ABSTRACT: 
There is a longstanding debate on whether Muslims can be modern. Some argue that they can only be so if they forsake their traditions and embrace rationalism. In this article I argue that the G&uuml;len Movement, a transnational Turkish Muslim educational activist network has found a middle ground by blending religious traditions with modern day realities. Drawing on interviews from the movement\u27s teachers and graduates of its schools, from Turkey, Central Asia, Afghanistan and Pakistan, I explore, through the prism of al-riḥla fī ṭalab al-ʿilm (travel in search of knowledge), their maintenance of the longstanding Islamic ritual of travel as a means of excelling both professionally and religiously. In turn, I demonstrate how the movement, on a number of levels, effectively reconciles the spiritual and the everyday through updating Islamic practices to better integrate themselves and other Muslims into a globalised world. 
 
PREDICTION: 
The reformers, he argued, counter that it is the retention of the old ways and the inflexibility of the Islamic clergy that have prevented Muslims from moving forward.3 Bassam Tibi comes full circle back to Nielsen’s view that Muslim rationalists lost out to the traditionalists in the twelfth century and, as a result, Muslims today lack the necessary secular ‘rational knowledge for a proper understanding of the world in which they live’.4 Indeed, Tibi goes so far as to say that reformers in Islam have failed and that it is only through secular rational knowledge that the Muslim world can catch up to the West.5 While the debate for some within academia appears to have hardly moved, progressive movements have begun to emerge in everyday societies operationalis- ing exactly what Rahman prescribed—melding the religious with the secular rational sciences to create new generations of integrated modern Muslims. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 167 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 brought knowledge and prestige,27 a role that had a number of benefits for the itinerant: (a) the prospect of work, which otherwise was not necessarily forthcoming in their homeland; (b) an opportunity to increase one’s status abroad for the search for knowledge confers distinction; (c) becoming an object of praise upon their return, which lends itself to increased status in the hierarchy of piety, and in turn translates into a senior position reserved for them upon their return (most travellers do). From the thirteenth to the fifteenth century, a time of Islamic expansion, these ‘reasonably literate, urbane and cosmopolitan’ wanderers brought with them to the peripheries of the umma the values of scripturalist Islam and helped to lend a sense of theocratic righteousness to newly establishedMuslim governments, thereby strengthening the Muslims’ sense of collective identity.28 Today many of the teachers from the Gu len Movement are following in the ri _ hla tradition of their forebears, striking out to other countries in the name of their God and Prophet 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Introduction Can Islam bemodern?Can Islam have any relationshipwith science? Can aMuslim be both pious andmaterially successful in the temporal world? Such questions have abounded in the scholarly literature since the 1950s with little change in the parameters of the debate. For example, in 1955 Alfred Nielsen lamented that with the death of al-Ghazali (1058–1111) the doors of ijtiha¯d (renewal) closed and ever since then there had been persistent resistance tomodernisation by the traditionalist majority.1 Similarly, writing shortly after the Iranian revolution in 1979, Fazlur Rahman (d.1988), a late distinguished professor of Islamic studies from West Pakistan, surveyed the state of Islamic scholarship around the world and concluded that none had been able to find the ‘right’ balance between traditionalism and modernism. Traditionalism once again had prevented the translation of critical thinking into legal ijtiha¯d. The solution for Rahman was the hybridisation of the Islamic education system; the introduction of the secular sciences and humanities, as a compliment to the religious sciences, was needed to help sculpt more rounded Islamic scholars that would yield what he called ‘Islamic progress’. He felt that the introduction of science imbued with Islamic values would enable Muslims to once *Research Fellow, Centre for Citizenship and Globalisation, Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia. Email: david.tittensor@deakin.edu.au 1 Alfred Nielsen, ‘Can Islam Be “Modern”?’, The International Review of Missions, 44(175) (1955), pp. 257– 263. British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, 2015 Vol. 42, No. 2, 163–178, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13530194.2014.993864 q 2015 British Society for Middle Eastern Studies D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 again be creative by expanding their vision and in doing so raise intellectual standards within the Muslim community. Further, Rahman stressed that faith and new knowledge would be mutually reinforcing, for the Qur’an stresses the importance of knowledge, and that those with more knowledge of the unity or oneness of things would be more capable of faith and commitment.2 More recent accounts suggest that Rahman’s prescription for a better Muslim future has failed to materialise. Bernard Lewis at the turn of the twenty-first century concluded that the Muslim tug of war between traditionalists and modernisers continues unabated, with the former claiming that their decline is due to the adoption of alien ideas and practices and the need to return to the old ways. The reformers, he argued, counter that it is the retention of the old ways and the inflexibility of the Islamic clergy that have prevented Muslims from moving forward.3 Bassam Tibi comes full circle back to Nielsen’s view that Muslim rationalists lost out to the traditionalists in the twelfth century and, as a result, Muslims today lack the necessary secular ‘rational knowledge for a proper understanding of the world in which they live’.4 Indeed, Tibi goes so far as to say that reformers in Islam have failed and that it is only through secular rational knowledge that the Muslim world can catch up to the West.5 While the debate for some within academia appears to have hardly moved, progressive movements have begun to emerge in everyday societies operationalis- ing exactly what Rahman prescribed—melding the religious with the secular rational sciences to create new generations of integrated modern Muslims. Tradition has not been jettisoned in its entirety. One such progressive movement is the Turkish transnational educational activist network known as the Gu¨len Movement, which has opened around 1000 secular schools in over 140 countries. In this article, I illustrate how the teachers of the movement have found a middle ground between Islamic tradition and modernisation. To begin, I provide a brief background to the movement’s development and thought. Then, drawing on interviews with both teachers and graduates6 from the movement’s schools, I contrast and compare the teachers’ practices with those of the early Muslim travellers and show how they emulate an age-old rite of passage that reconciles the need for both spiritual and professional advancement through travel. In turn, I show how the teachers update some traditional practices to meet with modern day requirements and how they, through the updated Islamic practice, function as twenty-first-century ‘frontiers men’ for the various houses of Islam. The Gu¨len Movement: A Brief Overview Fethullah Gu¨len was born in 1938 in Ezurum in the east of Turkey. He had a traditional religious upbringing and was also educated by a Sufi, Alvarlı Efe, in his 2 Fazlur Rahman, Islam and Modernity: Transformation of an Intellectual Tradition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982). 3 Bernard Lewis, What Went Wrong? Western Impact and Middle Eastern Response (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2002). 4 Bassam Tibi, Islam’s Predicament with Modernity: Religious Reform and Cultural Change (London and New York: Routledge, 2009), p. 66. 5 Tibi, Islam’s Predicament with Modernity. 6 A total of 38 semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted by the author as part of a wider ethnographic study that took place between February 2008 and March 2009. The interviews were with both teachers (19) and students (19) in Ankara and Istanbul who had worked and studied in the movement’s educational institutions respectively in Turkey and/or abroad. DAVID TITTENSOR 164 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 formative years. In 1958, at the age of 20, he obtained his certificate as an imam and at the same time came into contact with the works of the Sufi writer Said Nursi,7 an event that was to leave its mark. Nursi advocated a holistic education that included the secular scientific and spiritual lessons, arguing that there was no contradiction between science and religion. Rather, the former merely represented a mirror to God. Thus, the more we learnt about the world around us, the more we learnt about the creator.8 Enamoured with this new perspective, Gu¨len joined what was then known as the Nurcu community. However, when Said Nursi passed away in 1960, the Nurcu movement splintered9 and one of the offshoots was directed by Gu¨len and came to be known as the Gu¨len Movement. Intent on employing the idea of combining both the religious and secular sciences, Gu¨len worked as a preacher and would educate students on morality and the physical sciences with a view to creating modern individuals that were still pious and morally upright.10 Over the next two decades, he began to develop his own theology that sought to reconcile Sufism with the Qur’an and the sunna and adapt them to cope with modernity.11 He wanted people to be spiritual, yet remain engaged with the world rather than retreating into the self, which is a key element of Sufism. To this end, he drew on Nursi’s notion of say-i insanı (human exertion) and coined the concept of aksiyon insanı (man of action) and explained that one needs to be actively engaged and undertake hizmet (service) for one’s community.12 Alongside this, Gu¨len also introduced the notion of temsil (representation). The practice of temsil means to live Islam and to not proselytise, ‘as the only way to affect other people is to practice the message first’.13 His ultimate hope through this blending of secular and religious sciences coupled with righteous stewards was the creation of an altın nesil (golden generation), an enlightened generation that would help to guide mankind away from strife through a re-injection of spirituality into the world. During this period of theological development Gu¨len garnered increased support through his public sermons and attracted professionals who were able to donate funds and help to expand his educational programme.14 In the 1980s his educational efforts also captured the attention of Turgut O¨zal, the then Prime Minister and a kindred spirit,15 who provided government support to the movement to develop 7 It is important to note that Said Nursi was not a Sufi in the traditional sense. He was not a member of an order; rather, his thinking was heavily influenced by Sufism. For a good account of Sufism’s influence on Nursi, see Alan Godlas, ‘A Religiological Analysis of Nursi’s View of Sufism Expressed in the “Nine Allusions” (Telvihaˆt-ı Tis’a) of the Risale-I Nur’, Islam and Christian–Muslim Relations, 19(1) (2008), pp. 39–52. 8 See Yamine Mermer and Redha Ameur, ‘Beyond the “Modern”: Sa id al-Nursi’s View of Science’, Islam and Science, 2(2) (2004), pp. 119–160. 9 For a detailed account of these schisms, see Hakan Yavuz, ‘Print-Based Islamic Discourse and Modernity: The Nur Movement’, Paper presented at the Third International Bediuzzaman Conference on Islamic Political Thought, 24–26 September 1995, Istanbul. 10 M.H. Yavuz, Islamic Political Identity in Turkey (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003). 11 Mustafa Go¨kcek, ‘Gu¨len and Sufism’, Paper presented at ‘Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gu¨len Movement in Thought and Practice’, 12–13 November 2005, Rice University, Houston. 12 See Elisabeth O¨zdalga, ‘Worldly Asceticism in Islamic Casting: Fethullah Gu¨len’s Inspired Piety and Activism’, Critique, 17 (2000), pp. 83–104; David Tittensor, ‘The Gu¨len Movement and the Case of a Secret Agenda: Putting the Debate in Perspective’, Islam and Christian–Muslim Relations, 23(2) (2012), pp. 163–179. 13 M. Fethullah Gu¨len, as cited in M. Enes Ergene, Tradition Witnessing the Modern Age: An Analysis of the Gu¨len Movement (New Jersey: Tughra Books, 2008), p. 184. 14 For some insight into the nature of voluntary giving within the movement, see Helen R. Ebaugh, The Gu¨len Movement: A Sociological Analysis of a Civic Movement Rooted in Moderate Islam (London: Springer, 2010). 15 Turgut O¨zal proclaimed himself an adherent of the Naqshibandi Sufi order and won support of parts of the Nur (followers of Said Nursi) community. See Kemal Karpat, ‘Nurculuk’, Encyclopaedia of Islam (2nd edition), Brill Online, 2013, http://referenceworks.brillonline.com.ezp.lib.unimelb.edu.au/entries/encyclopaedia-of-islam-2/ nurculuk-SIM_5993. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 165 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 formal private schools. The schools in a relatively short time earned a reputation for high academic achievement, and by the 1990s as many as 150 movement schools could be found across Turkey. On the back of their success Gu¨len began to look beyond Turkey, mobilising his estimated four million supporters and sympathisers,16 and moved into Central Asia. Successes there spurred the movement’s teachers to travel, establish and undertake hizmet in schools in 140 countries around the world.17 It is also important to note that the schools utilise a secular curriculum in all the countries in which they operate, teaching only the physical sciences, history, literature and languages. As Murad explained of his time as an English teacher in Tatarstan and Afghanistan, there is no religious education unless it is either sanctioned or required by the government in question: It is compulsory . . . we must obey the rules. Whatever the government says, we only obey the rules . . . For example in Tatarstan the government did not allow [religious lessons]. Before, in Turkey, we had the lesson ‘religious science’, [and] in the Russian Federation they [at] first allowed this kind of lesson. The religious science [class] is not only Islam, but also the other religions as well, like Christianity or Jew etc. But in Afghanistan it is on the contrary. You must put Islamic lessons into your curriculum otherwise you cannot open a school there. Wherever we went we obeyed the rules of the government. This staunch adherence to the laws of the respective countries has served the movement well, with both a legal salvo against the practices of one its schools in Russia in 2008 and a parliamentary inquiry into the movement’s conduct and intentions in the Netherlands in 2010 ultimately unable to fault their conduct.18 An Alternative Pilgrimage: Teachers Doing Hizmet Abroad Travel has an important place within Islamic faith and tradition with regards to connecting with the divine. One of the five pillars of Islam is that all Muslims must make the hajj (pilgrimage) to Mecca during their lifetime if they are physically able and can afford the expense. Alongside this, there is the doctrine of hijra (migration), where one is obligated to migrate from a land if they are not able to practise their faith freely, and the non-obligatory but widespread folk practice of ziya¯ras (visits to shrines).19 Closely associated with travel is the search for ‘ilm (knowledge). Both the Qur’an and the hadith direct the believer to undertake ri _ hla (travel) in the world that God created in order to better understand the creator. The former contains numerous versus that exhort the reader to ‘travel on the earth and see’ (3:137; 6:11; 12:109; 16:36; 29:20; 30:9; 30:42),20 and specifically uses the term ri _ hla in Sura Quraysh (106:2), with regard to the capacity of the tribe of 16 Bulent Aras and Omer C¸aha, ‘Fethullah Gulen and His Liberal “Turkish Islam” Movement’, MERIA: Middle East Review of International Affairs, 4(4) (2000), pp. 30–43. 17 Indicative of the movement’s reach and support is a 2008 poll undertaken by Foreign Policy magazine in which Gu¨len was voted the number one public intellectual. The poll was affected by a flood of votes from Gu¨len’s supporters. See ‘The World’s Top 20 Public Intellectuals’, Foreign Policy (2008, July/August), pp. 54–57. 18 See Basri Dog˘an and Adem Kotan, ‘Dutch Minister Gives Turkish Deputy a Lesson on Freedoms’, Today’s Zaman, 18 December 2010; Martin van Bruinessen, ‘De Fethullah Gu¨lenbeweging in Nederland’, Een rapport opgesteld op verzoek van de Minister voor Wonen, Wijken en Integratie (Netherlands: Utrecht University, 2010); Faruk Akkan, ‘St. Petersburg Turkish College Wins Case, Resumes Services’, Today’s Zaman, 4 July 2008. 19 Heba Aziz, ‘The Journey: An Overview of Tourism and Travel in the Arab/Islamic Context’, in David Harrison (ed.), Tourism and the Less Developed World: Issues and Case Studies (Oxon, UK: CABI Publishing, 2001), pp. 151–159. 20 Roxanne L. Euben, Journeys to the Other Shore: Muslim and Western Travellers in Search of Knowledge (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006), p. 35. DAVID TITTENSOR 166 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 Quraysh to travel north and south, and the success that it brought them.21 In like fashion, the hadith literature, which reports the life and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad, written after his death, builds on this Qur’anic thread, with many related tales extolling the need for both travel and knowledge. Al-Tamirdhi (d. 892) relates the story in which the Prophet explained that ‘those who go out in search of knowledge will be in the path of God until they return’ and there is the now famous hadith in which Muhammad is purported to have uttered the injunction, ‘seek knowledge even as far as China’.22 Subsequently, the importance of travel became embedded in the consciousness of Muslims and was regarded as a pious activity that brings God’s approval and grace.23 Indeed, such was the significance of the terms ri _ hla and ‘ilm that they inspired a literary genre, al-ri _ hla fı¯ _ talab al-‘ilm (travel in search of knowledge), in medieval Islam.24 As will be shown, this literature is particularly useful for understanding the motivations driving the Gu¨len Movement teachers today. This literary canon is believed to have begun with the ri _ hla of Ibn Jubayr (1145–1217), which functioned as the template for subsequent travelogues. Although Ibn Jubayr’s principal reason for embarking on his journey was to undertake the hajj to absolve himself of guilt, after being forced to drink wine by the governor of Grenada to whom he was secretary, _ talab al-‘ilm was an important component of his documented journey. He energetically visited mosques, shrines, colleges, tombs, saints and scholars in the course of his travels and wrote enthusiastically of these encounters. For this reason, many of the ri _ hlas that follow in his mould began with the hajj as the primary motivation for setting out. However, this often functioned as an excuse to embark on a journey that would give way to wanderlust and a range of other more mundane or pedestrian pursuits. A classic example of this is the ri _ hla of Ibn Jubayr’s successor Ibn Battuta (1304–1368/9 or 1377). He travelled in three capacities: as a pilgrim, a scholar of the law, and as a Sufi (though he never gave himself entirely to the asceticism of mystical life25), and according to Ross Dunn26 Ibn Battuta’s travels and career were not markedly different from the other well-documented accounts of other North African journeyers like Abu Muhammad al-‘Abdari, Muhammad ibn Marzuq and Ibn Khaldun. A chief function of their journeys, apart from being a pilgrim and seeking knowledge, was to operate as a ‘frontiers man’. That is, they played the social role of an educated pioneer who migrated to the peripheries of the Muslim world, and 21 S. Gellens, ‘The Search for Knowledge in Medieval Muslim Societies: A Comparative Approach’, in Dale F. Eickelman and James Piscatori (eds), Muslim Travellers: Pilgrimage, Migration, and the Religious Imagination (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1990), pp. 50–68. 22 Euben, Journeys to the Other Shore, p. 35; Ian R. Netton, Seek Knowledge: Thought and Travel in the House of Islam (Abingdon: RoutledgeCurzon, 1996), p. vii. 23 Gellens, ‘The Search for Knowledge’. 24 Ian R. Netton, ‘Ri _ hla’, in Encyclopaedia of Islam (2nd edition), Brill Online, 2013, http://referenceworks. brillonline.com.ezp.lib.unimelb.edu.au/entries/encyclopaedia-of-islam-2/rihla-SIM_6298. 25 He grew up in a climate where Sufism was beginning to take hold and it became tightly incorporated into his traditional training. He believed in personal baraka (divine grace) as well as the value of ascetic devotion. Moreover, he routinely attended mystical gatherings, sought blessings and wisdom from Sufi masters and occasionally retreated into contemplation for brief periods. However, he always returned to worldly affairs. For this reason Ibn Batutta can be regarded as ‘lay Sufi’. See Ross E. Dunn, The Adventures of Ibn Battuta, a Muslim Traveler of the Fourteenth Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986). 26 Ross E. Dunn, ‘International Migrations of Literate Muslims in the Later Middle Period: The Case of Ibn Battuta’, in Ian R. Netton (ed.), Golden Roads: Migration, Pilgrimage and Travel in Mediaeval and Modern Islam (Surrey, UK: Curzon Press Ltd., 1993), pp. 75–84. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 167 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 brought knowledge and prestige,27 a role that had a number of benefits for the itinerant: (a) the prospect of work, which otherwise was not necessarily forthcoming in their homeland; (b) an opportunity to increase one’s status abroad for the search for knowledge confers distinction; (c) becoming an object of praise upon their return, which lends itself to increased status in the hierarchy of piety, and in turn translates into a senior position reserved for them upon their return (most travellers do return). Ibn Battuta, for example, despite being an indifferent scholar, was routinely employed as a qadi during the course of his travels, and a senior post was reserved for him upon his return to his native Morocco. Alongside these personal benefits, the role of frontiers man was particularly important for Islam as a whole. From the thirteenth to the fifteenth century, a time of Islamic expansion, these ‘reasonably literate, urbane and cosmopolitan’ wanderers brought with them to the peripheries of the umma the values of scripturalist Islam and helped to lend a sense of theocratic righteousness to newly establishedMuslim governments, thereby strengthening the Muslims’ sense of collective identity.28 Today many of the teachers from the Gu¨len Movement are following in the ri _ hla tradition of their forebears, striking out to other countries in the name of their God and Prophet and to act as ‘frontiers men’ for their fellow Muslims. For them, as O¨zgu¨r explains, it is an alternative pilgrimage: Pilgrimage, hijra [migration] to Mecca, this is another thing. But I mean, in one of our prophet’s say[ings], I mean the best of human beings is the one who contributes to human kind most. There is a kind of saying, so perhaps this motivation urged me to go there. (O¨zgu¨r, English teacher, Kazakhstan) Similarly, Bu¨lent relates that they are following in the righteous footsteps of the friends of the Prophet to take their best around the world: You know in the past, it’s related to our ancestors too, in the Ottoman Empire you know, people rode horses, and went to different countries and, you know, the friends of our Prophet did the same thing, went to different countries and they informed those people for the new, this religion, and died there, many, many of them. Thousands of people died in those countries. So it was for the sake of God, not for nothing. They lived very poor lives, poor conditions, but, so they believed in their religion strongly, and they did whatever they could, they could have done, they did everything, their very best. (Bu¨lent, English teacher, Pakistan) Further to this, Bu¨lent went on to explain that practising temsil abroad is much more valuable than doing so at home, as it is better to go out and show other people in foreign lands a ‘good example as much as you can’ and spread the movement’s message (a point returned to shortly). This greater value attached to representing abroad was based on the fact that it would have been easy to remain in Turkey, in his comfort zone. Thus, like those of yesteryear, Bu¨lent was governed by a desire both for adventure and to test his mettle in the face of adversity: It is dedication because it’s another environment, you know, it’s difficult to be in an environment with foreign people, and without your family, without your friends, many friends are here you know, it’s [representing abroad] much more valuable, a lot more valuable. Difficulty and sacrifice is an important element of the teacher’s journey. Many spoke nostalgically of the various trials they faced. Dag˘estan, a Turkish Biology 27 Dunn, ‘International Migrations of Literate Muslims’. 28 Ibid., p.65; Gellens, ‘The Search for Knowledge’. DAVID TITTENSOR 168 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 teacher who spent eight years in Kyrgyzstan, spoke at length of the poverty and trying conditions under which he toiled and how he thrived on the challenge: three heaters were required to combat the cold, and after 8 o’clock in the evening the electricity in the city would be shut down. Yet he described this period of his life, despite these difficulties, as ‘very good days’, and stated that he was ‘very proud, because [he] lived there’. Others spoke of how they had to overcome linguistic and cultural barriers, or worked for little or no remuneration for extended periods of time: I mean, of course it was difficult. There was a different geography, a different education [system] . . . Especially, for example, we had to explain to them using a translator. Over there, there were also difficulties given one does not know the language . . . there was the adjustment to the environment, to the culture. (C¸etin, Turkish Literature teacher, Tatarstan) Many teachers there couldn’t get any salary for months. We worked there for three hundred dollars [a month] at the time, and we couldn’t get the salaries in time after ten months or so. (Anil, English teacher, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan) A lack of funds, particularly in the formative period of the schools, was not unusual as attendance was often free. The initial small contingent of students in the first intake all received scholarships that covered their tuition and materials, while the teachers waited for their salaries to come from Turkey. Such was the case in both Afghanistan andKazakhstan, with all funds provided by esnaflar (small businesses) involved with the movement, particularly those based in Germany. Often the schools are funded by localmovement businesses thatwere establishedwith the sole purpose of funding the development of schools. If these cannot provide adequate funding, additional movement sources are identified and provide assistance.29 Moreover, when teachers did receive their wages, they were often quick to part with their money for the benefit of their students. One graduate from Kyrgyzstan, for example, expressed to me her gratitude to her teacher who had handed over her savings so that she could continue her studies in Turkey: When I came to Turkey . . . my father could not support [me], and I know that one of my teachers paid all my [expenses], I mean the travel money, I mean for the ticket, and she gave also some pocket money. My father could not do that, and in that year, I know that she gave me that money and she did not come to Turkey, because she didn’t have any other money. (S¸ebnem, student/teacher, Kyrgyzstan) Even more remarkable was the story of a Turkish teacher at an Afghan school, who supposedly donated 10 months of his salary back to his school. Despite all these difficulties, privations and sacrifices, the teachers were invariably positive about their decision to leave the relative comfort of Turkey. Anil, like Dag˘estan, repeatedly reflected that, despite the poverty and treacherous weather, his 13 years abroad were a ‘good experience’. Sacrifice: A Modern Take This emphasis and reverence for sacrifice stems from the movement’s Sufistic underpinnings. Gu¨len with his reworked theology is seeking to find a middle way 29 For a good account of this process, see Bayram Balcı, Orta Asya’da I˙slaˆm Misyonerleri: Fethullah Gu¨len Okulları (Istanbul: I˙letis¸im Yayınları, 2005). ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 169 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 between conventional Islam and traditional Sufism with his concept of aksiyon insanı. Gu¨len’s ‘man of action’, who abandons asceticism and its preoccupation with the inner spiritual quest to actively work and engage with society, is predicated on revised interpretations of two core principles of Sufism that are thoroughly intertwined: halwat (seclusion) and riyada (austerity). Traditionally the follower of the mystical path is required to be secluded away for a period of 40 days so he can struggle for control over the nafs (the soul), which houses the lower self, such as the carnal desires of the flesh.30 In this time the initiate is able to discipline the body and reduce carnal desires, and focus attention on meditation and prayer in an environment that ‘is regarded as a door opening on nearness to God’ (‘Allah’a kurbet kapısı sayılan bu halvethaˆnede bedenıˆ ihtiyaclarını en aza indirir’).31 Also during this time of seclusion the initiate is to lead an austere existence, eating and drinking little, again with the view to controlling and disciplining the needs of the body. However, Gu¨len argues that the practice of seclusion has undergone change over time, and that it is no longer necessary to perform periods of seclusion like those undertaken by the Prophet Abraham, and the 40-day periods of the Prophet Muhammad. His basis for this position is the conduct of Rumi,32 who, while having undertaken many 40-day periods of seclusion in the early days of his initiation, gave up the practice for the company of people once he had found a true master.33 Instead of seclusion, Gu¨len advocates simply for austerity in everyday life, which functions as another avenue through which one can obtain divine grace. For through austerity, which means holding back carnal desires like thirst, appetite and sleep, one can ‘acquire piety, righteousness and nearness to God’ (‘Zu¨hd u¨ takvaˆ ve kurb u mu¨kaˆs¸efe maksadıyla, du¨nyanın beden-i hayvaˆnıˆye bakan zevklerinden kacınma’).34 Further to this, in his Sızıntı35 piece on austerity, Gu¨len speaks of the need for the austere individuals to also liberate themselves from worldly ambitions as well as the carnal (‘du¨nyevıˆ eg˘ilimlerden ve cismanıˆ temayu¨llerden sıyrılarak’).36 This reference to worldly ambitions most likely refers to the need for wealth and material possession in the sense that one should not covet these things and make them the focus of their existence. Although not explicit here, he expresses these sentiments more clearly in one of his sermons regarding the ideal person: Sacrifice is one of the important characteristics of a person who teaches others. Those who do not, or cannot, risk sacrifice from the start cannot be a person of cause. People who do not have a cause cannot be successful. Yes, those who are ready to leave at one stretch 30 Annemarie Schimmel, Mystical Dimensions of Islam (Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press, 1975). 31 M. Fethullah Gu¨len, ‘Halvet ve Uzlet’, Sızıntı, 14(168) (1993), http://www.kalbinzumruttepeleri.com/ fethullah-gulen-kalbin-zumrut-tepeleri-1/1865-fethullah-gulen-kalbin-zumrut-tepeleri-halvet-ve-uzlet.html; Gu¨len, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism: Emerald Hills of the Heart (New Jersey: The Light Inc, 2007), vol. 1, p. 16. 32 Mevlana Jalal al-Din Rumi was a Persian Sufi and poet (1207–1273) renowned for his work on the theme of love. 33 Gu¨len, Key Concepts, vol. 1. 34 M. Fethullah Gu¨len, ‘Riyazet’, Sızıntı, 16(190) (1994), http://www.kalbinzumruttepeleri.com/fethullah-gulen- kalbin-zumrut-tepeleri-2/1909-fethullah-gulen-kalbin-zumrut-tepeleri-riyazet.html; Gu¨len, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism: Emerald Hills of the Heart (New Jersey: The Light Inc, 2007), vol. 2, p. 3. 35 Sızıntı (Rivulet) is a magazine that the movement began to publish in 1979. It deals with religion, science and society, and always contains a lead article by Gu¨len. 36 Gu¨len, ‘Riyazet’; Gu¨len, Key Concepts, vol. 1. DAVID TITTENSOR 170 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 whenever necessary, their wealth, life, family, position, fame etc, things which many people desire and put at the purpose of life—that their cause eventually reaches peaks is certain and inevitable.37 Thus, migration to foreign lands, wherein the teachers give up their comfortable life, family, friends and money, functions as a longstanding Muslim ‘rite de passage’ in the vein of that developed by Arnold van Gennep38 and elaborated by Victor Turner.39 As is well known, van Gennep articulates that most rites of passage contain three distinct phases—separation, transition and incorporation— that account for the progression between the incompatible profane and spiritual worlds. The first phase of separation involves a break from profane or secular space that constructs a cultural realm that is ‘out of time’ wherein the individual in question is detached from their previous social statuses. The following transitional period, which is referred to as a liminal phase, is a period of ambiguity, or limbo, in which the individual has neither the attributes of either their preceding or subsequent profane social statuses or secular cultural states. Finally, the third phase, incorporation, includes ‘symbolic phenomena and actions’ that represent a return of the individual to a new, well-defined role within the society of origin. In particular, these are present in initiation rituals and this is how the educational pilgrimage of Ibn Battuta and its modern day adherents should be understood, for as Turner argues, initiatory rites of passage tend to ‘put people down’ or ‘humble people before permanently elevating them’, and this is precisely the role the pilgrimage plays.40 The challenges and privations the teachers face as they leave their friends and family behind, often for extended periods of time, represent the break from society and their previous status. Emphasising this divorce are the unfamiliar surroundings and the difficulties of language, which no doubt lead to a sense of isolation. The ensuing period in which the teachers battle to integrate themselves into their foreign surroundings and adopted community constitutes a limbo wherein they have to prove themselves professionally under duress. Further to this, as discussed above, they actively humble themselves by working for significantly reduced wages (if they are paid at all) and devote themselves entirely to the betterment of the students. This selflessness and reduction in status—that is, as a person of secondary importance—are willingly taken on as they grant them spiritual badges of honour that bring them closer to God and both increase their status and advance their career in the hierarchy of piety within the movement. Those that have gone abroad have shown their devotion to the cause, and like Ibn Battuta can be rewarded upon their reincorporation (the vast majority of hizmet teachers come back) with a better position upon their return to their homeland. Indeed, many of those who go abroad are fresh out of university and come home to senior positions within schools, and the various other institutions of the movement. For example, a good number of the teachers I interviewed are now vice-principals and principals of schools back in Turkey, or within one of the movement’s publishing houses or the Journalists and Writers Foundation of which Gu¨len is the honorary president. In other words, the finite period of sacrifice 37 Gu¨len, as cited in Ergene, Tradition Witnessing the Modern Age, p. 179. 38 Arnold van Gennep, The Rites of Passage (London: Routledge & Paul, 1960). 39 Victor Witter Turner, From Ritual to Theatre: The Human Seriousness of Play, (New York City: Performing Arts Journal Publications, 1982). 40 Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, pp. 24–25. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 171 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 operates, perhaps somewhat paradoxically, to propel members forward not only spiritually but also professionally. That is, both the spiritual world and the profane secular world are reconciled. This peculiar convergence is due to the movement valuing both market competition and the placing of its own professional networks above those of kin (that is not to say that family is not valued), which leads to what Elisabeth O¨zdalga refers to as an I-orientation, where the individual continually asks themselves: ‘what else can I do (for my Lord)?’ For success at work in terms of better educational outcomes and profits means the propagation of the movement’s objectives,41 namely God’s work. In other words, temporal success and God’s work are mutually reinforcing, as those who are willing to give more in the name of God are rewarded for their willingness professionally, as it enables them to achieve even more; they are not alone in this regard. This finding is similar to Egbert Harmsen’s42 account of the motivations of Muslim non-governmental organisation (NGO) workers in Jordan. He found that their drive was not solely governed by otherworldly concerns. Rather, alongside the injunction of fı¯ sabı¯l li- lla¯h (for the sake of God) and the prospect of entering heaven, the workers garnered a lot of public and political prestige from their welfare activities, which was used to promote their activities.43 A similar scenario has also been observed by Osella and Osella44 in the Muslim community in Kerala, India, where pious entrepreneurs saw no contradiction between using their charitable activities to bolster both their business dealings and the attainment of higher social and political status. Indeed, indicative of this mutually reinforcing cycle of sacrifice and temporal reward is the fact that the elevated status of these modern day Ibn Battutas is well understood within the movement. As one teacher explained to me, they are highly thought of and valued: They are some special people, they are considered as special people and they are presented as special people because it’s a difficult job. Everybody accepts this side . . . but some places are really difficult for Turkish people and for any people I mean. If you’re coming from [a] middle class family or having some different opportunities around you in your own country, but in the places [they go] you will have difficulties, so people who are going there are . . . special people, and they are very valuable. (Merve, English teacher, Senegal). Another movement member who spent many years abroad, and who is now in a very senior position with the daily newspaper Zaman, went so far as to suggest that those who fail to go overseas and make this alternative pilgrimage ‘feel somewhat ashamed’, as they have failed in their duties to the cause. Subsequently there is a fair degree of competition within the movement to obtain these postings overseas. Many spoke of how they admired the schools and the work they were doing, and 41 Elisabeth O¨zdalga, ‘Redeemer or Outsider? The Gu¨len Community in the Civilizing Process’, Muslim World, 95(3) (2005), pp. 435–436. 42 Egbert Harmsen, Islam, Civil Society and Social Work: Muslim Voluntary Welfare Associations in Jordan between Patronage and Empowerment (Leiden: ISIM/University of Amsterdam Press, 2008). 43 Similarly Janine Clark uncovered that the Muslim Brotherhood’s charities in Jordan tended to support and actively promote the interests of the middle class rather than those of the poor. See Janine A. Clark, Islam, Charity, and Activism: Middle-Class Networks and Social Welfare in Egypt, Jordan, and Yemen (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2004). 44 Filippo Osella and Caroline Osella, ‘Muslim Entrepreneurs in Public Life between India and the Gulf: Making Good and Doing Good’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 15 (2009), pp. S202–S221. DAVID TITTENSOR 172 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 how they always wanted be one of the hizmet teachers. As a result of this strong desire to do service abroad, lotteries are often held at seminars for teachers by subject to decide who gets to go and where. Such was the case for Dag˘estan, who, after completing his university studies, attended a seminar in which all the biology teachers were brought together to draw lots for a number of open positions ranging from South America to Central Asia. As he put it: ‘so there’s a lottery, so I took one and looked in [and it was] Kyrgyzstan. So I went to Kyrgyzstan . . . like that’. Through entering the lottery, Dag˘estan did exactly as the movement’s leader requested: he took a leap of faith, wherein he put the cause ahead of family, friends and wealth to go and serve. A host of teachers are eagerly waiting for an opportunity to make their pilgrimage. Devlet, for example, a seasoned teacher of nine years in local Turkish hizmet schools in Ankara, still holds out hope that he will one day get a chance to emulate his colleagues: ‘I observed the situation of the schools there [in Europe and Russia], but I never worked as a professional, I mean as an English teacher there . . . I would like to . . . it’s really important I think, and I have so many friends who have worked abroad’. The New Frontiers Men: More than just the Religious Sciences, Beards and Robes Equally important in creating the elevated status of those in the movement who go abroad is that they get to function as modern day ‘frontiers men’, and take the movement’s understanding of Islam abroad to show that it can be modern, and integrate successfully with a globalising capitalist world. As Bu¨lent explained, part of the value of the pilgrimage is to go abroad and be a good example for other people. On this point, teachers spoke regularly of how Islam around the world is often shrouded by misconceptions and explained that a chief aim of the movement is to dispel these, and to show that there is an alternative to hatred and violence: We wanted to show that, you know, accepted values from Muslim countries, accepted values, you know there are many already, many stereotypes for Islam. So we want, I believe, and as an individual person [I also] . . .want to change these accepted stereotypes for Islam. There are also some other way[s] from radicalism and fundamentalism. (Anil, English teacher, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan) For Gu¨len the chief means of steering people away from radicalism and fundamentalism is through education, wherein Muslims come to terms with the West and accept modern scientific practices and technology. Gu¨len is critical of anti-Westernism and it trappings, such as science, on two counts. Firstly, the very notion that science is oppositional to Islam, according to Gu¨len, is a Western construction that dates back to the Enlightenment period where science split off from religion and the former began to see human beings ‘as mind only’.45 Rather, he argues that there is absolutely no contradiction between science and Islam as they stem from the same truth. That is, that every scientific discovery is simply a manifestation of God and helps us to better understand his majesty. However, it is important to note that Gu¨len does not see scientific truths as being equal to those of the Qur’an and the hadith. As Osman Bakar observes, science in Gu¨len’s theology represents only a ‘relative truth’ while those of the Qur’an and the hadith are 45 M. Fethullah Gu¨len, M. Fethullah Gu¨len: Essays, Perspectives, Opinions (3rd edition) (Rutherford, NJ: The Light, 2004), p. 79. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 173 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 absolute. By relative truth, Gu¨len argues that scientific truths are changeable in so far as what is understood as being true can through further experimentation be found to be wrong. Thus, what was thought to be understood about God has changed, but the reality/truth about God’s nature remains unchanged.46 In other words, whenever there is a contradiction between scientific discovery and the word of God and no reconciliation can be found, the former trumps the latter, functioning as Islam’s ‘handmaiden’. In this regard, Gu¨len takes up a position that is similar to al-Ghazali, who did not scorn other branches of scholarship, but simply ranked them as lower than the religious sciences.47 This contextualises Gu¨len’s second point against wholesale rejection of the secular sciences. He argues that science, technology and an increasingly connected world are not the primary goal of humankind, but are merely by-products of human existence that must be accepted: Science, technology and speed are not and never were the primary needs of mankind. However, it is certainly wrong to oppose ‘idealistic’ thoughts, or science and technology. Such opposition can only represent a utopian attitude. Swearing at the machine, cursing at the factory cannot benefit humanity. The machines and factories are going to continue to work even if they are cursed. This is why it can be said that the important thing is not this or that detail, but rather the question of who controls science and technology and what purpose they are made to serve.48 Here, the central aim of education is not simply to provide education for the sake of education; it is to foster religiously oriented people who are conversant with secular scientific knowledge and who can deliver it from ‘the lethally polluted atmosphere of materialistic aspirations and ideological fanaticism, and . . . direct scientists toward higher human values’.49 As Bu¨lent explained, ‘we need to show the world that Muslims are also very educated, can be educated, very intellectual, open minded, and democratic . . . to be able to [be] flexible’. In other words, the aim is to better integrate Muslims into the increasingly fast-paced globalising world, though not at the expense of religious conviction in favour of what he sees as empty materialism. Indeed, Gu¨len’s golden generation will excel in knowledge of both the secular and the spiritual: For this generation to come to the fore, what do we need to do? . . . Worldly sciences, physics, chemistry, mathematics, biology, they will know these well. At the same time religious sciences: endowments, Islamic jurisprudence, the scriptures, hadith, theology, Qur’an, penmanship . . . For this generation to develop they will know both the religious and worldly sciences well. (Demir, Turkish teacher, Turkmenistan) The religious sciences are, according to many of the movement’s teachers, only transmitted through temsil; that is, the students will observe and eventually follow their pious yet modern practices. However, it is routinely alleged that informal religious classes take place in the school dormitories.50 46 Osman Bakar, ‘Gu¨len on Religion and Science: A Theological Perspective’, The Muslim World, 95(3) (2005), pp. 359–372. 47 Sebastian Gunther, ‘Be Masters in That You Teach and Continue to Learn: Medieval Muslim Thinkers on Educational Theory’, Comparative Education Review, 50(3) (2006), pp. 367–388. 48 Nevval Sevindi and Ibrahim M. Abu-Rabi, Contemporary Islamic Conversations: M. Fethullah Gu¨len on Turkey, Islam, and the West (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2008), p. 36. 49 Gu¨len, as cited in Bakar, ‘Gu¨len on Religion and Science’, p. 367. 50 This issue is in need of interrogation, but is beyond the scope of this article. SeeBayramBalcı, ‘FethullahGu¨len’s Missionary Schools in Central Asia and Their Role in the Spreading of Turkism and Islam’, Religion, State & Society, 31(2) (2003), pp. 151–177; Rachel Sharon-Krespin, ‘Fethullah Gu¨len’s Grand Ambition: Turkey’s DAVID TITTENSOR 174 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 Another avenue through which the movement is seeking to break down the negative stereotypes of Muslims is through countering the traditional image of the Muslim with the beard and the flowing robes, an image that is so often (mistakenly) associated with Islam and terror, and which is regularly caricatured in the Western media.51 This is done through the almost uniform adoption by the teachers of the suit and tie, which historically in the East have been powerful symbols of modernity and capitalism. In the early twentieth century, imported Western attire, such as the overcoat and the hat, became important markers of progress in Afghanistan, Iran and Turkey.52 However, it also signalled a move away from religion. For example, the brimmed hat which was compulsory in Iran and Turkey prevented men from touching their forehead to the ground, an integral component of prayer. Here the suit functions as a symbol that Muslims can have dual identities; one can be mercantile, successful and engage with the rest of the world, yet remain pious. Teachers at the schools I visited in Turkey were always in formal attire, be it a suit and tie or slacks and a blazer, and there was not a beard in sight. At most, movement members would sport a neatly trimmed moustache, but even this was confined to older men in their mid to late forties. Even the moustache goes against the sayings of the prophet, who is recorded as having instructed Muslims to trim the moustache and let the beard grow as a means of differentiating believers from non-believers.53 This complete break with tradition stems from Gu¨len’s view that such things are furuat (secondary matters).54 Gu¨len has a great appreciation for the flexibility and openness to change shown by the Ottoman jurists who regularly borrowed from customary practices, and who were skilled in accommodating and legitimating new practices.55 Moreover, Gu¨len is acutely aware of the world around him and the need to keep in step with it, and has adopted an approach that has been described as incremental ijtiha¯d: ‘Time and conditions are important means to interpret the Qur’an. The Qur’an is like a rose that develops a new petal every passing day and continues to blossom. In order to discover its depth and obtain its jewels in its deeper layers, a new interpretation should be made at least every 25 years’.56 This modern approach to traditional dress and facial hair has caused many to criticise Gu¨len and his followers, and declare that they have abandoned the sunna. Footnote 50 continued Islamist Danger’, Middle East Quarterly, Winter (2009), pp. 55–66; Martin van Bruinessen, ‘Producing Islamic Knowledge in Western Europe: Discipline, Authority, and Personal Quest’, in Martin van Bruinessen and Stefano Allievi (eds), Producing Islamic Knowledge: Transmission and Dissemination in Western Europe (New York: Routledge, 2011) pp. 1–27; Tittensor, ‘The Gu¨len Movement and the Case of a Secret Agenda’, pp. 163–179. 51 See Christian Christensen, ‘Islam in the Media: Cartoons and Context’, Screen Education, 43 (2006), pp. 27– 33; Karim H. Karim, ‘American Media’s Coverage of Muslims: The Historical Roots of Contemporary Portrayals’, in Elizabeth Poole and John E. Richardson (eds),Muslims and the News Media (London: I.B. Tauris, 2006), pp. 116–127. 52 Patricia L. Baker, ‘Politics of Dress: The Dress Reform Laws of 1920/30s Iran’, in Nancy Lindisfarne-Tapper and Bruce Ingham (eds), Languages of Dress in the Middle East (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon, in association with the Centre of Near and Middle Eastern Studies, SOAS, 1997), pp. 178–192; Michael E. Meeker, A Nation of Empire: The Ottoman Legacy of Turkish Modernity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002). 53 G.H.A. Juynboll, Encyclopedia of Canonical Hadith (Leiden: Brill, 2007). 54 M. Sait Yavuz, ‘Women in Islam: Muslim Perspectives and Fethullah Gu¨len’, Paper presented at the ‘Islam in the Age of Global Challenges: Alternative Perspectives on the Gu¨len Movement’ Conference, 14–15 November 2008, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, http://en.fgulen.com/conference-papers/gulen-conference-in- washington-dc/3112-women-in-islam-muslim-perspectives-and-fethullah-gulen. 55 See Jon. E. Mandaville, ‘Usurious Piety: The Cash Waqf Controversy in the Ottoman Empire’, International Journal of Middle East Studies, 10(3) (1979), pp. 289–308. 56 Gu¨len, as cited in Sait Yavuz, ‘Women in Islam’. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 175 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 This is particularly the case in more traditional countries like Pakistan, Afghanistan and the Arab countries where schools have had modest success.57 Bu¨lent, when talking on this issue, laughed ruefully and stated to me that the situation in Pakistan is ‘very strange’, and when asked why, explained that while the sunna is important, and that while the Prophet had a beard and wore different clothes, there are many other qualities of his life and character that are more important. He earnestly listed characteristics, such as generosity, leadership and kindness, and lamented that ‘some people, you know, get stuck’. Similarly, in Afghanistan the issue ofWestern styling was a sticking point for many, and caused the teachers to be subjected to ridicule, despite their credentials as pious Muslims: We also discuss the Gu¨len [Movement], but many people believe a lot, it is why they easily understand the Gu¨len Movement very well . . . even for the first time we met with a student and we tell about Gu¨len they can understand the Gu¨len Movement easily. But some traditions are different, we don’t have beards, we have, for example, different costumes, and Afghanistan people all have beard[s]. They sometimes criticised about this, as we don’t have beard[s], or we used neckties there, we wore jackets, trousers and shirts, but they have their traditional costume. (Murad, English teacher, Tatarstan and Afghanistan) However, this criticism most likely came from the older generations. The students—the movement’s target audience—were far more accepting and receptive to these attempts to update Islamic practice. For example, Farshad, a graduate of a hizmet school in Afghanistan, explained that he understood both figuratively and literally what they were trying to do: ‘they are just clothing Islam in a very modern way. They’re just going to find modern reasons for using technology, or relating technology and Islam’. Further to this, he expressed that they are a positive force in his country and neighbouring Pakistan, leading the way in education for boys and girls, and that the local people love them: I think they will progress. They will go on. You know at this rate they are just developing, they will make schools for girls. They will even make universities. They have planned to make universities, you know, I can say they are really successful, they are just going really well in Afghanistan, people love them, they love people, they respect people, people respect them. They have a high value . . . they will go on with a great manner, with the best manner in Afghanistan . . . Yeah, a positive force. In Pakistan they are really going too. Pakistan is really going, Afghanistan is really going . . . in our country they love our people, our people love them. They in every aspect want to help people, whether it could be economically, it could be something like, I can say socially. It’s really good you know. Likewise, Jahangir, a friend of Farshad’s, expressed nothing but admiration and love for the teachers and what they were doing in his city: ‘They’re positive. For example, in Afghanistan . . . this school has a good name and also every student in the city loves them, knows them and that’s it’. Other students from hizmet schools in Central Asia have also responded positively to this symbolic sartorial statement. A student from Kyrgyzstan stated that one of the first things he noticed about the teachers was their temizlik (neatness), that they wore conventional clothes and that their modern presentation 57 Often movement members attribute this to there being a qualitative difference in understanding between Turkish Islam and Arab Islam. Gu¨len himself describes Turkish Islam as being ‘deeper, more tolerant and inclusive, and based on love’. Gu¨len, as cited in Ali U¨nal, Advocate of Dialogue: Fethullah Gu¨len (Fairfax: Fountain, 2000), p. 53. DAVID TITTENSOR 176 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 was really important. Indeed, he explained that his father’s observation of how the older boys who had graduated from the school dressed was one of the reasons he was sent there, and that now personal presentation is very important to him, in so far as one needs to be modern. Arman, a graduate from Kazakhstan, related an almost identical story, explaining that as a result of the Soviet occupation there was general mistrust of the Turks amongst the Kazakhs. Many thought that, as they were Muslims, they were backward and dangerous, but soon changed their tune after observing both the behaviour of the teachers and the change in the students: We were told that Turkish people are uncivilised or something like a terrorist, something in this way. So in Kazakhstan there was a concept of Turkish people as something like a terrorist or something, and people were looking [at] those schools with suspense, we didn’t trust them. But, later, after the graduates graduated from the high schools, people just look at them, according to their behaviour, according to their success, their Olympiads,58 according to their like university life, like how they’re integrating, or how they are socially with the people, they started saying ‘maybe we should give our children to this school’. These stories highlight that the teachers’ modern attire and practice, and teaching of the secular sciences, are having a profound and positive impact on updating future generations’ perceptions of Islam, from one of backwardness to a view that it can be modern and engage with Western culture and practice. Conclusion It can be seen in the Gu¨len Movement that there is a middle road for Muslims that does not require clinging purely to tradition, nor does it require Tibi’s wholesale rejection of religious conviction in order to be modern. Rather, the movement in a range of ways engages with both tradition and modernity and in doing so manages to reconcile both the spiritual and the profane on a number of levels. The teachers remain connected to their traditions by engaging in an ancient rite of passage in the form of the educational pilgrimage undertaken by their forebears. They travel in the same capacities as Ibn Batutta: as pilgrims, scholars and Sufis. However, these roles have been updated to reflect contemporary times. The knowledge that they bring is not just of the religious sciences, but also the secular sciences in order to equip future Muslims with the tools they need to engage in the increasingly globalised world. Similarly, the Sufi elements of their faith have been retooled to fit with their task, which is to act as frontiers men and transmit their renewed knowledge. Instead of shying away in meditative introspection, newmodern forms of sacrifice are found through which they are able to humble themselves and commune with God. Furthermore, these sacrifices not only function as spiritual badges of honour that count towards the afterlife; they also function to propel movement members forward professionally, as they are recognised for their travails and awarded elevated positions on their return. In short, everything within the movement is geared towards the harmonisation of the temporal and the spiritual, to show that one does not have to shun the world in order to be a pious Muslim. It appears that this positive message is being well received by Muslim 58 The Olympiads are regional and international competitions in the sciences. The students from the movement schools regularly win gold at these competitions, enhancing their reputation for excellence. ISLAM’S MODERN DAY IBN BATTUTAS 177 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 students in Central Asia, Pakistan and Afghanistan, who want to play an active role in shaping the twenty-first century without losing their sense of self. Acknowledgements The field research for this article was funded by an Australia Endeavour Award for Turkey. DAVID TITTENSOR 178 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 9:2 3 1 1 M ay 20 15 