ABSTRACT: 
Health care forms a large economic sector in all countries, and procurement of medicines and other essential commodities necessarily creates economic linkages between a country's health sector and local and international industrial development. These procurement processes may be positive or negative in their effects on populations' access to appropriate treatment and on local industrial development, yet procurement in low and middle income countries (LMICs) remains under-studied: generally analysed, when addressed at all, as a public sector technical and organisational challenge rather than a social and economic element of health system governance shaping its links to the wider economy. This article uses fieldwork in Tanzania and Kenya in 2012–15 to analyse procurement of essential medicines and supplies as a governance process for the health system and its industrial links, drawing on aspects of global value chain theory. We describe procurement work processes as experienced by front line staff in public, faith-based and private sectors, linking these experiences to wholesale funding sources and purchasing practices, and examining their implications for medicines access and for local industrial development within these East African countries. We show that in a context of poor access to reliable medicines, extensive reliance on private medicines purchase, and increasing globalisation of procurement systems, domestic linkages between health and industrial sectors have been weakened, especially in Tanzania. We argue in consequence for a more developmental perspective on health sector procurement design, including closer policy attention to strengthening vertical and horizontal relational working within local health-industry value chains, in the interests of both wider access to treatment and improved industrial development in Africa. 
 
PREDICTION: 
“Spaghetti”-like patterns of overlapping andmultiplying supply chains have been largely driven by donors' in-dependent procurement for vertical programmes in public and NGOsectors (Yadav et al., 2011:6, MoHSW, 2008: 23 http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/coordination/tanzania_mapping_supply.pdf; KEMSATask Force, 2008: 28 http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnadn474.pdf).This complexity operates alongside (poorly documented) private sectorimporting, wholesaling and retailing of at least half of medicines con-sumed in Tanzania and Kenya (MSD 2013; MoMS & MPHS 2010).While ‘deliver’ frameworks focus on logistics, health system-basedframeworks tend to overlook procurement. Thus, when asked about pro-curement activities and experience, those responsible in facilities didnot stop at the technical aspects of stock auditing and order form filling.Facility-level procurement staff in all sectors ordered and purchasedfrom wholesalers as well as from district authorities and local shops.Their detailed accounts included systematic ways of addressing thedaily constraints they faced: procurement strategies and routines thatwere notably relational and local in nature.Health facilities were generally severely cash-constrained andlacked market and institutional power: only a few private hospitalsserving insured patients reported some market leverage over choice ofsupplies. Over 20% of Tanzanian respondents were atassistant or attendant level, but only 6% of Kenyan interviewees, whileTable 2Tanzania and Kenya: wholesale source of tracer medicines and supplies in health facilities(percentages by facility sector).HealthfacilitysectorTanzania KenyaWholesale source sector Wholesale source sectorPublic Donation Private Public FBO/NGODonation PrivateMedicinesPublic 98 1 2 90 2 1 7FBO/NGO 16 2 83 22 47 4 27Private 6 94 1 99SuppliesPublic 86 11 4 64 1 15 20FBO/NGO 20 19 61 20 37 9 35Private 11 9 80 4 5 92Note: totals may not add to 100 because of rounding.Table 3Qualifications 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 by front line staﬀ in public, faith-based and private sectors, linking these experiences to wholesale fundingsources and purchasing practices, and examining their implications for medicines access and for local industrialdevelopment within these East African countries. We show that in a context of poor access to reliable medicines,extensive reliance on private medicines purchase, and increasing globalisation of procurement systems, domesticlinkages between health and industrial sectors have been weakened, especially in Tanzania. We argue in con-sequence for a more developmental perspective on health sector procurement design, including closer policyattention to strengthening vertical and horizontal relational working within local health-industry value chains,in the interests of both wider access to treatment and improved industrial development in Africa.1. IntroductionDespite a huge increase in development aid for health and a majorimprovement in access to treatment for HIV/AIDS and TB, access toessential medicines remains a crisis in Sub-Saharan Africa (WHO,2011). Regular stock-outs in public sector facilities, and reliance on out-of-pocket purchase of medicines, continue to exclude low income po-pulations from reliable access to essential medicines (Bigdeli et al.,2014; WHO, 2011; Ewen et al., 2017).Donors' large scale international procurement of medicines aims toreduce prices and assure quality through pre-qualiﬁcation of suppliers,international tendering, and pooled procurement processes (GlobalFund, 2012; P4i initiative http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/p4i/). Anacknowledged side-eﬀect has been the by-passing of local procurementbodies or their reduction to logistics contractors, with, for some policyactors, the explicit objective of bypassing procurement corruption atnational level (Huﬀ-Rousselle, 2012).There is however a long-standing theme in the literature that betterlocal procurement processes are needed to improve access to medicines(Wang’Ombe and Mwabu, 1987; Waako et al., 2009; Wiedenmayeret al., 2015). International programmes including USAID/JSI DELIVER(http://deliver.jsi.com/dhome/), SIAPS (http://siapsprogram.org/),https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.01.008Received 10 August 2016; Received in revised form 27 November 2017; Accepted 8 January 2018∗ Corresponding author.1 Present address: Economic and Social Research Foundation, 51 Uporoto Street, P.O. Box 31226, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.2 Present address: Uongozi Institute, 62 Msasani Rd, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.E-mail addresses: Maureen.Mackintosh@open.ac.uk (M. Mackintosh), pautiba@yahoo.com (P. Tibandebage), riminjeru@gmail.com (M. Karimi Njeru),joankkungu@gmail.com (J. Kariuki Kungu), carolinemlulla@yahoo.com (C. Israel), pharemujinja@yahoo.co.uk (P.G.M. Mujinja).Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189Available online 31 January 20180277-9536/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).Tand People that Deliver (http://www.peoplethatdeliver.org/) focusparticularly on supporting local skills improvement in procurement.Using evidence from primary research on supply chains and industrialsuppliers in Tanzania and Kenya, we argue here for an approach toprocurement analysis and policy, employing aspects of global valuechain (GVC) theory, that can that can identify and respond to the em-beddedness of procurement processes in the governance of local healthsystems and their links to the wider local economy. We aim to con-tribute to research literature on health system strengthening includingpotential beneﬁts in Africa of strengthening local industrial linkages(Sidibé et al., 2014; Massard da Fonseca, 2017).Throughout this article, “procurement” is deﬁned in a broad sense,to encompass the whole set of processes for ordering and purchasing atfacility and shop level, for wholesale purchasing, and for distribution ofmanufactured commodities to public, faith-based and private healthfacilities, and to shops. This deﬁnition is in line with the usage of ourinterviewees.2. MethodsThis article presents evidence from a study of procurement ofmedicines and supplies in Tanzania and Kenya, and of related manu-facturing-health sector linkages (see Acknowledgements). In a ﬁrststage (2012–13), a convergent mixed methods design (Ozawa andPongpirul, 2013) used qualitative in-depth interviews to explore pro-curement processes and experience, in 42 health facilities, pharmaciesand drug shops in Tanzania, and 55 in Kenya, alongside quantitativedata capture of availability and source of a set of tracer essentialmedicines, supplies and equipment. The tracer commodities (listed inweb-based supplementary material), similar but not identical in eachcountry, were selected following advice from national clinical andregulatory experts, and encompass a range of essential generic medi-cines and basic medical equipment and supplies, laboratory suppliesand other basics such as bed sheets and cleaning materials.Table 1 shows interview distribution by sector. (The AccreditedDrug Dispensing Outlets, ADDOs, are Tanzania's regulated drug shops).All tables and quotations are from authors' ﬁeldwork unless otherwiseindicated.Facilities were purposively selected from public, faith-based/NGOand private sectors, spread geographically across four districts(Tanzania) or counties (Kenya). Locations were chosen to represent awide range of geographical area, incomes, infrastructure and healthoutcomes. In Kenya they included two contrasting areas of Nairobi (onehigh-income, to capture supply chains to private sector facilities), andtwo rural counties, one on the coast and one in the Rift Valley borderingTanzania. In Tanzania they included two urban districts, one in Dar esSalaam and one in Arusha region, plus two rural districts, one on thecoast, and one towards the Kenyan border to capture cross-bordersupply chains. In all, 79 semi-structured interviews were conducted inTanzania and 81 in Kenya, covering sources and procurementprocesses, supply gaps and opinions on local versus imported supplies,for medicines, medical supplies and equipment, laboratory supplies andbasics such as bed nets, sheets and cleaning materials. In Kenya theseinterviews were carried out before the decentralisation of public sectorprocurement to counties (KEMSA nd).In a second stage in 2013–14, 15 interviews were conducted inTanzania and 14 in Kenya with wholesalers, procurement agents, reg-ulators, government oﬃcials and manufacturing associations. InTanzania 11, and in Kenya 12, locally based manufacturers of medi-cines, medical and other supplies, and of inputs such as packaging, werealso interviewed, on business history and strategy, production organi-sation and technology, domestic and export market access, experienceof health sector procurement, and business challenges and constraints.Quantitative data were analysed using Stata. Qualitative interviews,both transcribed recordings and verbatim notes, were entered intoNVivo for coding and exploration of concepts and arguments. Data fromdiﬀerent sources were triangulated, and interpretations discussed bythe authors.Ethical clearance was obtained from the Open University HumanResearch Ethics Committee in the UK, the Kenyatta National HospitalEthical Review Board in Kenya, and the National Institute for MedicalResearch Ethics Review Committee in Tanzania. All participants hadconsented to the research, having been assured that participation wasvoluntary and that their anonymity would be preserved in publishedresearch ﬁndings.3. Analysing procurement: a value chain governance frameworkCurrent frameworks of analysis of health care procurement in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) are strongly inﬂuenced by linear supply-chainmodels of ‘delivery’ of medicines and other supplies from manufacturerto end-user. Yadav (2015) and Yadav et al. (2011) frame supply chainsas technical logistical processes whereby products ﬂow from manu-facturers (the ‘international’ level) via warehousing, storage andtransport, to clinics, health workers and drug shops (Yadav et al., 2011:4). Reverse ﬂows of information from eﬀective ‘quantiﬁcation’ at locallevel, and appropriate ﬁnancing, are required for eﬃcient supply anddelivery. While problems arising from lack of competitive pressure areidentiﬁed (Yadav, 2015), recommendations emphasise consolidationand simpliﬁcation of linear supply chains (see also Huﬀ-Rousselle,2012).This supply chain management focus on logistics and quantiﬁcationis a strength. However, ‘mapping’ of SSA supply chains has demon-strated their complexity. “Spaghetti”-like patterns of overlapping andmultiplying supply chains have been largely driven by donors' in-dependent procurement for vertical programmes in public and NGOsectors (Yadav et al., 2011:6, MoHSW, 2008: 23 http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/coordination/tanzania_mapping_supply.pdf; KEMSATask Force, 2008: 28 http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnadn474.pdf).This complexity operates alongside (poorly documented) private sectorimporting, wholesaling and retailing of at least half of medicines con-sumed in Tanzania and Kenya (MSD 2013; MoMS & MPHS 2010).While ‘deliver’ frameworks focus on logistics, health system-basedframeworks tend to overlook procurement. Analysis of medicines inhealth systems has so far paid little attention to procurement processes(e.g. Bigdeli et al., 2014). People-centred health systems analyses si-milarly tend to omit procurement activity (e.g. Abimola et al., 2014)despite recognising the necessarily polycentric nature of health caregovernance.We analyse procurement in this article as a governance process forhealth systems and their industrial linkages, drawing on aspects of GVCtheory. Sourcing of medicines and health sector supplies for East Africais largely international, despite a long-standing local pharmaceuticalindustry (Banda et al., 2016). GVC analysis directs attention to linksbetween demand, purchasing and production networks, and inter-connections between power relations, market structures, labourTable 1Facilities and shops in which interviews conducted, number by sector and country.Type of facility/shop Tanzania KenyaPublic FBO/NGOPrivate Public FBO/NGOPrivateHospital 4 2 1 3 3 6Health centre/clinic 6 2 7 3 4Dispensary 8 3 6 4 4Pharmacy 3 13Drug shop/ADDO 7 8Total 18 7 17 14 10 31Note: FBO/NGO = Faith-based and non-governmental organisation ownership.Private= privately owned for-proﬁt.M. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189183processes, and consumption of commodities in markets that cross na-tional borders (Gereﬃ et al., 2005; Flecker et al., 2013). We examinehealth sector procurement as a social and economic activity, includingcomplex front line labour processes and their implications for access totreatment; wholesaling and related global trading and funding re-lationships; and the impacts on local industrial development.GVC analysis links governance of value chains to the type of itemtraded and the complexity of transactions (Gereﬃ et al., 2005). Whilethe bulk of essential items purchased by the Kenyan and Tanzanianhealth sectors are standard commodities, two major characteristics ofthe production and distribution of essential medicines and suppliesdiﬀer from standard commodity chains. The ﬁrst is the importance ofquality of medicines and medical supplies (Höllein et al., 2016).Asymmetry of information, where quality cannot easily be judged byusers, implies central importance for regulation and quality assurance,which in turn, we argue below, depends on eﬀective relational workingat all levels. The second characteristic is need: given current interna-tional policy emphasis on moving towards universal access to appro-priate treatment, essential medicines and supplies should be analysedfor policy purposes as inputs to this movement.This article therefore explores procurement as a key governanceaspect of value chains linking industrial development, in East Africaand abroad, to (potential) universal access to competent treatment. Theperspective of front line procurement staﬀ identiﬁes incentives andconstraints that shape local procurement rules and norms, drawingmethodologically on Abimola et al.'s (2014) investigation of local rule-setting and multi-level governance. We then investigate institutionalchanges in wholesale procurement for commercial and non-commercialuse, focussing on organisational inter-linkages, governance structuresand the leverage exercised by purchasing functions (Kaplinsky andMorris, 2001). Finally, we investigate the impact of these procurementtrends and structures on locally based manufacturers' market access.The discussion reﬂects on the implications for a more developmentalapproach to procurement design.4. Findings4.1. Domestic supply chains: segmentation and interactionsOur quantitative data on wholesale sources of supplies by healthfacility sector understate the complexity of sectoral interactions ingovernance of access to supplies. Table 2 shows, for each facility sector,the wholesale sector from which available tracer medicines and sup-plies had been sourced. The “public” wholesale sector encompasses tax-and donor-funded public procurement by the large public wholesaler(KEMSA in Kenya, MSD in Tanzania), plus most of the vertical pro-gramme supplies distributed by those wholesalers or through districtand city authorities. “Donations” were predominantly direct donationsof equipment to facilities. In Kenya, “FBO/NGO” wholesaling refers tothe Mission for Essential Drugs and Supplies (MEDS): a large Christian-based non-proﬁt wholesaler established in 1986 to improve supplies tonon-proﬁt health facilities. Faith-based wholesalers in Tanzania existbut were too small to register in these data. Table 2 shows that mostpublic facilities' available medicines and a smaller majority of suppliescame from the public wholesale sector, while the FBO facilities reliedmainly on private and NGO sources, and private facilities sourced fromprivate wholesalers.The cross-overs between sectors identiﬁed in Table 2 include ver-tical programme supplies from the public sector to the faith-based, NGOand private facilities, and public sector “gap ﬁlling” from private sup-pliers as described below. However Table 2 substantially under-estimates inter-sectoral supply chain interactions, because public sectortreatment access also relies extensively on patients' private out-of-pocket purchase of medicines and supplies from private shops.4.2. Norms and relationships in front-line procurementHealth services' quality depends, as Abimola et al. (2014: ii23)argue, on the strength and nature of working practices. Described as“operational governance”, these are the norms and relationships thatshape day to day decisions, and are particularly inﬂuential whereformal governance of systems is weak or displays gaps. Medicines andsupplies are, for health facility staﬀ, essential inputs to treatment, andthe procurement routines and norms of behaviour of interviewees re-ﬂected that needs-based perspective. Thus, when asked about pro-curement activities and experience, those responsible in facilities didnot stop at the technical aspects of stock auditing and order form ﬁlling.Facility-level procurement staﬀ in all sectors ordered and purchasedfrom wholesalers as well as from district authorities and local shops.Their detailed accounts included systematic ways of addressing thedaily constraints they faced: procurement strategies and routines thatwere notably relational and local in nature.Health facilities were generally severely cash-constrained andlacked market and institutional power: only a few private hospitalsserving insured patients reported some market leverage over choice ofsupplies. Public facilities in both countries reported recurrent and oftensevere supply shortages, while faith-based and private facilities strug-gled with pricing and cash ﬂow constraints in a context of low ability topay. Adding to the lack of front line leverage over suppliers was the factthat procurement was largely non-professionalised: in Tanzania, 59% offacility interviewees actively engaged in procurement were doctors,nurses or clinical oﬃcers, and in Kenya 41% (Table 3). Respondentswith formal procurement and supply management qualiﬁcations wereconcentrated in hospitals. Over 20% of Tanzanian respondents were atassistant or attendant level, but only 6% of Kenyan interviewees, whileTable 2Tanzania and Kenya: wholesale source of tracer medicines and supplies in health facilities(percentages by facility sector).HealthfacilitysectorTanzania KenyaWholesale source sector Wholesale source sectorPublic Donation Private Public FBO/NGODonation PrivateMedicinesPublic 98 1 2 90 2 1 7FBO/NGO 16 2 83 22 47 4 27Private 6 94 1 99SuppliesPublic 86 11 4 64 1 15 20FBO/NGO 20 19 61 20 37 9 35Private 11 9 80 4 5 92Note: totals may not add to 100 because of rounding.Table 3Qualiﬁcations of health facility procurement interviewees, by country and level of facility(percentages by column).Tanzania KenyaQualiﬁcation Hospital Lower level Hospital Lower levelProcurement/supplymanagement14 2 22Medical doctor/Assistant MO 10 9 4 4Clinical oﬃcer/nurse 14 50 19 37Pharmacist 19 5 19 22Pharmacy/laboratorytechnician/technologist19 5 33 22Nursing/pharmacy/laboratoryassistant/attendant14 24 9Public health/administration/other10 5 4 6Total 100 100 100 100M. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189184proportionately more Kenyan than Tanzanian interviewees had phar-macy or laboratory training including stock management and ordering(Table 3). In all, 53% of Kenyan and 73% of Tanzanian health facilityinterviewees had no procurement training, short courses included.Procurement work was therefore an element in a multi-tasking fa-cility work process, squeezed into busy working days by clinicians, la-boratory and dispensing staﬀ. The rules and practices of procurementwere embedded in the broader facility culture and subject to clinicalpressures. While procurement training addressed important skills ofstock control and timely, accurate form-ﬁlling, eﬀective procurementwas seen on the front line as dependent also on strong ‘horizontal’working relationships within local areas, given the lack of power ex-ercised in ‘vertical’ relations with wholesalers.4.2.1. Public sector shortages and gap-ﬁllingIn the public sector, front-line staﬀ managed procurement in con-texts of high uncertainty. Clinical interviewees stated that publicwholesalers' medicines were generally of good quality, but expressed anumber of complaints about the quality of equipment and supplies suchas gloves. Facility staﬀ lacked inﬂuence over the public wholesalers'response to orders, and experience of recurrent stock outs and delayeddeliveries was almost universal. The following quotations are re-presentative:There was no medicine at this centre the whole of January.(Tanzania, public dispensary)At times we can stay for almost even six months without gettingthese [speciﬁed] drugs. (Kenya, public dispensary)Sometimes up to 45% of the order is reported missing. (Tanzania,public district hospital)Frontline procurement routines therefore allocated part of limitedstaﬀ time to gap-ﬁlling, a rational response to patients' needs andsupply uncertainty. Gap-ﬁlling strategies all involved relationship-building, including working with the district authorities. Some verticalprogramme supplies were delivered to the District Medical Oﬃcer(DMO) in Tanzania, and could be chased through the DMO's oﬃce. Insome Tanzanian districts, facilities visited had suﬃcient vertical pro-gramme supplies, while in another district HIV tests had been missingfor a month. In Kenya, public wholesaler and vertical programmesupplies could come to dispensaries through the district hospital. Ineach case, communication and logistics were complicated, requiringlocal working relationships.A widely reported gap-ﬁlling strategy in Kenya (but not inTanzania) was resort to borrowing (included within the public sectorcategory on Table 2). For this, relationships were key:We normally share with other facilities. (Kenya, public healthcentre)We are forced to go to the other facilities … begging for drugs. Orwe barter, if the other facility requires paracetamol, we may tradeparacetamol for gloves or a similar arrangement. (Kenya publichealth centre)There was investment in mutual support:Interviewer: Do you borrow to return or they give you and maybenext time you replace?No, no, when you borrow they just give you. But when you, later onyou might have a problem, you will assist them. Just creating a goodrelationship. So when I have a problem, you'll help me. (Kenyapublic health centre)4.2.2. Funding procurement at the front lineThose responsible for front line public procurement constantlychased additional funds, and their skills in accessing and using thesefunds strongly inﬂuenced service quality. In Kenya the Health SectorServices Fund (HSSF), and in Tanzania the donor-ﬁnanced Basket Fundheld at district level, were used by facilities to ﬁll emergency supplygaps. The HSSF disbursed funds directly to health centres and dis-pensaries (Opwora et al., 2011). Interviewees had used these funds forcleaning items, casual labour for security, essential missing drugs, andtransport for urgent referrals among other items. The HSSF allowedfacilities to treat patients who were unable to pay for missing items:We tell them [patients] to buy [but] some of them cannot aﬀord.That is now where we try to squeeze out the HSSF fund. (Kenyapublic health centre)In Tanzania, the basket funds were used to buy essential items fromsuppliers selected by the district authorities. A laboratory in-chargeexplained:… most laboratory supplies are always out of stock at [the publicwholesaler] … the procedure … starts by the laboratory technicianpreparing a list and taking it to the DMO to sign as well as theDistrict Executive Director.… it is then taken to the supplies oﬃce,who get quotations from the vendors, and the one with the cheapestprices … is the one who wins the tender …. There is a risk of gettinglow quality from the vendors because of the business-oriented,proﬁt-making mentality. (Tanzania, public hospital)This perception that buying medicines and supplies privately riskedlower quality than public supplies, is supported by recent literaturereviews (Höllein et al., 2016; Wafula et al., 2017: 61). Private marketquality concerns continue despite the regulatory eﬀorts of the Tanza-nian Food and Drug Authority and the Kenyan Pharmacy and PoisonsBoard. Furthermore, some private wholesalers in Kenya were reportedto refuse orders from public hospitals, fearing long payment delays.Some public health facilities retained charges at facility level. Howevermany rural health centres and dispensaries in each country were notpermitted to do so or did not charge, leaving staﬀ with no petty cash forprivate purchases or transport; some staﬀ reported using their ownmoney in crises.4.2.3. Patients buying medicines and suppliesIn both countries therefore, public sector patients were frequentlysent to private shops:For a long time, we didn't have gloves … So we were buying foremergencies. …. Even right now, a woman coming to the maternityto deliver brings her own gloves … the stocks that are delivered [bythe public wholesaler] are spared for emergencies or for lab use.(Kenya public health centre)When medicines come late to our dispensary … patients go withoutservices …. they are told to go and buy medicines from privateshops. They complain about the prices there because most of ourcustomers are poor. (Tanzania public dispensary).There are no systematic data in either country on the extent ofpublic sector facilities' reliance on patients' private purchases to delivercurrent levels of service.4.2.4. FBO and private sector procurementThe faith-based and private facilities and private shops were a keyelement of access to treatment. In Kenya, FBO facilities were suppliedpartly by MEDS and by some vertical programmes via the public sector;they also relied on private wholesalers (Table 2). FBO facility inter-viewees in Kenya were notably positive about MEDS' responsiveness totheir procurement demands, saying that MEDS oﬀered good quality,short delivery times, and were responsive to complaints and to requestsfor speciﬁc items. The availability data from our sample facilities bearsthis out: among dispensaries and health centres, faith-based facilitiesgenerally had higher availability of both medicines and supplies thanM. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189185the public facilities, and their staﬀ expressed more sense of control.Private sector interviewees in shops and small facilities felt muchless sense of control of quality and price when ordering from whole-salers. Private sector retail and facility buyers were generally veryprice-focused, and also tied into wholesalers oﬀering credit:Eﬃciency of supply, the credit period and also the competitivenessof their prices: these are the three main things. (Kenya, privateclinic)The main reasons why I chose those wholesale pharmacies are theprices of the drugs, quality and the convenience each of them oﬀers.(Tanzania private dispensary).Yes, there are new suppliers in the market, but the only thing is thatyou have to belong to a distributor because of the terms they oﬀer toyou. (Kenya drug shop)The phrase ‘belonging’ to a distributor signals the relative power-lessness of the small retailers, and the diﬃculty of switching supplier. Ineach district, private sector interviewees relied on a small number ofdominant wholesalers. Supply mistakes, short expiry dates and sub-stitutions were listed as recurrent problems in private sector procure-ment interviews. Drug shop owners consistently struggled with ﬂuctu-ating prices, cash ﬂow problems, and an acknowledged lack of controlover quality even from established wholesalers.It is a free market so everyone has the right to set and change theprices … sometimes it forces us to increase the sale price to custo-mers, who in many cases don't have money. … Sometimes I amforced to sell at a loss in order to keep my customers. (Tanzania,ADDO)The core purchasing constraint for many private sector intervieweeswas the poverty of their customers, who were constantly seeking thelowest prices, increasing the risk of purchasing substandard medicines.4.3. Public, non-proﬁt and private wholesaling: market structure andincentivesThis lack of frontline power implies that the wholesale level of thevalue chain exercised substantial leverage in the governance of thesystem. Wholesaling, encompassing government, donor, faith-basedand private commercial bulk purchasing and distribution, powerfullyshapes market structure, and therefore retail and health facility-levelhealth care and medicines access. It also transmits incentives that in-ﬂuence manufacturing business behaviour (Chataway et al., 2016;Srinivas, 2012; Pazirandeh and Norrman, 2014).In Tanzania and Kenya in recent years, wholesalers including largepublic and non-proﬁt procurement bodies have been one force amongothers for market liberalisation and globalisation of health sector sup-plies. In both countries, private wholesaling of medicines creates a largepart of the total domestic market, supplying private facilities and re-tailers and also non-governmental and public facilities (Table 2). Pri-vate wholesaler/importers also sell medicines and supplies to publicand faith-based wholesalers. In Tanzania, private retail purchase alonewas estimated by interviewees to represent around half of the totalmedicines market (vertical programmes included), while in Kenya oneoﬃcial estimate (MoMS & MPHS, 2010) put the private share of totalpharmaceutical expenditure at 80%. In both countries, the local tax-funded share of public medicines expenditure is low: in Tanzania, 63%of the public wholesaler's turnover was represented by vertical pro-grammes in 2011/12, a ratio ﬂuctuating sharply year on year with thesize and timing of donor expenditure; part of the Tanzanian Treasurycontribution was also donor-funded (MSD, 2013; MoHSW, 2008: 4–5;MSD oﬃce records). In Kenya, the bulk of public expenditure onmedicines was estimated to be donor-ﬁnanced (MM&MPHS, 2010).It follows that donors' procurement practices, and private whole-saling market structure and behaviour, between them dominateddomestic market-shaping in essential medicines and supplies. Publicwholesalers used large international tenders to procure medicines andsupplies. Large donors generally undertook international tendering di-rectly, reducing the public wholesalers to logistics suppliers. This ap-proach gave donors control of quality and payment, reducing theirorganisational risk, but also undermined domestic industrial linkages.Data in Table 4, combined with the interviews, conﬁrm that donors'procurement practices have shifted the balance of sourcing of medi-cines from local producers towards overseas (particularly Indian) sup-pliers of essential medicines. In Kenya, reliance on Indian imports forthe chronic disease and other essential tracer medicines was low re-lative to local suppliers, and in Tanzania 37% of other essential itemswere regionally sourced (Table 4). However local manufacturers' sharesof the tracer medicines for HIV/AIDS (ARTs) and of the new ﬁrst-lineanti-malarial treatments (ACTs) were very low, as vertical programmefunders imported from India and high income country (HIC) manu-facturers (Table 4). While local ﬁrms had supplied the bulk of theprevious ﬁrst line anti-malarial treatment (Sulfadoxine and Pyr-imethamine, SP) (Mujinja et al., 2014), the switch to the new moreexpensive ACTs as ﬁrst line treatment had raised barriers to marketentry by local ﬁrms. Subsequent to this data collection, the sole Tan-zanian supplier of anti-retrovirals was closed.In Kenya over half of publicly-sourced tracer medicines had beenbought locally, and in Tanzania over 20%, despite these constraints anddespite the use of international tendering as the public wholesalers'main procurement method (Table 5). Private wholesalers had boughtproportionately less locally in each country. In Kenya, private whole-sale buying from HICs (Table 5) reﬂected the market leverage of thehigher income segment of Kenya's private sector. Strikingly, faith-basedwholesalers interviewed, including MEDS in Kenya (Table 5) and Ac-tion Medeor in Tanzania, were making major eﬀorts to purchase lo-cally, as was PEPFAR in Tanzania when sourcing medicines for op-portunistic infections. These organisations were actively adapting theirTable 4Country of origin of all essential tracer medicines, by category of medicine and country ofuse (percentages by medicine category) 2012.Country ofuseTanzania KenyaCountry oforiginACTs ARTs ChronicdiseaseOther ACTs ARTs ChronicdiseaseOtherTanzania 10 19Kenya 12 18 1 2 59 44India 37 90 41 46 44 90 12 27China 8 8 4 2 6HICs 55 47 7 51 5 20 17Other 2 2 7 6Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100Note: ACT: artemisinin combination therapy; ART: antiretroviral therapy.Table 5Tanzania and Kenya: Country of origin of tracer medicines, by wholesale sector (% bysector).Country oforiginTanzania KenyaWholesale source sector Wholesale source sectorPublic Donation Private Public FBO/NGODonation PrivateTanzania 22 11Kenya 10 25 20 54 76 50 32India 49 25 47 30 8 40 31China 6 6 8 1 4HICs 12 50 12 8 10 10 25Other 4 5 8M. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189186procurement processes to working with local suppliers. Intervieweesattributed MEDS′ relatively high reliance on local procurement (at 75%,see Table 5 Col. 5) to its mix of local tenders of accessible size andactive working relations with local manufacturers.In both countries, interviewees including regulatory oﬃcials, publicand NGO wholesalers and clinicians, identiﬁed particular local manu-facturers as producing reliable quality medicines, and also reportedproblems, investigations and complaints about particular ﬁrms or pro-ducts. Facility level and other interviewees argued that more localpublic procurement could improve ﬂexibility and quality of local sup-plies, by allowing enhanced regulatory oversight:… the health system will be in a position to monitor right from theprimary stage of production, and quality of drugs would be assuredright at the factory level. (Tanzania, public health centre)In both countries, the business model of private wholesaling anddistribution was strongly inﬂuenced by proﬁts from importing. Privatewholesaling was dominated by wholesalers/importers acting as re-presentatives of Indian and multinational (MNC) exporters to EastAfrica. In Kenya, some distributors acted mainly as marketing anddistribution agents for branded imports from MNCs such as Novartis,Sanoﬁ and Astra Zeneca. Others had built up businesses as distributionagents both for local manufacturers and for large Indian exporters suchas Cipla and Aurobindo (see also WHO, 2011). One distributor inter-viewed represented two local manufacturers in tendering to KEMSA,and this formed a substantial element of his local purchases; otherwisehe stated that he preferred importing, since imports were lower priced,by implication allowing higher resale margins.Distributors in Tanzania also acted as intermediaries between localmanufacturers and the public wholesaler. Tanzanian wholesaler/im-porters bundled local and imported items to supply MSD tenders, andone manufacturer of other health sector supplies was consideringmoving into this business. There were a number of reasons why man-ufacturers in Tanzania preferred indirect supply to the public sector.Public tenders carried considerable risk: smaller manufacturers inparticular reported increasing delays in payment after delivery andchanges to contracted volumes during production. There was thereforean incentive to shift this risk to an intermediary, despite reducedmargins. From the public wholesaler side, the attraction of bundling bywholesalers included fewer contracted suppliers to deal with. Given thewholesaling structure, this “bundling” would tend to incentivise a shiftover time to increasing reliance on imports.4.4. Procurement patterns and local manufacturers' market accessThese trends at wholesale level had had the eﬀect of weakeningdomestic linkages between health sector procurement and local in-dustry. Tanzania and Kenya each have active domestic pharmaceuticaland health supplies industries, largely owned by East African capital(Banda et al., 2016; UNIDO, 2010). Kenya, with around 40 pharma-ceutical ﬁrms and substantial upstream suppliers, is the regional hub.Tanzania's smaller industry supplies mainly its domestic market. Bothcountries' pharmaceutical sectors operated in a liberalised and globa-lised market environment, with zero regional import duties on ﬁnishedpharmaceutical imports, and almost complete reliance on imports ofactive pharmaceutical ingredients, excipients and machinery.In 2009, these pharmaceutical industries were producing around athird of domestic medicines' consumption (Table 6). However in Tan-zania, local producers' market share of an expanding market had sincedropped sharply, to 15%, while exports had largely collapsed; mean-while Kenyan producers had sustained their market share of a moreslowly growing market. Both countries had received rising volumes ofdonor-funded medicines, particularly Tanzania. Data are unreliable(UNIDO, 2010) but domestic market size, measured in Table 6 as localproduction plus net imports, includes donor-funded medicines to theextent that they were included in countries' import data.Manufacturers interviewed stated that WHO pre-qualiﬁcation, re-quired to tender for donor-funded contracts, was expensive in relationto ﬁrms' revenues, and unlikely to generate business because of diﬃ-culties in meeting the required scale and Asian manufacturers' tenderprices. The impact on market access was identiﬁable in both countries,despite Kenya's stronger local industry (Table 4). In Tanzania, manu-facturers stated that the shift to ACTs as ﬁrst-line anti-malarial medi-cation, without access to donor-subsidised tenders, had reduced theircash ﬂow, with one manufacturer reporting a loss of one third ofturnover from the switch. Loss of local suppliers potentially reducesaccess by disadvantaged populations, since local producers in Tanzaniahave been shown to distribute more eﬀectively than importers in ruralareas (Mujinja et al., 2014).In Tanzania, the decline in market share was thus partly generatedby the terms of donor-funded procurement. A further blow was the lossof industrial protection when import tariﬀs on medicines were removedacross the East African Community in 2009, increasing price competi-tion from Asian exporters who may beneﬁt from domestic export sup-port. The WHO, alongside large donors and NGOs, has argued for zeroimport protection on medicines, characterising tariﬀs as a tax on illness(Olcay and Laing 2008). Tanzanian interviewees conﬁrmed that thisview inﬂuenced trade policy. In both countries, manufacturers statedthat they now faced taxes or duties on some imported inputs, whilecompeting with duty-free imported formulations. While the publicwholesalers continue to provide up to 15% price premia for tendersfrom local manufacturers, the cumulative impact of the changes hasbeen to increase barriers to market entry for local producers, withparticularly negative eﬀects in the less robust Tanzanian industrialstructure.Kenyan manufacturers' market share may have been in part sus-tained by the country's lower reliance on donor medicines funding,alongside greater industrial capabilities of local ﬁrms. Kenyan manu-facturers were supplying a broader range of essential medicines, in-cluding those for chronic disease (diabetes, hypertension and mentalillness), and more technologically demanding items such as injectablesand IV ﬂuids. Tanzanian ﬁrms' range was narrower, mainly tablets,capsules and some syrups – and was narrowing further.Both countries also displayed high reliance on imports of medicalequipment and laboratory supplies (Table 7). China was emerging as asupplier of medical equipment and supplies such as microscope slidesand glucometer strips, and Korea (among HICs) of diagnostics. Tan-zania and Kenya were supplying domestically a majority of basics suchas brooms, bedsheets, disinfectant, bed nets and alcohol/spirit forwound cleaning (Table 7). Kenyan manufacturers also produced ban-dages, syringes and needles and some types of gloves, and exportedsome of these items to Tanzania (Table 7).Table 6Kenya and Tanzania: pharmaceutical markets 2009 and 2013 (millions of current USdollars) and market share of local manufacturers (%).Country andyear(1) Imports(USD m)(2) Exports(USD m)(3) Localproduction (USDm)Local marketshare (%)aKenya2009 298.6 67.3 99.9 302013 466.4 82.1 193.1 33Tanzania2009 99.4 7.9 49.2 352013 286.1 1.7 48.7 15Sources: Kenya: Imports, exports and local production: KNBS (2014, 2015). Mid-yearexchange rates from Central Bank of Kenya https://www.centralbank.go.ke/ consulted17.2.16Sources: Tanzania: Imports and exports: Comtrade data base http://comtrade.un.org/data/ downloaded 5.8.14; local production URT (2012, 2013). Mid-year exchange ratesfrom Bank of Tanzania https://www.bot-tz.org/ consulted 12.2.16.a Share calculated as (3)/((1) + (3)–(2)).M. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189187Equipment and supplies are diverse, and relied on erratic and cash-constrained locally-funded procurement. Private pharmaceuticalwholesalers dealt in medical supplies such as clinical gloves and la-boratory items, and there were some specialist equipment wholesalers.Medical supplies, like medicines, were imported tariﬀ-free, while pro-ducers of e.g. hospital furniture complained of tariﬀs and taxes on theirimported inputs. Local producers of medical and laboratory suppliesand equipment thus faced similar competitive disadvantages to phar-maceuticals suppliers. Overall, local manufacturers of medicines andsupplies for the health sector had lost out in access to rapidly expandingmarket demand segments, notably donor-funded medicines, while fa-cing increasingly risky and uneven public procurement patternsalongside sharpening import competition in core domestic markets.5. Discussion: a developmental perspective on procurementProcurement processes, we have shown, act as a governance struc-ture at multiple levels across the health sector, and connect need toindustrial development. Routines and constraints in front line pro-curement processes embedded the workforce in ‘horizontal’ workingrelationships that sought to improve access to treatment. In the publicsector, how staﬀ stitched together stock control, ordering, chasing thepublic wholesaler and district authorities, borrowing, and purchasingusing a variety of funding sources, inﬂuenced treatment access. Whilethe strengths of public and donor procurement, according to facilityinterviewees, were low prices and quality assurance, weaknesses werenot all attributable to local ordering and stock management failures.Other causes identiﬁed included top-down working relationships gen-erating relative powerlessness of frontline staﬀ, erratic and uneven ﬁ-nancing, logistical problems, long geographical supply chains, and in-ﬂexible tendering systems.In the faith-based sector, facility staﬀ undertaking procurementworked with faith-based wholesalers where available, and relied, likelarger private sector facilities, on working relationships with privatewholesalers they judged reputable through experience, but over whosequality they lacked control. Patients in small private dispensaries anddrug shops, generally seeking the cheapest medicines, were the mostvulnerable to wholesale suppliers of medicines of doubtful quality.Given the continuing persistence of access gaps and low incomes, abroader perspective on procurement policy can embed it more securelyin health system strengthening, complementing a focus on strength-ening top-down logistics. This shift in perspective should combine re-cognition of the strengths within persistently uncertain funding con-texts of multi-level governance of procurement rooted in eﬀectiverelational working with an appreciation of the broader developmentalopportunities, as well as the problems, generated by power relationswithin value chains.In this framework, procurement emerges as an important arena forboth health and industrial policy. The GVC framework emphasises therole of lead buyers in value chain governance, and historical researchidentiﬁes how health care demand patterns structure supply industries(Srinivas, 2012; Chataway et al., 2016). Health sector procurementpractices constitute “implicit” industrial policy, shaping pharmaceuticaland vaccine manufacturing in high- and middle-income countries(Srinivas, 2012; Massard da Fonseca, 2017; Shadlen and Massard daFonseca, 2013; Pazirandeh and Norrman, 2014). Pharmaceuticalmanufacturers have historically relied on domestic markets for theirearly development, and the Africa-based pharmaceutical industry is noexception (Banda et al., 2016).Procurement in East Africa thus opens up developmental opportu-nities, as Wang’Ombe and Mwabu (1987) noted two decades ago.Building more eﬀective multi-level governance can strengthen linksbetween serving population health needs and supporting local in-dustrial development. The challenge for public, NGO and donor pro-curement is to sustain quality control while greatly increasing respon-siveness to frontline requirements.Strikingly, the non-commercial wholesaler in this study with thebest such responsiveness, MEDS, was also the wholesaler with thestrongest local purchasing, with resultant industrial and employmentbeneﬁts. MEDS′ working practices were strongly relational, both up-and down-stream, involving accreditation of local ﬁrms, regular con-sultation with local manufacturers, in-house quality control, and rapidresponse to facility requests and complaints. MEDS' relative success inassociating local procurement, quality assurance and downstream re-sponsiveness shows that relational working processes can build mutualunderstanding as a basis for eﬀective negotiation and market devel-opment.Public and non-proﬁt wholesalers can thus shorten supply chainswhile encouraging domestic market competition through relationalworking with local suppliers. This shift implies substantial workingpractice changes within public and donor procurement. Because of thecentral importance of quality, procurement for health care cannot bearms-length. It requires inspection, quality assurance and control,alongside knowledge sharing and a level of trust. These in turn requirebetter communications between procurement bodies and local ﬁrms,and between procurement bodies and frontline staﬀ. Other supportivepolicy changes, such as modest levels of tariﬀ protection to supportemerging industrial strengths, also require improved relational workingbetween health and industrial policy makers to identify scope for mu-tual beneﬁt. Potential gains include industrial and employment growth,and a reduction of a reliance on low-priced Indian imports that iswidely feared to be unsustainable as reputable Indian exporters move tohigher margin opportunities (Chaudhuri et al., 2010).6. ConclusionAccess to essential medicines and supplies in the public sectorhealth facilities on which the bulk of Tanzanian and Kenyan low in-come populations rely remains problematic and erratic. Local pro-curement staﬀ were disempowered, and local industrial suppliers hadbeen weakened or constrained within a globalising market context.Responsiveness to needs remained poor, and reliance on privateTable 7Country of origin of tracer medical equipment and health sector supplies, by type of item and country of use (percentages by type of item) 2012.Source country Tanzania KenyaMedical equipment Supplies Medical equipment SuppliesMedical Lab Other Medical Lab OtherTanzania 31 3 63Kenya 5 4 13 7 38 16 73India 7 2 4 17 3 2 1China 15 20 3 3 17 30 4HICs 75 41 85 3 67 23 74 11Other 3 1 1 6 8 4 16Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100M. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189188medicines purchases high.The cultural and institutional changes required to shift to a moredomestically oriented, needs-led procurement mix can be built on thestrengths of current multi-level governance of procurement, alongsideeﬀective use of the market-shaping power of wholesale procurement.Procurement can be made to function more eﬀectively as an activepolicy ﬁeld for: assessing and transmitting need; sustaining access inlow income contexts with high uncertainty; generating greater re-sponsiveness to population needs; and strengthening competent localindustrial suppliers; thus shifting more of the beneﬁts of health-relatedindustrial value chains towards the domestic economy. Better localprocurement by public and non-proﬁt wholesalers can generate wideraccess to treatment, can support investment by competent, regulatedlocal manufacturers, and improve local distribution.Increasingly these challenges are being addressed in East Africa. InTanzania the Second Five Year Development Plan (United Republic ofTanzania (URT), 2016) identiﬁed pharmaceuticals as a priority in-dustrial sector, encouraging public procurement to link actively withlocal manufacturers. Generating eﬀective two-way relational workingbetween front-line procurement staﬀ, wholesalers and industrialists canclose the policy circle, extracting beneﬁts for both health care and in-dustrial development.AcknowledgementsThis article presents ﬁndings from the project IndustrialProductivity and Health Sector Performance: a study in Tanzania andKenya. The content is the responsibility of the authors and does notnecessarily reﬂect the views of DFID or the UK ESRC (Grant number ES/J008737/1), whose support is gratefully acknowledged (project ES/J008737/1). We thank: our interviewees; research colleagues SamuelWangwe, Edwin Mhede, Watu Wamae; interviewers and data-entrycolleagues Samwel Ebenezeri, Caritas Pesha, Sweetbert Ijumba, JacobKateri, Mariam Mwandoro, Doreen Kachenje, Lilian Nyandieka,Richard Mutisya; also KEMRI, especially Dr Yeri Kombe, for supportand research facilitation; and participants in Policy Dialogue workshopsin Dar es Salaam and Nairobi; also two anonymous reviewers andMaggie Huﬀ-Rouselle for detailed commentary on earlier drafts. Thesame disclaimer applies.Appendix A. Supplementary dataSupplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.01.008ReferencesAbimola, S., Negin, J., Jan, S., Matniuk, A., 2014. Towards people-centred health systems:a multi-level framework for analysing primary health care governance in low- andmiddle-income countries. Health Pol. Plann. 29, ii29–ii39.Banda, G., Wangwe, S., Mackintosh, M., 2016. Making Medicines in Africa: an HistoricalPolitical Economy Overview. In Mackintosh, M., Banda, G., Tibandebage, P., Wamae,W. (Eds.), 2016. Making Medicines in Africa: The Political Economy of Industrializingfor Local Health. Palgrave Macmillan. Chapter pages 7–24.Bigdeli, M., Peters, D.H., Wagner, A.K., 2014. Medicines in Health Systems: AdvancingAccess, Aﬀordability and Appropriate Use. Alliance for Health Policy and SystemsResearch, WHO, Geneva.Chataway, J., Banda, G., Cochrane, G., Manville, C., 2016. Innovative Procurement forHealth and Industrial Development. pp. 243–260 In Mackintosh, M., Banda, G.,Tibandebage, P., Wamae, W. (Eds.), 2016. Making Medicines in Africa: The PoliticalEconomy of Industrializing for Local Health. Palgrave Macmillan. Chapter pages7–24.Chaudhuri, S., Mackintosh, M., Mujinja, P.G.M., 2010. Indian generics producers, accessto essential medicines and local production in Africa: an argument with reference toTanzania. Eur. J. Dev. Res. 22 (4), 451–468.Ewen, M., Kaplan, W., Gedif, T., Justin-Temu, M., Vialle-Valentin, C., Mirza, Z., Regeer,B., Zweekhorst, M., Laing, R., 2017. Prices and availability of locally produced andimported medicines in Ethiopia and Tanzania. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy andPractice 10, 7.Flecker, J., Haidinger, B., Schönauer, A., 2013. Divide and serve: the labour process inservice value chains and networks. Compet. Change 17/1, 6–23.Gereﬃ, G., Humphrey, J., Sturgeon, T., 2005. The governance of global value chains. Rev.Int. Polit. Econ. 12/1, 78–104.Global Fund, 2012. Guide to Global Fund Policies on Procurement and SupplyManagement of Health Products. The Global Fund, Geneva (June).Höllein, l., Kaale, E., Mwalwisia, Y.H., Schulze, M.H., Holzgrab, U., 2016. Routine qualitycontrol of medicines in developing countries: analytical challenges, regulatory in-frastructures and the prevalence of counterfeit medicines in Tanzania. Trends Anal.Chem. 76, 60–70.Huﬀ-Rousselle, M., 2012. The logical underpinnings and beneﬁts of pooled pharmaceu-tical procurement: a pragmatic role for our public institutions? Soc. Sci. Med. 75,1572–1580.KEMSA (nd) New Business Model http://www.kemsa.co.ke 26/5/2016.KEMSA Task Force, 2008. KEMSA Task Force Report. KEMSA, Nairobi. http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnadn474.pdf.Kaplinsky, R., Morris, M., 2001. A Handbook for Value Chain Research. https://www.ids.ac.uk/ids/global/pdfs/VchNov01.pdf, Accessed date: 5 March 2015.Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), 2014. Economic Survey 2014. Nairobi,Kenya.Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), 2015. Economic Survey 2015. Nairobi,Kenya.Massard da Fonseca, E., 2017. How can a policy foster local pharmaceutical productionand still protect public health? Lessons from the health–industry complex in Brazil.Global Publ. Health. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2017.1396354.Medical Stores Department (MSD), 2013. Medium Term Strategic Plan II: 2014 – 2020.United Republic of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam Available from: http://msd.or.tz/index.php/medium-term-strategic-plan-2014-2020/category/6-medium-term-strategic-plan, Accessed date: 30 April 2015.Mujinja, P.G.M., Mackintosh, M., Justin-Temu, M., Wuyts, M., 2014. Local production ofpharmaceuticals in Africa and access to essential medicines: 'urban bias' in access toimported medicines in Tanzania and its policy implications. Glob. Health 10 (12),1–12.Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW), 2008. Mapping of the MedicinesProcurement and Supply Management System in Tanzania. Dar es Salaam. http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/coordination/tanzania_mapping_supply.pdf,Accessed date: 4 May 2015.Ministry of Medical Services and Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation (MoMS &MPHS), 2010. Sessional Paper on National Pharmaceutical Policy. Nairobi. http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/d/Js18697en/, Accessed date: 4 May 2015.Olcay, M., Laing, R., 2005. Pharmaceutical Tariﬀs: what is their eﬀect on prices, pro-tection of local industry and revenue generation? http://www.who.int/intellectualproperty/studies/TariﬀsOnEssentialMedicines.pdf, Accessed date: 17August 2015.Opwora, A., Toda, M., Waweru, E., Edwards, T., Fegan, G., Noor, A., Molyneux, S.,Goodman, C., 2011. Health Service Delivery, Governance and Supportive Supervisionunder the Health Sector Services Fund: National Baseline Survey, vol. 1 KEMRIWellcome Trust, Nairobi.Ozawa, S., Pongpirul, K., 2013. 10 best resources on …mixed methods in health systems.Health Pol. Plann. 29 (3), 323–327.Pazirandeh, A., Norrman, A., 2014. An interrelation model of power and purchasingstrategies: a study of vaccine purchase for developing countries. J. Purch. SupplyManag. 20, 41–53.Shadlen, K., Massard da Fonseca, E., 2013. Health policy as industrial policy: Brazil incomparative perspective. Polit. Soc. 41/4, 561–587.Sidibé, M., Yong, L., Chan, M., 2014. Commodities for better health in Africa: time toinvest locally. Bull. World Health Organ. 92 (d).Srinivas, S., 2012. Market Menagerie. Health and Development in Late Industrial States.Stanford University Press, California.UNIDO, 2010. Pharmaceutical Sector Proﬁle. Kenya UNIDO, Vienna.United Republic of Tanzania (URT), 2016. National Five Year Development Plan, 2016/2017-2020/2021. Ministry of Finance and Planning, Dar es Salaam.United Republic of Tanzania (URT), 2012. Annual Survey of Industrial Production 2009:Statistical Report. Ministry of Trade and Industry, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.United Republic of Tanzania (URT), 2013. Census of Industrial Production 2013.Tanzania Mainland. National Bureau of Statistics, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.Waako, P.J., Odoi-adome, R., Obua, C., Owino, E., Tumwikirize, W., Ogwal-okeng, J.,Anokbonggo, W.W., Matowe, L., Aupont, O., 2009. Existing capacity to managepharmaceuticals and related commodities in East Africa. Hum. Resour. Health 7, 21.Wafula, F., Dolinger, A., Daniels, B., Mwaura, N., Bedoya, G., Rogo, K., Goicoechea, A.,Das, J., Olayo, B., 2017. Examining the quality of medicines at Kenyan healthcarefacilities. Drugs - Real World Outcomes 4 (1), 53–63.Wang'Ombe, J.K., Mwabu, G.M., 1987. The economics of essential drug schemes: theperspectives of developing countries. Soc. Sci. Med. 26 (6), 625–630.Wiedenmayer, K.A., Kapologwe, N., Charles, J., Chilunda, F., Mapunjo, S., 2015. Thereality of task shifting in medicines management – a case study from Tanzania.Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice 8, 13.WHO, 2011. The World Medicines Situation Report. WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/policy/world_medicines_situation/en/, Accessed date: 18August 2015.Yadav, P., Stapleton, O., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2011. Always Cola, Rarely EssentialMedicines. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1656386, Accessed date: 1 August 2016.Yadav, P., 2015. Health product supply chains in developing countries: diagnosis of theroot causes of underperformance and an agenda for reform. Health Syst. Rev. 1 (2),142–154.M. Mackintosh et al. Social Science & Medicine 200 (2018) 182–189189