ABSTRACT: 
The extractive sector now holds an even more predominant position for national economies following the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals in 2015. The sector can make significant contributions to the achievement of a large number of these Goals. Managing extractive resources has always presented a major challenge for many countries worldwide, but especially in the developing world. This paper documents the shortcomings of the existing governance architecture. It builds on the ‘social licence to operate’ and draws from its limitations to propose a new framework called the ‘sustainable development licence to operate’. The latter is a holistic multi-level and multi-stakeholder governance framework aimed at enhancing the contribution of the mining sector to sustainable development. It is not intended to function as a licence in the regulatory sense. The underlying principles, policy options and best practices that form the basis of the proposed framework are outlined in the paper. This analysis should be viewed as a starting point, in recognition that the development of a robust sustainable development licence to operate depends on an open and inclusive approach to populating its normative content. 
 
PREDICTION: 
* Antonio Pedro pedro.uneca@un.org 1 United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, Yaoundé, Cameroon 2 United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa, Accra, Ghana 3 United Nations Environment, Paris, France 4 University College of London Institute for Sustainable Resources, London, UK 5 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Miner Econ (2017) 30:153–165 DOI 10.1007/s13563-017-0108-9 the domestic economy, shows that six of the top ten countries are in Africa.2 In addition to generating vast sums of govern- ment revenues, extractive projects can also generate benefits by creating employment, fostering demand for domestic goods and services, transferring technologies and know-how, and building infrastructure. However, in re- sponse to the new imperatives set by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the inadequacies of the current paradigm, this paper calls for the SLO to be developed into a new multi-level, holistic and integrated governance frame- work, applicable to governments, companies and the range of stakeholders involved in the mining sector, which is here referred to as the ‘Sustainable Development Licence to Operate’ (SDLO),6 and which is designed to function as a normative reference point for the multiple actors concerned with the extractive sector, and support their efforts to work together in a manner compatible with the SDGs. The challenges in- clude the unevenly distributed and finite nature of mineral deposits; the volatility of commodity prices which have ex- posed developing countries to external shocks triggering macro-economic instability; the difficulties of managing large and volatile inflows of foreign capital, technical complexities of large scale projects and limited national capacities; the en- clave nature of the industry with weak linkages to other eco- nomic sectors; redefinitions of resource nationalism and the contours of the social licence to operate, with no clear consen- sus on what would thus constitute shared value from mining (CCSI 2016; EY 2015; PWC 2015); lack of accountability, transparency and risk of corruption; global asymmetries of power; conflicting stakeholder interests leading to social con- flict; and lasting environmental damage. These include many commendable 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords Extractive sector . Mining . Governance . Resource curse . Sustainable development goals . Social licence to operate . Sustainable development licence to operate Introduction Mineral wealth, if managed prudently, presents enormous op- portunities for advancingsustainabledevelopment, particularly in low-income countries. The extractive sector has been identi- fied as an important contributor to the achievement of all 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by UN Member States in 2015.1 Mining can impact most directly the Global Goals relating to poverty eradication, decent work and economic growth, clean water and sanitation, life on land, sus- tainable and affordable energy, climate action, industry and in- frastructure, as well as peace and justice (UNSDSN 2015). Recent data published by the International Council of Mining and Minerals (ICMM) clearly shows the potential role of mining in national economies (ICMM 2016). For the poorest countries in the world, the sector can be a driver for economic growth and improved welfare of its people. The 2016 mining contribution index, which ranks 183 countries in the world according to the mining sector’s contribution to 1 On 25 September 2015, the 193 member states of the United Nations (UN) adopted a new Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Agenda features 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 Targets, which UNMember States have committed to implement by 2030. The 2030 Agenda succeeds the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which included commitments to achieve by 2015 outcomes focusing on extreme poverty and hunger, prima- ry education, gender quality and empowerment of women, child mortality, maternal health, diseases, environmental sustainability and global partner- ships. The 2030 Agenda differs from the MDGs in several key respects—it applies to all countries, recognises a wider range of economic, social and environmental objectives, and defines specific means of implementation. Progress towards the Agenda’s 17 Goals and 169 Targets will be assessed using a suite of indicators, agreed in preliminary form in March 2016. The original version of this article was revised due to a retrospective Open Access order. * Antonio Pedro pedro.uneca@un.org 1 United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, Yaoundé, Cameroon 2 United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa, Accra, Ghana 3 United Nations Environment, Paris, France 4 University College of London Institute for Sustainable Resources, London, UK 5 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Miner Econ (2017) 30:153–165 DOI 10.1007/s13563-017-0108-9 the domestic economy, shows that six of the top ten countries are in Africa.2 In addition to generating vast sums of govern- ment revenues, extractive projects can also generate benefits by creating employment, fostering demand for domestic goods and services, transferring technologies and know-how, and building infrastructure. Notwithstanding, mineral-rich nations are confronted with serious challenges in attempting to translate natural resource wealth into long-term inclusive and sustainable development. The phenomenon of resource-rich countries being unable to transform their mineral resource endowments into enhanced growth and well-being for their citizens has received consid- erable attention in the literature, referred to as the ‘resource curse’ or ‘the paradox of plenty’.3 It has long been recognised that governance is key for miti- gating the adverse impacts of mining and for enhancing its positive economic, social and environmental outcomes. Nevertheless,mostexistingpolicyframeworksand instruments for governing the mining sector tend to present piecemeal ef- forts and, importantly, often fail to be implemented at the na- tional level. This means that new governance approaches and instruments have not succeeded in bringing about a transition away from the ‘extractivist’ and anthropocentric model widely prevalent in the developing world, whereby the extractive sec- tor is anenclavewith fewlinkages to the local economy(Acosta 2013).4 To achieve this, therewould be a need to adopt sustain- able development approaches basedonnewmetricswhere suc- cess is measured on the strength of economic outcomes, sound environmental management, the respect of social values and aspirations and the observance of the highest governance and transparency standards. This more holistic approach is at the core of the Africa Mining Vision (AMV) adopted in February 2009,whichargues thatmineral resourcescancatapultAfrica to broad-based development and structural transformation (African Union 2009). Insofar as these issues are currently taken into account in the governance of resource extraction, it is largely through the so-called Social Licence to Operate5 (SLO). However, in re- sponse to the new imperatives set by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the inadequacies of the current paradigm, this paper calls for the SLO to be developed into a new multi-level, holistic and integrated governance frame- work, applicable to governments, companies and the range of stakeholders involved in the mining sector, which is here referred to as the ‘Sustainable Development Licence to Operate’ (SDLO),6 and which is designed to function as a normative reference point for the multiple actors concerned with the extractive sector, and support their efforts to work together in a manner compatible with the SDGs. This paper firstly briefly describes the SLO and some of the criticisms that have been made of it (Section 2), followed by the changes in the international context and emerging chal- lenges that have rendered the SLO somewhat outdated (Section 3). After examining the nature of the current gover- nance architecture in the extractive sector, the paper then sets out the key principles and policies that underlie the proposed SDLO (Section 4), together with some of the implications for the reform of resource governance to which they give rise, followed by some concluding remarks (Section 5). The social licence to operate Since the late 1990s, mining companies have increasingly sought to secure the acceptance of mining activities by local communities and stakeholders, build public trust and prevent social conflict (Prno 2013). Such attempts to earn a SLO are premised on engagement between mining companies, govern- ments and civil society to ensure that mineral resource extrac- tion contributes to national and local development, and that damaging impacts on host communities and the environment are mitigated or otherwise managed. The social licence to operate can be credited with drawing attention to the need for mining companies to bear responsibil- ity for the negative social implications of their practices and to engage in an inclusive and meaningful way with stakeholders. Companies are expected to respond to concerns and requests by affected communities (including indigenous peoples) and broader civil society, provide timely and understandable infor- mation, deliver on their commitments, and operate in an honest and responsiblemanner, andbeaccountable.While the abstract 2 The Democratic Republic of Congo comes first with a score of 96.2, follow- ed by Mauritania (95.6), Burkina Faso (94.0), Madagascar (91.7) and Botswana (90.7), and Liberia with an index of 89.0 is at the eighth position (ICMM 2016). 3 Some of the main arguments explaining this paradox are summarised, for instance, in Stevens et al. (2015). 4 ‘Extractivism’ is defined as ‘those activities which remove large quantities of natural resources that are not processed (or processed only to a limited degree), especially for export’ (Acosta 2013, p. 62). A legacy that remains since colo- nial times, the extractivist mode of accumulation refers to the exploitation of raw materials needed primarily to fuel the development and growth of industrialised and emerging nations. It typically generates few benefits for the host country due to the resulting limited demand for domestic labour, goods and services; lack of value addition and linkages to the rest of the economy; depletion of finite resources; environmental destruction; and incen- tives for ‘rent-seeking’ behaviour which undermine effective and democratic governance (Ibid). 5 The concept of ‘Social Licence to Operate’ relates to the broad, on-going acceptance within local communities, and society more broadly, of mining projects. It can be regarded as a largely intangible agreement between mining companies and civil society, based on a growing common understanding of the need for greater public participation in decision-making, a fairer share of min- ing proceeds, and assurances that mineral development will be conducted safely and responsibly (see, for instance, Prno 2013). Joyce and Thomson (2000) consider that the social licence to operate is a metaphor to depict values, activities and best practices that companies must commit to within society to ensure that their operations are successful. 6 The term ‘Sustainable Development Licence to Operate’was first introduced by Pedro (2015). 154 Pedro A. et al. nature of this ‘social contract’ does not imply granting a licence in the legal sense, in some countries social acceptability is a requirement for mining contracts to be issued. Despite the term’s widespread uptake by industry and the aforesaid welcoming attributes, the notion of a social licence to operate can be criticised on a number of grounds. These relate to both thesocial licencediscourseand itspractical application (see, for instance,Owen andKemp2013;BusinessCouncil of British Columbia 2015). Firstly, the use of the term ‘licence’ has been seen as mis- leading, insofar as it is suggestive of the granting of specific permission for or public acceptance of a mining project, even if the reality is one of reluctant tolerance or absence of overt opposition or conflict (Business Council of British Columbia 2015). This can be particularly problematic in certain political contexts where the public expression of dissent may be ex- plicitly prohibited or otherwise punishable. Moreover, the use of the term ‘social’may serve to aggregate diverging opinions among a diverse or heterogeneous group of stakeholders, therefore masking some dissenting or marginalised views (Agrawal andGibson 1999; Owen andKemp 2013; Lesser et al. 2017). Importantly, the social licence to operate, as its name suggests, focuses mainly on the social dimension of mining pro- jects, with less attention paid to the environmental component. While some environmental concerns may be addressed if raised by local communities andother actors, the social licence to operate is far from a comprehensivemeans for protecting the environment fromthedestructiveandpolluting impactsofmining.This is linked to a fundamental critique of the social licence framework emphasisedbyOwenandKemp(2013),which is that itwasdevel- opedas industry’spragmatic response tobusiness risk. Itsagenda is limited to accommodating community demands to the minimum extent necessary to avoidpublic opposition and social conflict, and the associated costs of reputational damage and operational delays or disruptions. Its narrow and business-driven agenda means that the social licence to operate is a deficient framework—both in theory and practice—for establishing higher standards of social and environmental performance, and stakeholder engagement for long-term sustainable development. In the absence of explicit con- ditions for obtaining the licence, of recognition of reciprocal rights andof even access to information, the authors argue that the ‘social licence itself is not only unworkable, but its usage by industry can result inperverse development outcomes’ andeven run ‘counter to a sustainable development agenda’ (ibid, p. 31; p. 33). They con- cluded that ‘nothingshortof amoveawayfromsocial licenceat the project level is required topave theway for amoreproactive stance towards sustainable development’ (ibid p. 34). Imperatives for a new paradigm The imperative for a new governance framework arises from the inadequacy of the existing governance landscape, particularly in light of recent developments in the global de- velopment agenda, namely the adoption in 2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The notion of sustain- able development—integrating the three pillars of economic development, social inclusion and environmental sustainabil- ity—has become the organising framework for global coop- eration and development and is key in framing the discussion. There is a growing recognition that if wellmanaged, themin- ing sector can play a positive role in promoting broad-based development and structural transformation in relevant countries. Whilemining impacts all 17SDGs tovaryingdegrees, the indus- trycancontributemoredirectly to the followingeightGoals (1,6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 15 and 16) (UNSDSN 2015). Mining generates significant revenues through taxes, roy- alties and dividends for governments to invest in economic and social development (Goal 1). Mining can help drive eco- nomic development and diversification through direct and in- direct economic benefits, the development of new technolo- gies and by spurring the construction of new infrastructure for transport, communications, water and energy (Goal 9). It can alter the lives of local communities, offering opportunities for jobs and training, while contributing to economic and social inequities if not appropriately managed (Goal 8). Moreover, mining requires access to land and water, presenting signifi- cant and broad landscape impacts that must be responsibly managed (Goals 6 and 15). Mining activities are also energy and emissions intensive in both the production and down- stream uses of mining products (Goals 7 and 13). Finally, mining can contribute to peaceful societies by avoiding and remedying company-community conflict, respecting human rights and rights of indigenous peoples, and by supporting the representative decision-making of citizens and communi- ties in extractives development (Goal 16) (ibid). Despite the potential of the mining sector to act as a catalyst for growth and development in mineral-rich developing coun- tries, there are a number of barriers and challenges that may prevent this potential from being realised. The challenges in- clude the unevenly distributed and finite nature of mineral deposits; the volatility of commodity prices which have ex- posed developing countries to external shocks triggering macro-economic instability; the difficulties of managing large and volatile inflows of foreign capital, technical complexities of large scale projects and limited national capacities; the en- clave nature of the industry with weak linkages to other eco- nomic sectors; redefinitions of resource nationalism and the contours of the social licence to operate, with no clear consen- sus on what would thus constitute shared value from mining (CCSI 2016; EY 2015; PWC 2015); lack of accountability, transparency and risk of corruption; global asymmetries of power; conflicting stakeholder interests leading to social con- flict; and lasting environmental damage. Moreover, it has been argued that technological advances in the extractive sector could have disruptive impacts on job Towards a sustainable development licence to operate 155 creation, local procurement of goods and services as well as change production and supply dynamics with profound geo- political implications (WEF 2016). In addition, an important issue in several countries is the discrepancy between formally recognised rights to extractive resources, and the resource-related expectations anddependen- cies of local communities (Toulmin and Quan 2000). Many local communities around the world are highly dependent on resources (e.g. forests, fisheries, agricultural land) over which they do not enjoy formal property rights (Palmer et al. 2012; RRI 2016; Suárez et al. 2009). Economic development policies inseveral low-andmiddle-incomecountrieshaveinsomecases facilitated the large-scale acquisition of formal property rights by commercial sector actors, in particular to enablemining and plantation agriculture (Cotula et al. 2014, 2009). These acqui- sitions are often characterised by the involvement of TNCs which are difficult to regulate for various reasons. Negative outcomes associated with large-scale property acquisition by the extractive sector in low- and middle-income countries in- clude expropriation without adequate compensation of formal rights held by individuals and communities, extinguishment of long-standing informal rights held by individuals and commu- nities, dislocation of local communities from acquired areas, destructionof local livelihoods,andresourcesdevelopment that maximises marketable private benefits (e.g. mining) to the det- riment of public benefits (e.g. access to clean water) (Anseeuw et al. 2012). Finally, sustainable development is impeded, not just in relation to mining, by an incomplete accounting of sector im- pacts on comprehensive wealth (UNECA 2016). Figure 1 il- lustrates how economic wealth in comprehensive terms is composed of three broad categories of capital assets: infra- structure and financial capital, institutions and communities, and natural capital including biotic and abiotic components of the natural environment (see generally MEA 2005; World Bank 2011; Kumar 2012; Terama et al. 2016). A range of impacts on institutions and communities and biotic natural capital assets (including associated flows of ecosystem ser- vices) are not currently valued in markets and represent well-known externalities associated with the extractive sector. When calculating the potential economic benefits of a min- ing project, both mining companies and governments tend to greatly exaggerate these by not taking into account environ- mental and social externalities. Hidden environmental and es- pecially social costs of mineral extraction are typically underestimated or not estimated in monetary terms, even though these may greatly offset the real or perceived econom- ic benefits of mining activities (Acosta 2013). Natural capital accounting, the importance of which has been recognised for African States in the 2012 Gaborone Declaration, can help make decision-makers aware of the environmental and re- source impacts of mining, and help them estimate their quan- titative importance. In addition, as all countries strive towards achieving sus- tainable development, it is not yet fully understood how to accelerate the decoupling of mineral resources use and envi- ronmental impacts from economic growth, nor how to mini- mise the negative impacts on developing countries of deep decarbonisation of global energy systems, and especially ac- tions that will result in the stranding of fossil fuel deposits. There is a need to simultaneously achieve the different and not always aligned, imperatives of resource security and access, economic development and diversification in resource depen- dent developing countries, as well as the decoupling of natural resource extraction and related environmental degradation from economic progress. The sustainable development licence to operate Decision-making in the extractive sector is shaped by a com- plex global, regional, national and local architecture of rela- tionships between individuals and institutions. The term governance refers to the many ways that individuals and in- stitutions manage their common affairs in this context. Governance of the extractive sector is a process characterised by diverse actors, normative frameworks, hierarchical rela- tionships, and spatial and temporal boundaries. These compo- nents are summarised below and illustrated in Fig. 2 below. Fig. 1 Mineral resources in the context of comprehensive wealth 156 Pedro A. et al. In the following paragraphs, we provide a formative outline of the SDLO. It should be made clear at the outset that SDLO is not intended to function as a licence in the regulatory sense of that term.7 Instead it contains a flexible and coherent col- lection of principles and policy options, which over time will give rise to best practice that are practical in nature and appli- cable in diverse contexts at multiple spatial scales. As illus- trated in Fig. 3, the SDLO is designed to function as a norma- tive reference point for the multiple actors concerned with the extractive sector, enabling them to act in a coordinated and cooperative manner that supports the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. This involves building on the wider suite of relevant priorities, obligations and stan- dards that are compatible with the SDGs, including but not limited to those relating to: & National and regional economic development—including instruments such as the Africa Mining Vision, Gaborone Declaration for Sustainability in Africa. & Environment and climate change—including Paris Agreement on Climate Change, Convention on Biological Diversity including the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, and United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. & Human rights—including the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. & Trade and investment—including agreements of the World Trade Organisation. & Industry best practice—examples of initiative setting stan- dards for industry include the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI). Distilling practical principles and policy options from the complex of relevant norms is a significant undertaking, and only a preliminary and indicative attempt is made to do so here. It will become clear that there is no one-solution-fits- all, and that a flexible approach is required whereby proposed policy options and best practices account for and adapt to the specific socioeconomic, geopolitical, cultural and historical specificities of each particular area, country and region. However, the paragraphs that follow sketch out principles and policy options that are broadly applicable everywhere. Actors and stakeholder engagement in extractive sector governance The governance regime depicted in Fig. 2 operates as a holistic multi-level complex of formal and informal arrangements, encompassing governance institutions and mechanisms that act at the international, regional,national, localandproject levels, and performed by amultitude of actors (Ekins andO’Keeffe 2014). These actors include but are not limited to ‘home’ and ‘host’ governments, intergovernmentalorganisations,privatecommer- cial entities and ‘third’ sector actors such as non-governmental organisations, and diverse communities within civil society. Each of these actors pursues different sets of interests at different spatial and temporal scales, in different social, cultural, political, economicandenvironmentalcontexts.Acharacteristic featureof the extractive sector is the influential roleplayedby transnational corporations (TNCs),8 including state-owned enterprises from other countries (Cotula 2013; Holden and Pagel 2013; UNCTAD 2009). The conflicting interests and asymmetries of information,negotiatingskills, leverageandpowerbetweengov- ernments, TNCs and communities present important political economy challenges. The divergence in expectations between stakeholders has been a key driver of conflict in the extractive industry. This happens as certain stakeholders may be excluded from the decision chain. Stakeholders may also lack knowledge of the economic specificities of a mining project, fail to collectively understand how mining can benefit each group and view val- ue creation as a ‘zero sum’ game of winners and losers (Pedro 2015). A notable attempt by the World Economic Forum to address this is the Responsible Mineral Development Initiative, which entails a platform and tool to create a shared understanding of the benefits and costs of mining, and identify beneficial solutions (WEF 2017).9 Appropriate governance of mineral resources, so as to en- hance their contribution towards sustainable development, is a shared responsibility along the mining value chain. From an ethical standpoint, developed importing nations should share responsibility for the adverse social and environmental im- pacts of mineral resource extraction occurring in mainly de- veloping exporting countries. A globalmulti-level governance architecture will therefore need to address not only an agenda 7 Of note is that the choice of the word ‘licence’ in naming the new governance framework may misleadingly refer readers to the narrow notion of legal or other formal arrangements between host governments and mining companies. Yet, it should be clarified that this is but a single dimension of the much broader and encompassing mineral resource governance architecture envisioned and set forth in this paper. The wording of ‘sustainable develop- ment licence to operate’ is rather chosen to connect to and improve on the industry’s aforementioned established approach of granting a ‘social licence to operate’ for engaging with stakeholders and improving development in the sector. 8 TNCs are composed of national entities located in more than one country, linked together by ownership or otherwise, under a coherent system of decision-making in which they can exercise significant influence over each other and share knowledge, resources and responsibilities (Sauvant 2015; Weissbrodt and Kruger 2003). 9 The initiative adopts a broad view of the value from mineral development, identifying seven dimensions. These include the revenue streams (through tax, royalties, levies and fees), employment and skills acquisition, ensuring the respect for the environment and biodiversity, securing social cohesion and cultural gains, facilitating the entry of local entrepreneurs in the mining supply chain, promoting local beneficiation and downstream industry, and optimising mining infrastructure for development (Pedro 2015). Towards a sustainable development licence to operate 157 for resource security, resource efficiency and decoupling of resource use and environmental impacts from economic growth that is of particular importance to developed nations but also the need for continuous economic development, structural transformation and economic diversification in re- source exporting and other developing countries. The SDLO envisages an inclusive multi-stakeholder ap- proach, whereby decisions concerning the mining industry are made with the involvement of stakeholders. All relevant actors should be included through, among others, information exchange, media and other campaigns, and collaboration with institutions such as those with oversight roles. A community- orientated, context-sensitive approach to engagement requires in-depth knowledge of local culture, circumstances and power dynamics, alongside a sophisticated approach to engaging di- verse voices (including alternative and marginalised voices) within affected communities (Owen and Kemp 2013). It is thereby important that industry engages in patient, long-term and broad-based collaborative social dialogue regarding each mining project, articulating an agenda which balances its own commercial needs with managing and meeting broader expec- tations about the contribution of mining to sustainable devel- opment (ibid). Comprehensive, consistent and flexible national governance regimes The SDLO can build on a plethora of existing policy options, initiatives and instruments. Nevertheless, there is a danger of ‘initiative fatigue’ as the ‘proliferation of initiatives and lack of linkages make it challenging for mining companies to de- cide which ones to adopt and make a focus on sustainability more costly to implement’ (Resolve and WEF 2015, p. 6). Importantly, for many countries, the challenge relates less to Fig. 3 The Sustainable Development Licence to Operate (SDLO) Fig. 2 Key components of extractive sector governance 158 Pedro A. et al. the absence of appropriate constitutional provisions, legisla- tion, regulations, contracts and licences, but more to the chal- lenge of enforcing these. In addition, effective governance of the mining sector re- quires a legal system that is comprehensive, consistent and universally applicable to all projects. In addition to adopting policies/legislation, governments also need to build the insti- tutional capacity to implement the rules. And rules and insti- tutions, in turn, need to be supported by a critical mass of citizen understanding (Collier 2013). They also need to be appropriate to the local context. Differentiated governance approaches are needed, for instance, for countries where stan- dards and guidelines can be easily implemented, compared to others with a large artisanal and small-scale mining sector, or with high levels of corruption, or that are affected by conflict and war. Governance strategies thus need to be tailored to a particular country’s socioeconomic, geopolitical, historical and cultural background. Coherent global governance architecture Different actors and normative frameworks shape extractive sector governance at different spatial and temporal scales, in- cluding local, national, regional and international. The spatial boundaries of governance at each of these scales are often not aligned with the biophysical and spatial characteristics of re- sources, many of which are location-specific point resources. Mineral resources are concentrated in small areas and are un- evenly distributed, which means that they must be exploited where they occur, most often through capital intensive tech- niques. Yet, many activities in the extractive sector, and im- pacts of these activities, straddle, migrate across or are affected biophysically by activity located beyond jurisdictional bound- aries. A powerful recent example of such impacts is the col- lapse in November 2015 of a mine-tailing dam in Brazil, which generated a wave of toxic mud killing 20 people and severely affecting hundreds of kilometres of river, riparian lands and Atlantic coast across the two states of Minas Gerais and Espirito Santo (Couto Garcia et al. 2017). The ubiquitous movement of extractive resources across national boundaries is driven by the organisation of produc- tion, trade and investment into globalised supply and value chains (Kaplinksky and Morris 2001; OECD et al. 2014). These chains have diverse characteristics—including different degrees of complexity, fragmentation, interconnectedness and resource intensity, and different structures of control and own- ership (OECD 2013). The management of mineral resources therefore requires interventions of different actors in different spatial horizons in both ‘home’ and ‘host’ countries. Setting clear legislative and political boundaries with regards to these strategic re- sources is important. Nigeria, for example, has legislated to include a minimum 13% derivation rule in its Constitution, for allocating oil and gas revenues to the nation’s oil-producing states. Despite the introduction of such an instrument for the fairer distribution of extractive revenues between national and local governments, this has nevertheless led to unequal reve- nue transfers and failed to avert militant struggle in the Niger Delta (Iledar and Suberu 2010). Relevant normative frameworks Decision-making by different actors concerning the extractive sector is enabled, constrained and influenced by a wide variety of normative frameworks. More formal normative frame- works include treaties, constitutions, laws, policies, regula- tions, contractual agreements and technical standards. Less formal normative frameworks include administrative, com- mercial, professional, cultural and interpersonal practices. The past two decades have also witnessed a plethora of domestic, regional and international legal and regulatory frameworks as well as formal and informal initiatives aimed at better governing the extractive industry for increased eco- nomic prosperity and environmental protection. These include many commendable examples such as the Africa Mining Vision, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI), the Dodd-Frank Act, the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), the Model Mining Development Agreement, the Initiative for ResponsibleMining Assurance, the Natural Resource Charter, the development of indicators tomeasure resource governance and the broader work of the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM). In distinguishing between different normative frameworks, these include international agreements, national legislation and standards of practice. International agreements establish a basic architecture of extractive sector governance at a global level, through the recognition of several general rights and obligations of nation states. For example, States are afforded permanent sovereign- ty over extractive resources within their respective territories, and sovereignty or sovereign rights over certain extractive resources depending on where they are located offshore. National laws, policies and regulations establish detailed frameworks concerning rights to extractive resources, man- agement and development of the extractive sector taking into account impacts on the environment and other economic sec- tors, and the allocation of associated benefits and impacts. An important issue in several countries is the discrepancy be- tween formally recognised rights to resources, and the resource-related expectations and dependencies of local com- munities (Toulmin and Quan 2000). Voluntary and private standards—As mining companies have sought to earn a ‘social licence to operate’, this has resulted in an explosion of soft regulation in recent years (Pedro 2015). Such voluntary initiatives are aimed at addressing potential Towards a sustainable development licence to operate 159 consequencesofminingon theenvironment (for instance,owing to tailing spills, deforestation, loss of biodiversity, soil erosion, water depletion andCO2emissions), poverty and inequality, em- ployment and inflation, immigration, displacement, loss of an- cestral lands and livelihoods and other human rights violations. Relationships—Both actors and normative frameworks are influenced and shaped by relationships of power, authority, coop- eration or influence at multiple levels. These relationships can be hierarchical, or cooperative and voluntary. The prominent and influential role of private transnational entities, including TNCs, not-for-profit organisations andother formalised partnerships and associations, is a defining feature of extractive sector governance in recent decades. The ability of TNCs to influence extractive- sector decision-making across globalised value chains depends on the governance structure of the chain in question. The afore- mentioned asymmetry of power betweenTNCs, government and communities, for instance, may prevent local communities from exercising their rights and developing country governments from securing a ‘fair’mining deal. Different value chain structures af- ford different degrees of power and influence to TNCs. Figure 4 presentsfivewell-knownillustrativemodesofinteractionbetween different private sector actors within globalised value chains, and corresponding degrees of power asymmetry and coordination. Extractive sector value chains tend to be characterised by high levelsofintegration,withtransnationalminingcompaniesexercis- ing a high degree of coordination and power over private sector activities in the relevantvaluechain.Anumberofextractivesector TNCs participate in collaborative networks designed to promote better governancewithin and across global value chains—a focal point being the International Council forMining andMetals. Whiledomestic lawsandpolicies are critical inmanagingmin- ingoperations, rents and investment inhost countries, there is also an important role to be played by home countries and the wider international community. A number of proposals have been put forward for improving the governance of resources (including mineral resources) at the global level in support of sustainable development. These range from the creation of extended sustain- able commodity agreements to an International Convention on Sustainable Resource Management, an Integrated Resource Management Agency and an international metals covenant (Ekins and O’Keeffe 2014; Bleischwitz and Bringezu 2007; Bleischwitz et al. 2012; Wilts and Bleischwitz 2012). Proposals for suchglobal governance regimes for sustainable resourceman- agement should complement other related arrangements in the mining sector and aim to promote mineral resource sufficiency and security of access, the decoupling of mineral resource use and impacts from economic growth, and the contribution ofmin- eral resources to the achievement of the SDGs. Transparency and accountability A new governance approach must recognise that although appropriate legal, regulatory and voluntary frameworks and instruments may to a large extent already be in place to govern the mining sector, the problem is all too often the uneven or outright lack of their enforcement. In order to implement laws and policies governing the mining sector, transparency is an essential, even if not a sufficient, prerequisite. Transparency is also important for helping to combat ills associated with transfer mispricing (whereby governments may lose out on tax revenues owing to the distorted prices applied to transactions within TNCs) and illicit financial flows (amounting to estimated annual losses of over 50 billion in Africa) (UNECA 2015). The transformations that occurred in the marketplace due the financialisation of commodity markets are a cause of great debate. A key concern is the potential perverse impacts in commodity price formation, particularly those arising out of speculative practices which exacerbate price volatility and lead to price distortions (Cheng and Xiong 2014; Heumesser and Staritz 2013). In developing countries, this can lead to significant difficulties in managing macro-economic imbal- ances driven by volatile export revenues, changes in the bal- ance of payments and public finances as well as in inflation and exchange rates. The issue of transparency has received significant attention in international policy circles, and there have been some no- table advances in this field, including the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI), mandatory disclosure require- ments in the European Union and the USA, as well as numer- ous national initiatives (Kaufman 2014). Several valuable di- agnostic tools have also been developed, including the Resource Governance Index.10 Yet, analysis using this tool shows that fewer than 20% of resource relevant countries displayed adequate quality of transparency and accountability (Revenue Watch Institute 2013) (see Fig. 5). Further inroads have to be made to increase transparency in a number of areas across the value chain, including mining contracts and licences, social and environmental impact as- sessments, royalties and tax payments at the project level, as well as state-owned enterprises, sovereign wealth funds and beneficial ownership of mining companies (Kaufman 2014). In this endeavour, responsibility does not only rest with gov- ernments and industry but also with countless other non- governmental actors, who include unions, non-governmental organisations, think thanks and academics, and who can share public auditors’ burden, analysing data, reporting on findings, and demanding more accountable governance and manage- ment in the mining sector (ibid). 10 The Resource Governance Index (RGI) has been developed by the Revenue Watch Institute and assesses the quality of four key governance components: institutional and legal setting, reporting practices, safeguards and quality con- trols, and enabling environment. It further includes information on state- owned companies, natural resource funds and subnational revenue transfers (Revenue Watch Institute 2013). 160 Pedro A. et al. While greater transparency is critical for ensuring account- ability and hence successful policy implementation, it also has to be accompanied by efforts to fight corruption, improve the rule of law, and protect civil and political rights (including press freedom) (Kaufman 2014). These are important prereq- uisites for effective governance of the mining sector to ensure companies commit to the highest environmental, social and human rights standards, and the sector contributes towards sustainable development. Support for broad development objectives, including poverty reduction, economic diversification and structural transformation In establishing a new governance framework for the mining sector, it is essential to understand the sectorwithin the broader context of a national economy, and its development objectives and strategies. Thismeans bothmanaging the potential impacts of mineral resource extraction on other parts of the economy (such as on the artisanal and small-scalemining sector), aswell as maximising linkages between the mining sector and other parts of the economy (including through job creation, local procurement of goods and services, the downstream use of mined goods, and shared infrastructure). This will require a long-term comprehensive strategy, going beyond industry reg- ulation toalso include investment ineducationand training, and other policies for creating an enabling environment. In the case of low-income resource-rich countries, governance strategies need to focusonbreaking away from the enclave nature andextractivistmodeloftheminingsector.Countriesneedtobuild forwardandbackwardlinkageswithothersocioeconomicsectors, build infrastructure and capacity for greater value addition along thevaluechain,andpromoteregionalpartnershipsandintegration. A range of structural reforms and industrial policies need to be implemented to help achieve structural transformation and eco- nomic diversification. Developed countries and the global com- munityneed toafforddevelopingcountries sufficientpolicyspace to do so, including through reform of the international trade and investmentregimethatconstrains theuseof thefull rangeofpolicy instruments toachieveresource-based industrialisationat the local level (Acosta 2013; UNECA andAfricanUnion 2011). TheAfricaMiningVision (AMV)presents one such compre- hensive governance framework that extends beyond the narrow confines of the mining sector, to also advocate for linkages to Fig. 5 Mapping the governance deficit. Source: NRGI 2013, pp. 12–13 Fig. 4 Interaction between private sector actors within global value chains. Source: adapted from Gereffi et al. (2005) Towards a sustainable development licence to operate 161 other sectors, diversification, development of socioeconomic in- frastructure and regional integration. The AMVAction Plan, which is structured around programme clusters, specific goals, outcomes and activities, was developed in 2011 for the practical applicationof thevisionfor thecontinent.TheAMVActionPlan, which is structured around programme clusters, specific goals, outcomes and activities, was developed in 2011 for the practical application of the vision for the continent (Pedro 2016). A result-oriented monitoring framework has also been de- veloped toassessAMVcompliance, asmeasuredby the levelof implementation of the 83 activities recommended by theAMV ActionPlan(GIZ2014).Approachessuchas theAMVcouldbe replicated in other regions and implemented at the national lev- el.Another example of a suggested comprehensive approach to governance of the extractive sector is the Natural Resource Charter, which is a set of 12 precepts that put forward choices and strategies in order to increase the sustainable development benefits of natural resource exploitation. An accompanying Benchmark Framework has also been developed as a tool for the management of oil, gas and minerals against global best practice as prescribed in the Charter (NRGI 2016). Systems thinking In addition to examining the inter-linkages between the min- ing sector and other socioeconomic sectors, there is also a need to look at the dynamic relationships between minerals and other natural resources such as land, energy and water. Extractive industries place large demands on these resources, risk polluting water resources and can lead to biodiversity loss and ecosystem destruction. This calls for a systems-thinking approach that accounts for the nexus between resources so as to steer policy efforts towards integrated natural resourceman- agement along the mining value chain. In this context, strategic environmental impact assessments and integrated spatial planning or landscape planning are crucial toensure that aminingproject effectivelycontributes to local and national development. These instruments help protect local hab- itats, manage forests andwater resourcesmore sustainably, arbi- tratebetweenconflicting landuseoptionsandreducepovertyand improve the livelihoods of local communities. Inclusiveness and reduced gender and other inequalities An important element of the SDLO is recognition that mining activities can impact men and women in a different manner. Special attention should be paid to the role of women in arti- sanal and small-scale mining, their growing portion of em- ployment in large-scale mining, and the adverse environmen- tal and social impacts of mining that can disproportionately affect women. Examples of the latter include the impact of deforestation on women’s ability to collect water and fuel, or the rise of prostitution to serve mine workers and associated risks of sexually transmitted diseases including HIV/AIDS. A gender lens therefore needs to be adopted in governing the mining sector in order to maximise its development contribu- tion, whilst also promoting female empowerment and gender equality that are central to the achievement of the SDGs. A similar need for differentiated analysis and policies may also arise with respect to other groups, such as indigenous people, who may be marginalised. Potential policy instruments The principles outlined above would need to be operationalised through a range of policies along the entire mining value chain (that is, from licencing of mineral terrains, geological mapping, mineral exploration, mine development, mining, mineral pro- cessing and refining, ore transportation, manufacturing of end- use products, to recycling and mine closure). Van der Lugt (2014), based on Gunningham and Grabosky (1998), summa- rises examples of policy and regulatory instruments that can be applied in anappropriatemixofmandatoryandvoluntary instru- ments, creating both carrot and stick incentives, to advance the environmental performance of the sector. On command and control regulation, possible instruments include environmental standards (e.g. process standards, tech- nology standards, performance standards), permits and li- cences (e.g. point source or facility), and covenants (negotiat- ed agreements, co-regulation). Economic and market-based instruments vary and include property rights, market creation, fiscal instruments (e.g. taxes, charges, subsidies), financial instruments, liability instruments, performance bonds, deposit refund systems (solid waste), removing perverse subsidies and sustainable procurement. On self-regulation (industry group or social control), there are standards and codes of practice. Voluntarism can also be practiced at the individual firm level or in the context of corporate social responsibility. Education, capacity building and information instruments include educa- tion and training, corporate environmental reporting, commu- nity right to know and pollution inventories, product verifica- tion and labelling, and award schemes (Van der Lugt 2014, based on Gunningham and Grabosky 1998). There is a strong case for governing the extractive indus- tries through detailed robust laws and regulations, rather than reliance on the negotiation of extensive and complex individ- ual mining contracts as is often the case in developing coun- tries. Contracts should as far as possible be consistent with the general legislative framework, include standardised terms, avoid stabilisation clauses, be allocated through a competitive bidding process and be accessible in the public domain.11 This 11 The Mining Law Committee of the International Bar Association has de- veloped a comprehensive and common template to aid developing countries negotiate and agree a mining contract that supports the contribution of the project towards sustainable development (see www.mmdaproject.org). 162 Pedro A. et al. can help the government maintain a coherent strategy for the sector and broader economy, reduce the challenges associated with the negotiation of each project (particularly amid asymmetries in negotiating skills and leverage), facilitate ef- fective rule enforcement by easing the work burden of regu- latory and oversight bodies, and increase transparency and accountability (UNSDSN 2015). Support for broad development objectives is likely to re- quire a coherent formulation and coordinated implementation of a wide range of policies, which may relate to such issues as local content, shared infrastructure, international trade, invest- ment, industrial policy, education and training, and many others, and which can help strengthen institutions, build ca- pacities and create an enabling environment. At the global level, policy action is needed for setting glob- al standards in the form of rules and regulations, voluntary initiatives and reporting obligations in areas that include: & coordination of mining policies and initiatives and agree- ment on international mining standards [including pressurising transnational corporations (TNCs) to disclose information and adhere to global codes of conduct, and ensuring host countries receive a fair deal]; & influencing incentives and behaviour (examples of poli- cies being extended consumer responsibility and eco- labelling of metals); & technology transfer; and & regulation of the financialisation of commodities, and to cur- tail illicit financial transactions, transfer-pricingabuse, useof tax havens and other tax evasion or avoidance techniques. The World Bank has developed a value chain approach for the extractive industries aimed at supporting countries trans- late mineral and hydrocarbon wealth into sustainable develop- ment, shown in Fig. 6.12 Policies need to be designed at each of the illustrated different stages of the extractive sector value chain, which for space limi- tation are not described further. The implementation of the vari- ous policy options identified will differ from country to country dependingon the local context, but somepolicieswill very likely be required at each of the identified stages of the value chain. Upward harmonisation of best practices A number of authors have recognised the need to achieve the upward harmonisation of global standards of good practice for the mining sector to contribute to sustainable development (see, for example, Nickless et al. 2015). What is required is a set of international guidelines for what is acceptable, for instance, in terms of environmental, social and human rights impacts of min- eral extraction, getting a fair deal and share of profits, profit repa- triation, transparency and accountability, and investing in the fu- ture and in support of sustainable development objectives, along the linesdiscussedabove.Theguidelineswouldneed tobeused to set clear and concrete benchmarks for countries and companies to aim for.A formalmandate could be given to an institution such as the InternationalOrganisation forStandardisation todevelopsuch global standards and benchmarks of good practice, which will need to include new reporting guidelines (for example those of the Global Reporting Initiative—GRI), and sustainability indica- tors (such as the Responsible Mining Index being developed by the ResponsibleMining Foundation). Concluding remarks The paper argues that despite themany challenges and complex- ities ofmanaging extractive resources, there are also tremendous opportunities from using mineral resource wealth to spearhead sustainable and inclusive development. Examples of countries suchasBotswana today,and theNordiccountriesand theUSAin the last century provide evidence that resource riches can act as positive drivers (and not a ‘curse’) for the required structural transformation towards sustainabledevelopment.Butwhat these country examples alsohighlight is the importance of governance Fig. 6 Value chain for extractive industries. Source: World Bank (2009). http://siteresources. worldbank.org/INTOGMC/ Resources/ei_for_development_ 3.pdf 12 This framework was popularised by Collier (2007), with several institutions such as the Revenue Watch Institute, the World Bank, the Natural Resource Governance Institute and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) having since developed similar value chain approaches for the extrac- tive sector. Towards a sustainable development licence to operate 163 for achieving positive economic, social and environmental out- comes. Governments need to put in place clear, comprehensive and transparent laws, policies and regulations, build strong insti- tutions, train skilled professionals and set up accountability mechanisms to ensure that policy frameworks and rules are im- plemented. At the same time, the challenges associated with ris- ing resource nationalism, policy revisionism (including fromde- nials of climatechange), volatile commodityprices and threats to multi-lateralism would need to be overcome. This will require close collaboration and cooperation between countries and ac- tors, with all relevant stakeholders incorporating the principles enshrined in the SDGs into their own practices and operations. Thisnewgovernanceparadigmhasherebeencalleda ‘sustain- able development licence to operate’, as a development of the ‘social licence to operate’ paradigm, to reflect the significant po- tential contribution of the mining sector to realise the sustainable development of mineral-rich developing countries. The new par- adigmextends overmultiple dimensions (local, national, regional andglobal) and calls for the reconciliation of the aspirations of the different actors (including multi-national companies, govern- ments, non-governmental organisations, civil society organisa- tions and land users) in the extractive sector to ensure shared ben- efits from mining. The underlying principles and policy options outlined above,which form the basis of the proposed framework, should serve as useful benchmarks for its operationalisation. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons At t r ibut ion 4 .0 In te rna t ional License (h t tp : / / creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, duplication, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made. References Acosta A (2013) Extractivism and neoextractivism: two sides of the same curse. In: Lang M, Mokrani D (eds) Beyond development: alterna- tive visions from Latin America, vol 6. Rosa Luxemburg Foundation and Amsterdam: Transnational Institute, Quito, pp 1– 86 https://www.tni.org/files/download/beyonddevelopment_ extractivism.pdf African Union (2009) Africa mining vision. ht tp: / /www. africaminingvision.org/amv_resources/AMV/Africa_Mining_ Vision_English.pdf Agrawal A, Gibson CC (1999) Enchantment and disenchantment: the role of community in natural resource conservation. World Dev 27:629–649 Anseeuw W, Alden Wily L, Cotula L, Taylor M (2012) Land rights and the rush for land: findings of the global commercial pressures on land research project. International Land Coalition, Rome Bleischwitz R, Bringezu S (2007) Global resource management: conflict potential and characteristics of a global governance regime. Stiftung Entwicklung und Frieden, Bonn Bleischwitz R, Bahn-Walkowiak B, Ekardt F, Feldt H, Fuhr L (2012) International resource politics—new challenges demanding new governance approaches for a green economy. Publication Series on ecology volume 26. Heinrich Böll Foundation, Berlin Business Council of British Columbia (2015) Rethinking social licence to operate—a concept in search of definition and boundaries. Environ Energy Bull 7(2) CCSI et al. (2016) Mining a mirage? Reassessing the shared-value para- digm in light of the technological advances in the mining sector. http://ccsi.columbia.edu/work/projects/the-mine-of-the-future/ Cheng I, XiongW (2014) Financialisation of commodity markets. https:// www.princeton.edu/~wxiong/papers/Review_Financialization.pdf Collier P (2007) The bottom billion: why the poorest countries are failing and what can be done about it. Oxford University Press, Oxford http://www.sfu.ca/content/sfu/dean-gradstudies/events/ dreamcolloquium/SpringColloquium/Readings/Readings/_jcr_ content/main_content/download_47/file.res/Paul%20Collier Collier P (2013) Under pressure: good management of a resource discov- ery needs informed citizens and informed government. Finance and Development Cotula L (2013) The great african land grab? Agricultural investments and the global food system. Zed Books, London and New York Cotula L, Vermeulen S, Leonard R, Keeley J (2009) Land grab or devel- opment opportunity? Agricultural investment and international land deals in Africa. FAO, International Institute for Environment and Development, International Fund for Agricultural Development CotulaL,OyaC,CodjoeEA,EidA,Kakraba-AmpehM,KeeleyJLaokaleyA, KidewaM,MakwarimbaW, SeideM,NashaWO,Asare RO,RizzoM (2014) Testing claims about large land deals in Africa: findings from a multi-country study. J Dev Stud 50(7):903–925 Couto Garcia L, Ribeiro DB, de Oliveira Roque F, Ochoa-Quintero JM, Laurance WF (2017) Brazil’s worst mining disaster: corporations must be compelled to pay the actual environmental costs. Ecol Appl 27(1):5–9 Ekins P, O’Keeffe M (2014) Concept note for a possible IRP report on governance of the extractive industry. A proposal from Paul Ekins and Michelle O’Keeffe, UCL Institute for Sustainable Resources, University College London, for discussion at the IRP Rotterdam Meeting in November 2014 EY (2015) Business risks facing mining and metals 2015–2016. http:// www.ey.com/gl/en/industries/mining—metals/business-risks-in- mining-and-metals Gereffi G, Humphrey J, Sturgeon T (2005) The governance of global value chains. Rev Int Polit Econ 12(1):78–104 GIZ (2014) A gap analysis of African mining vision implementation in Liberia and Sierra Leone. German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development GunninghamN, Grabosky P (1998) Smart regulation: designing environ- mental policy. Clarendon Oxford University Press, Oxford Heumesser C, Staritz C (2013) Financialisation and the microstructure of commodity markets—a qualitative investigation of trading strate- gies of financial investors and commercial traders. http://www. oefse.a t / f i leadmin/content /Downloads/Publ ikat ionen/ Workingpaper/WP44_financialisation.pdf Holden J, Pagel M (2013) Transnational land acquisitions: what are the drivers, levels, and destinations of recent transnational land acquisi- tions? EPS-PEAKS Consortium ICMM (2016) Role of mining in national economies. Mining contribu- tion index, third edition supplement. ICMM, London Iledar W, Suberu R (2010) Oil and gas resources in the Federal Republic of Nigeria. Framework paper. World Bank Conference on Oil and Gas in Federal Systems. March 3–4, 2010 Joyce S, Thomson I (2000) Earning a social licence to operate: social responsibility and resource development in Latin America, CIM Bulletin, 49–53 Kaplinksky R, Morris M (2001) A handbook for value chain research. International Development Research Centre, Ottawa 164 Pedro A. et al. Kaufman D (2014) Evidence-based reflections on natural resource gov- ernance and corruption in Africa, Africa at a fork in the road: taking off or disappointment once again, The Yale Center for the Study of Globalization. April, 2014 Kumar P (2012) The economics of ecosystems and biodiversity: ecolog- ical and economic foundations. Routledge Press, Oxford Lesser P, Suopajärvi L, Koivurora T (2017) Challenges that mining com- panies face in gaining and maintaining a social license to operate in Finnish Lapland. Miner Econ 30:41–51 MEA (2005) Millennium ecosystem assessment, ecosystems and human well-being: synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC NicklessE,Ali S,ArndtN,BrownG,DemetriadesA,DurrheimR,Enriquez M A, Giurco D, Kinnaird J, Littleboy A, Masotti F, Meinert L, Nyanganyura D, Oberhänsli R, Salem J, Schneider G, Yakovleva N (2015)Resourcingfuturegenerations:aglobaleffort tomeet theworld’s future needs head-on. International Union of Geological Sciences. http://iugs.org/uploads/RFG%20Report-sm.pdf NRGI (2013) The 2013 resource governance index: a measure of trans- parency and accountability in the oil, gas andmining sector. A report by the Natural Resource Governance Institute. http://www. resourcegovernance.org/resource-governance-index http://www. resourcegovernance.org/sites/default/files/rgi_2013_Eng.pdf NRGI (2016) Natural resource charter benchmarking framework. Natural Resource Governance Institute. http://www.resourcegovernance. org/sites/default/files/documents/precept-combined.pdf OECD (2013) Interconnected economies: benefiting from global value chains: synthesis report OECD, WTO and World Bank (2014) Global value chains: challenges, opportunities, and implications for policy Owen JR, Kemp D (2013) Social licence and mining: a critical perspec- tive. Resour Policy 38:29–35 Palmer D, Arial A, Metzner R, Willmann R, Muller E, Kafeero F, Crowley E (2012) Improving the governance of tenure of land, fisheries and forests. FAO Land Tenure Journal 1 Pedro A (2015) Towards a sustainable development licence to operate: the resource governance imperatives. Concept note for the development of a report by the International Resource Panel on Governance of the Extractive Industry, presented for discussion at the UN Environment– International Resource Panel Expert Workshop on Resource Governance held on 15–16October 2015 in Davos, Switzerland Pedro A (2016) The country mining vision: towards a new deal. Miner Econ 29(1):15–22 Prno J (2013) An analysis of factors leading to the establishment of a social licence to operate in the mining industry. Resour Policy 38: 577–590 http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0301420713000810 PWC (2015) Mine 2015, the gloves are off: review of global trends in the mining industry. http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/mining/publications/ assets/pwc-e-and-m-mining-report.pdf Resolve and WEF (2015) Voluntary responsible mining initiatives: a review. White paper. By RESOLVE Solutions Network and World Economic Form. August, 2015 RevenueWatch Institute (2013) The 2013 Resource Governance Index: a measure of transparency and accountability in the oil, gas and min- ing sector Rights and Resources Initiative (RRI) (2016) Closing the gap: strategies and scale needed to secure rights and save forests. Rights and re- sources initiative annual review 2015–2016 Sauvant KP (2015) The negotiations of the United Nations code of con- duct on transnational corporations: experience and lessons learned. J World Invest Trade 16:11–87 Stevens P, Lahn G, Kooroshy J (2015) The resource curse revisited. Chatham House Research Paper Suárez SM, Osorio LM, Langford M (2009) Voluntary guidelines for good governance in land and natural resource tenure: civil society perspectives, FAO Land Tenure Working Paper 8 Terama E, Milligan B, Jimenez-Aybar R, Mace GM, Ekins P (2016) Accounting for the environment as an economic asset: global prog- ress and realizing the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. Sustain Sci 11(6):945–950 Toulmin C, Quan J (2000) Evolving land rights, policy and tenure in Africa. IIED, DFID UNECA (2015) Track it! Stop it! Get it! Illicit Financial Flows. Report of the High Level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows from Africa. Commissioned by the AU/ECA Conference of Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development UNECA (2016) Africa’s blue economy: a policy handbook. http://www. uneca.org/sites/default/files/PublicationFiles/blue-eco-policy- handbook_eng_1nov.pdf UNECA and African Union (2011) Minerals and Africa’s Development: The International StudyGroup Report on Africa’s Mineral Regimes. United Nations Economic Commission for Africa United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2009) World Investment Report 2009: Transnational Corporations, Agricultural Production, and Development. UNCTAD/WIR/2009 UNSDSN (2015) Harnessing natural resources for sustainable develop- ment: challenges and solutions. http://unsdsn.org/wp-content/ uploads/2014/02/TG10-Final-Report.pdf Van der Lugt C T (2014) Global resource governance and poverty: scop- ing paper on a new work steam of the international resource panel Weissbrodt D, Kruger M (2003) Norms on the responsibilities of trans- national corporations and other business enterprises with regard to human rights. Am J Int Law 97(4):901–922 Wilts H, Bleischwitz R (2012) Combating material leakage: a proposal for an international metal covenant. Sapiens 4(2):1–9 World Bank (2009) Extractive industries value chain: a comprehensive integrated approach to developing extractive industries. Eleodoro Mayorga Alba. Extractive Industries for Development Series #3. Africa Region Working Paper Series #125 World Bank (2011) The changing wealth of nations: measuring sustain- able development for the new millennium. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. World Economic Forum (2016) Toward transparency and best practices for deep seabed mining: an initial multi-stakeholder dialogue. http:// www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Toward_Transparency_Best_ Practices_Deep_Seabed_Mining_2016.pdf World Economic Forum (2017)Mining andmetals industry visions 2017. Davos-Klosters, Switzerland 17–20 January Towards a sustainable development licence to operate 165 