ABSTRACT: 
This review article provides an overview of the scholarship on the establishment and reform of East Asian welfare capitalism. The developmental welfare state theory and the related productivist welfare regime approach have dominated the study of welfare states in the region. This essay, however, shows that a growing body of research challenges the dominant literature. We identify two key driving factors of welfare reform in East Asia, namely democratization and post-industrialization; and discuss how these two drivers have undermined the political and functional underpinnings of the post-war equilibrium of the East Asian welfare/production regime. Its unfolding transformation and the new politics of social policy in the region challenge the notion of “East Asian exceptionalism”, and we suggest that recent welfare reforms call for a better integration of the region into the literature of advanced political economies to allow for cross-fertilization between Eastern and Western literatures. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Since the democratization literature focuses on “politics” (with an emphasis on “old” social policies, namely health insurance, old-age security, and unemployment protec-tion; in addition to downplaying party-political agency), we suggest that the far-reaching im-plications of post-industrialization and its interaction with democratization deserve greater attention for advancing our understanding of transformation of East Asian welfare capitalism. Instead of the adhering to “regional” approaches 4 in the study of social policy, we suggest that recent East Asian welfare reforms in the wake ofdemocratization and post-industrialization call for a better integration of the region into the literature of advanced political economies, where established tools of welfare state analysis (especially, those looking at partisanship and party competition) help us better understand the transformation of East Asian welfare capitalism. Whilst Kwon (2009) acknowledges that the developmental welfare state w s transformed from a “selective” variant to an “inclusive” one, Holliday (2005) assertively contends that welfare reforms in Korea and Taiwan were still largely informed by “productivist concerns” regardless of the emergence of competitive politics (see also Ahn & Lee, 2012; Aspalter, 2006). Distinguishing the period of democratic consolidation from the post-industrial era, Peng and Wong (2008) describe the end of the “progressive coalition” (with civil society organiza-tions as important policy entrepreneurs) and instead emphasize the economic rationale of these new social policies, and accordingly present a case for cross-class support in their ex-pansion (that is, neo-liberal economic reformers and social policy activists joining forces) (see also Seeleib-Kaiser & Toivonen, 2011 for the economic rationale in policy discourses); and in light of the identified economic rationale, Peng (2012) suggests the “readjustment rather than the replacement” of developmental state strategies. Distinguishing the period of democratic consolidation from the post-industrial era, Peng and Wong (2008) describe the end of the “progressive coalition” (with civil society organiza-tions as important policy entrepreneurs) and instead emphasize the economic rationale of these new social policies, and accordingly present a case for cross-class support in their ex-pansion (that is, 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 -fare/production regime. Its unfolding transformation and the new politics of social policy in the region challenge the notion of “East Asian exceptionalism”, and we suggest that recent welfare reforms call for a better integration of the region into the literature of advanced politi-cal economies to allow for cross-fertilization between Eastern and Western literatures. Keywords: Democratization, Post-Industrialization, Welfare Capitalism, Developmentalism, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan. East Asian welfare states have experienced comprehensive reforms in the last two decades. Following the regional “pioneer” of Japan, the neighbouring South Korea and Taiwan have introduced unemployment protection schemes, and have universalized health-care provision and old-age security. Also observed has been increased state intervention in child and long-term care in the region, including Japan. Welfare state expansion in the three countries, with the rise of social citizenship, challenges perceived wisdom in the literature. According to de- 3 velopmental welfare state theory, and the related productivist welfare regime approach, social policy (driven by technocrats) is strictly subordinated to the primary policy goal of economic development, and therefore social welfare provision is confined to “productive” parts of the population (in particular, regular workers in key industries). However, recent policy expan-sion benefited presumably “non-productive” parts of the population as well (such as the un-employed, women, children, and the elderly), whilst the deregulation of employment protec-tion undermined the developmentalist “welfare-through-work” system. This article reviews the literature on the establishment and reform of East Asian welfare capitalism. In so doing, we focus on the research examining the political and socio-economic drivers of the unfolding transformation of East Asian welfare capitalism; with a focus on Ja-pan, Korea, and Taiwan. We show how democratization (that is, the end of authoritarianism in Korea and Taiwan, and the end of one-party dominance in Japan) and post-industrialization (that is, both labour market and family changes, such as the rise in female employment and the decline of traditional families) have undermined the post-war equilibrium of the East Asian welfare/production regime. Democratization has allowed the rise of political parties and societal actors in social policy-making, challenging the dominance of economic bureaucrats. We also identify limitations of the reform literature, notably paying insufficient attention to the role of political parties; and suggest that political parties, facing fierce electoral competi-tion, are now claiming the “driving seat” in social policy. Political agency operates in a con-text of post-industrialization, which has driven new social risks calling for social policy inter-vention (notably, child and long-term care expansion). We, thus, highlight that a powerful in-teraction between democratization and post-industrialization, which calls for further explora-tion. The observed welfare state reforms and the new politics of social policy in the region call into question the notion of “East Asian exceptionalism” and the associated theories of the developmental and Confucian welfare state. Instead of the adhering to “regional” approaches 4 in the study of social policy, we suggest that recent East Asian welfare reforms in the wake ofdemocratization and post-industrialization call for a better integration of the region into the literature of advanced political economies, where established tools of welfare state analysis (especially, those looking at partisanship and party competition) help us better understand the transformation of East Asian welfare capitalism. This also allows for cross-fertilization be-tween “Western” and “East Asian” literatures for more robust theory development in compar-ative political economy and welfare state research. The Developmental Welfare State in East Asia Rapid economic development in post-war Japan and newly industrialized economies in East Asia (especially, Korea and Taiwan) between the 1960s and late 1990s attracted great interest in the region. Building on developmental state theory and its highlighting of the steering role of the state (C. A. Johnson, 1982; Wade, 1990), social policy analysis in the region has been dominated by the developmental welfare state perspective and the related productivist welfare regime approach (Holliday, 2000; Kwon, 1997; Deyo, 1992). According to this body of litera-ture, social policy is subordinated to the key policy objectives of economic growth and indus-trialization; and policy-makers forcefully pursued the state-led “modernization” of their econ-omies, which was essentially understood as catching up with advanced economies in the West. At the early stages of industrialization, social policy was considered largely incompati-ble with economic development. Developmental strategies at first focused on light, labour-intensive manufacturing for the world market, which put great pressure on labour costs leav-ing little room for social innovations. However, the economic success of this developmental strategy created labour shortages and corresponding pressure on wages, which in turn made light-industry-based development increasingly unfeasible. In this context, a change of strategy towards higher value-added manufacturing was undertaken. This type of industrialization re- 5 quired human capital investments for greater productivity and labour force stability, which provided the socio-economic underpinnings for increased expenditure on education and train-ing but also on health and enterprise welfare. Thus, the objective of up-skilling workforces made economic development and social policy compatible (Deyo, 1992). The developmental state concentrated its welfare efforts on the presumably productive parts of the population, especially skilled workers in large companies but also civil servants and the military. And indeed, the coverage of early social insurance schemes (health care andold-age security) was rather selective with the majority of the population being excluded (Kwon, 1997). By contrast, social care was not considered a good “investment,” and also so-cial security for weaker members of society was typically viewed as a burden on the economy (Holliday & Wilding, 2003a, p. 166). Overall, we observed the reluctance of the developmen-tal state to engage in the provision of social welfare; and East Asian welfare states are gener-ally considered “low spenders”, where the state prioritizes the investment into industrial rather than social development (White & Goodman, 1998, p. 13; Kwon, 1997, p. 471). Whilst public social policy provision is poorly developed, some scholars point out that so-called “surrogate social policies” enjoy great prominence in the region, such as mandatory enterprise welfare and subsidies for farmers and small- and medium-sized companies. The former, especially in Japan and Korea, was pushed by policy-makers in order to pre-empt popular demands for universal social welfare. With respect to the latter, it is acknowledged that these subsidies cannot easily be defined as social policy. However, this state support, as a measure of trade protectionism, was granted in order to shield the agricultural sector and small employers from international competition and thereby to protect employment. Critical-ly, in the developmental welfare state, employment is crucial for access to benefits, and the East Asian welfare model presents a system of “welfare through work”, where economic growth and corresponding high levels of employment were thought to substitute for generous social welfare provision in the first place (Estévez-Abe, 2008; Kim, 2010; Miura, 2012). In 6 addition to trade protectionism, high levels of employment were achieved through strict em-ployment regulation and the (de-facto) lifetime employment practice (E.-H. Jung & Cheon, 2006, pp. 458-460; Woo-Cumings, 2007, p. 18). The regulation of employment in the region created “profound core-periphery distinctions” (Goodman & Peng, 1996, p. 197) with well-protected insiders (who have access to relatively generous benefits), whereas labour market outsiders enjoyed little social protection. The developmentalist logic is reinforced by Confucian ethos, which attaches great im-portance to the family. Welfare, particularly social care for children and the elderly but also social protection, is believed to be best provided by families, within which Confucianism en-courages a rigid traditional division of gender roles – the man being perceived as the “natural” head of the family and its breadwinner, whereas the woman’s role is primarily seen as the provider of care. From this perspective, state intervention into family affairs is considered un-desirable, putting an immense burden on women, who are expected to provide unpaid care work within their families across generations. Hence, a strong male breadwinner ideology can be ascribed great weight in East Asian societies (Won & Pascall, 2004; see also Lewis, 1992 on the male breadwinner model). However, the role of families goes beyond their function in care provision. Traditionally, based upon the Confucian ideals of filial piety and family obli-gations, East Asian families were furthermore characterized by considerable intergenerational monetary transfers (especially, from sons to parents in the absence of old-age security) (Jones, 1993). Thus, social welfare provision by families (as promoted by Confucianism) allowed the state to prioritize economic development, whilst largely ignoring social policy. The Politics of the Developmental Welfare State The East Asian developmental welfare state was built by conservative elites in the absence of competitive politics. Admittedly, after World War II, Japan was democratized, but the con-servative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) monopolized political power for most of the post- 7 war period. It was not before 1993 that the party found itself on the opposition benches. Thus, despite the country’s democratization, “soft authoritarianism” was widely ascribed to the Jap-anese political system. In Korea, the 1961 military coup created a single-party regime, where elections were no more than an instrument of the dictatorship to formally legitimize its rule. Lastly, Taiwan, also with a single-party regime, did not even attempt to appear democratic. Instead, the external threat from mainland China was used by the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) to justify the authoritarian system (Holliday, 2000, p. 715; C. Johnson, 1987, pp. 143-44; White & Goodman, 1998, p. 15). An important common feature of the scholarship on the building of East Asian welfare states is the emphasis put on the role of bureaucrats. Whilst politicians set broad policy goals, technocrats (in a supposedly depoliticized manner) engaged in policy planning, the develop-ment of new policy, and their implementation. Highly centralized bureaucracies are consid-ered key to the coordination of different policies for economic growth, and the developmental (welfare) state is typically associated with bureaucratic dominance in policy-making (Goodman & Peng, 1996, p. 196; Holliday, 2000, p. 715). Conservative elites, in politics and bureaucracies, shared the key objective of industrialization and economic development – both were driven by the “imperative” of modernization (Kwon, 1997, pp. 497-80). It was also thought that economic growth and the associated prosperity would legitimize authoritarian rule, which made the developmental state a strategy of “stability through growth” (Holliday, 2000, p. 715). In this context, the developmental welfare state contributed to regime stability by granting favourable treatment to those who were considered particularly important to the government. In addition to core workers (for productivist reasons), civil servants and the mili-tary were among the first to benefit from public social welfare provision in order to ensure the loyalty of these groups (Goodman & Peng, 1996; White & Goodman, 1998). By contrast, so-cial citizenship and redistribution received very little political support, and we find a “clear hostility to the European welfare state” (Holliday & Wilding, 2003a, p. 167) among conserva- 8 tive elites, who believed that European-style social policy provision would undermine the tra-ditional Confucian family. Although the developmental state approach highlights the leading role of the state in economic development, it also recognizes a critical alliance between the state and business, the so-called “developmental alliance”, behind the formation of specific sets of economic and social policy (Hundt, 2009; Wade, 1990). However, even though the developmental state largely promoted business interests (and granted employers incomparably greater policy in-fluence than other societal actors), the state had the “upper hand” and kept business “at a dis-tance” (Holliday & Wilding, 2003b, p. 35) allowing the government to pursue its interests when in conflict with employers. Unlike business, organized labour was effectively excluded from the political decision-making process, which provided ruling elites with a remarkable degree of political autonomy from societal forces. Disciplined (and low-cost) labour was considered a precondition for fast and export-oriented industrialization, and this was thought to require the exclusion of trade unions from the political process (Buchanan & Nicholls, 2003; Pempel & Tsunekawa, 1979). Critically, the predominance of enterprise unionism in the region undermined institutionally the forming of strong working-class interests and solidarity, and therefore contributed to re-gime stability and the insignificance of organized labour and social democracy (Deyo, 1987; C. Johnson, 1987). Holliday highlights that “benevolent authoritarianism was for many years accepted rather than challenged by workers” (Holliday, 2000, p. 719). Importantly, we cannot account for the welfare state’s “post-war development in terms of right-left political move-ments” (Goodman & Peng, 1996, p. 208; see also White & Goodman, 1998; Yang, 2013) and, accordingly, the literature argues for the insignificance of political parties in East Asian wel-fare politics. This stands in sharp contrast to the historical experience of West European wel-fare states, where (left) party political agency is ascribed great importance (Esping-Andersen, 1985; Huber & Stephens, 2001). 9 The developmentalist approach and the argument of “East Asian exceptionalism” (cf. Peng & Wong, 2010) have been challenged by recent welfare state expansions in the face of democratization and post-industrialization. Welfare state provision has been expanded to “non-productive” parts of the population, which could be interpreted as the emergence of a notion of social citizenship in the Far East (Y.-M. Kim, 2008; H.-K. Lee, 1999). In the next sections, we discuss the scholarship on the impact of democratization and post-industrialization on welfare state development in the region. Following the Japanese Pioneer? The Rise of Social Protection in Democratic Korea and Taiwan Entering the late 1980s, the political landscape in Korea and Taiwan experienced massive changes with the transition to democracy. In 1987, martial law was lifted in Taiwan, and the first presidential election was held in Korea (Haggard & Kaufman, 2008). With the cessation of repression of opposition parties and extension of elections to all levels of government, competitive politics became the norm in Korea and Taiwan. In tandem with democratization, the two countries underwent a process of “welfare state deepening”. Most notably, the frag-mented social insurance system, a key characteristic of East Asian welfare capitalism, turned into a universalistic one (Peng & Wong, 2010). Pension and health-care schemes were univer-salized as compulsory coverage was extended to less productive workers (i.e. employees of small- and medium-sized firms, farmers, and the self-employed). The two countries further-more introduced unemployment protection schemes in the 1990s, though benefit levels and coverage were somewhat modest, in addition to strict eligibility criteria (Peng & Wong, 2008; Ringen, Kwon, Yi, Kim, & Lee, 2011). Intriguingly, these developments in democratizing Korea and Taiwan resemble the Japanese post-war experience. During American occupation (1945-52), Japan saw the introduction of unemployment insurance, though with rather limited coverage. Whilst benefit generosity stayed modest during LDP rule (from 1955), benefit cov- 10 erage was extended to all regular workers and some active labour market policy measures were introduced in the mid-1970s. Despite these developments, unemployment insurance re-mained geared towards the protection of core workforces (Seeleib-Kaiser, 1995). By contrast, during the era of high-speed growth until the mid-1970s, the LDP universalized health insur-ance and old-age protection. The latter though provided only modest benefits, and this trans-lated into high saving rates. Also, surrogate social policies played an important role through-out LDP hegemony (Kasza, 2006). Despite substantial welfare state expansion in Korea and Taiwan, the developmental welfare state approach “defended” its corner, arguing that the rise of social policy did not pose a fundamental challenge to developmentalism in the region. Whilst Kwon (2009) acknowledges that the developmental welfare state w s transformed from a “selective” variant to an “inclusive” one, Holliday (2005) assertively contends that welfare reforms in Korea and Taiwan were still largely informed by “productivist concerns” regardless of the emergence of competitive politics (see also Ahn & Lee, 2012; Aspalter, 2006). This literature has been criti-cized for downplaying the scope of the welfare state change that the region experienced; and, in terms of the politics of social policy, it has been argued that the development of East Asian social welfare provision in the democratic era was underpinned by a qualitatively different political logic; that is, electoral competition. A number of scholars contend that if the ruling conservatives advanced (modest) social policy for economic growth and legitimization prior to democratization, they did so for elec-toral calculation in the democratic era (Haggard & Kaufman, 2008; Peng & Wong, 2010; Wong, 2004). During the immediate years following the democratic transition, conservative governments instigated welfare reforms whenever necessary to secure electoral success. In Korea, coinciding with elections, conservatives gradually extended health insurance coverage, and a national pension scheme was introduced immediately before the first presidential elec-tion. In Taiwan, the conservative KMT swiftly implemented a national healthcare program in 11 1995, facing legislative and presidential elections. Moreover, the healthcare program took the form of the universal insurance that had been promoted by the opposition party, the Demo-cratic Progressive Party (DPP). Both countries also saw the introduction of selective unem-ployment protection under conservative governments in the second half of the 1990s. The main rationale of the Korean Kim Young-Sam government was to pre-empt opposition from organized labour to proposed labour market deregulation (S. C. Lee, 2012), whereas the Tai-wanese case underscored the opportunistic political behaviour of the ruling KMT in the wake of elections; unemployment protection was first proposed by the DPP (Zhu, 2005, p. 94). We find that democratization brought greater pluralism into social policy-making, as electoral competition incentivized politicians to be more sensitive to broader societal demands. Popular calls for redistribution through the welfare state were channelled through social movements and policy experts, creating pro-welfare advocacy coalitions and constraining the dominance of the developmental alliance in social-policy making (Y.-M. Kim, 2008; Peng & Wong, 2010; Ringen, et al., 2011). This “democratization” literature made critical contributions to improving our under-standing of social policy developments in Korea and Taiwan. It showed the “responsiveness” of conservative political elites to electoral demands, in their efforts to overcome association with the authoritarian regimes. In fact, conservatives, who had displayed a firm anti-welfare stance in the past, made opportunistic “concessions” to the electorate and civil society to stay in power – with reasonable success. Insofar, it can indeed be argued that the political right remained in the “driving seat” of welfare state development in the early period of democratic transition. Importantly, the opportunistic electoral strategies of the conservatives in Korea and Taiwan appear to follow the earlier example of Japan, where the LDP routinely took an op-portunistic approach to welfare in its post-war rule. While the LDP dominated the political arena, Kasza (2006) argues that social policy was critical for party to establish its hegemonic 12 status in electoral competition with the Japanese Socialist Party in particular, and to win sup-port for its developmental program of economic growth first. Calder (1989) describes social welfare as a popular measure of compensation to “dissidents” in situations of political crisis. Thus, whilst Japan’s previous electoral system of multi-member districts and single non-transferable vote is widely viewed as having prevented the emergence of a generous “Europe-an-style” welfare state (Estévez-Abe, 2008), social policy was nonetheless an important tool of the ruling elite of LDP, big business, and bureaucrats (Kasza, 2006). In the light of the Jap-anese experience, one might therefore want to argue that Korea and Taiwan in democratic transition caught up with their already democratized neighbour; and that the developmental alliance remained unchallenged in social welfare policy. The Rise of Political Parties in East Asian Welfare Politics Despite highlighting the importance of electoral competition (though in somewhat vague terms), the democratization literature failed to recognize the rise of party-political agency, which continued to be downplayed (as in the developmental welfare state approach). We also contend that empirical observations suggest that this literature struggled to fully acknowledge the rise of the political left in particular, the subsequent conservative loss of control over the welfare state, and the implications of these developments for East Asian welfare politics. Wel-fare state deepening was advanced by the electoral victories of left political parties. In Korea and Taiwan, the political left and long-time opposition parties won presidential elections in the aftermath of the East Asian Financial Crisis of 1997/8, and they were confirmed in gov-ernment in both countries. We find that left parties, in alliances with organized labour (Fleckenstein & Lee, 2017b; Kamimura, 2010; Zhu 2005), promoted the expansion of welfare benefits for workers (see Hong, 2014 on the importance of economic crisis). It appears that the political left emerged as a champion of the welfare state. In terms of social policy platform, it has been argued left parties in East Asia demonstrated some affinity with the social- 13 democratic welfare model, as they articulated some enthusiasm for universal coverage of so-cial protection and tax-funded welfare benefits (Fell, 2004; Y.-M. Kim, 2008; Kuhnle, 2004). In Korea, the centre-left Kim Dae-Jung government implemented a series of compre-hensive welfare reforms improving old-age security and health care provision, in addition to expanding the selective unemployment protection scheme to all full-time workers and some atypical workers and improving benefit generosity and duration. Also, the government de-ployed public work schemes and employment promotion subsidies to reduce the burden of unemployment caused by the East Asian financial crisis, as it introduced non-contributory public assistance for those who still fell outside the unemployment insurance scheme The thrust of these reforms was to improve social protection for non-productive and less-productive populations, and to strengthen the redistributive capacity of social policy (D. Jung & Park, 2011; Fleckenstein & Lee, 2017b). In Taiwan, the centre-left DPP government, elected on a social welfare platform (Haggard, 2005), endeavoured to strengthen the redistributive capacity of the welfare state by enhancing social protection for the unemployed and the elderly. In the wake of the 2001 re-cession, the DPP government replaced the modest unemployment protection with a more comprehensive new scheme: the coverage was expanded to employees of small firms as well as part-time workers, in addition to increasing benefit generosity. Like Korea, Taiwan also engaged in greater employment promotion and job creation schemes during the tenure of the DPP government (Chang, 2011; Chen, 2010). To improve old-age income security for those neglected by the KMT, the DPP introduced a basic old-age pension scheme and substantially increased the very modest benefits that less productive works (e.g. farmers) received (Haggard, 2005, p. 29). In the 1990s, we also observed the rise of party-political agency in Japan with the end of one-party dominance in the country. For the first time, the LDP failed to form a government in 1993; and instead a coalition of the political left formed a majority. Moreover, a major 14 electoral reform in 1994 undermined the LDP’s ability to harvest electoral majorities out of special interests (such as farmers and small businesses), and it is expected that changes in government become a regular feature in Japan (Rosenbluth & Thies, 2010). The LDP’s failure to dominate the legislature signifies the end of Japanese “soft-authoritarianism” and that com-petitive politics has become the norm in the country, as it has become in Korea and Taiwan. In Japan, democratic consolidation challenged the conservative ownership of the welfare state, and we find remarkable activism in the domain of family policy in particular, where the polit-ical left performed a critical agenda-setting function, to which the LDP responded. Critically, the political left in Korea and Taiwan also discovered family policy, and we witness devel-opments that display great similarities with the Japanese trajectory. In consideration of these empirical observations, we suggest greater attention should be paid to the role of political left in the future scholarship. We now discuss post-industrialization and the decline of the Confu-cian family as the socio-economic driver of recent family policy expansion in the region, which is followed by exploring the interaction between post-industrialization and democratic consolidation in the region. Post-Industrialization and the Decline of the Confucian Family As with Western welfare states (Daly & Rake, 2003; Lewis, 1992), the developmental welfare state of East Asia was built for the industrial age. As discussed earlier, it was geared in partic-ular towards male workers in manufacturing industries to promote economic development and industrialization in societies that had greatly relied on agriculture, and this male breadwinner bias had been reinforced in the expansion of social protection in the early stages of democrati-zation. By contrast, very little support was provided for those who were deemed “non-productive” (especially, women). This model of development was feasible in a context of fast economic growth (with low levels of unemployment) and stable Confucian families (provid-ing a basic social safety net and social care). However, these assumptions, which had already 15 been discarded in advanced economies in the West, have also become untenable in East Asia, where post-industrialization has increasingly undermined the previous welfare settlement (S. S.-y. Lee, 2011; Peng, 2004; Peng & Wong, 2008). After rapid industrialization (with indus-trial employment peaking in Japan in the early 1970s, and in Korea and Taiwan in 1991 and 1987, respectively), all three countries experienced steady increases in service sector em-ployment (see Figure 1). Post-industrialization was accompanied by a significant increase in women’s employment. Admittedly, female labour market participation in the region lags somewhat behind the development in Western countries, as with the shift towards service sec-tor employment. Yet, this should not deflect from the rising number of East Asian women who have entered the labour market – especially in Japan, where female employment partici-pation reached levels we can find in France (which has historically been classified as a modi-fied male breadwinner country; Lewis, 1992 - see Figure 2). (Insert Figures 1 and 2 here) The growth of female labour market participation has far-reaching implications for East Asian societies, which were built upon Confucian ideas of a gendered division of paid and unpaid labour. This, however, as in Western societies, has become ever less feasible with rising fe-male employment rates. The double burden of paid labour and unpaid care puts enormous pressure on women, who experience huge difficulties to reconcile their employment with their domestic “duties”. In strong male breadwinner countries in particular, women do not receive much public support in work/family reconciliation. The state does not conceive that it has re-sponsibilities for public child and eldercare provision, leaving this to families and markets. Especially in conservative welfare states, great responsibility is ascribed to families, typically based on the Catholic principle of subsidiarity (Seeleib-Kaiser, Van Dyk, & Roggenkamp, 2008). Likewise in East Asian societies, the responsibility for care was left to families, so that 16 one might want to consider Confucianism as the functional equivalent to Catholicism in the Western world. Accordingly, family policies supporting work/family reconciliation were most poorly developed. Hence, in East Asia, as elsewhere in the developed world (Bonoli, 2005; Esping-Andersen, 1999), we have also been witnessing the emergence of the “new social risk” of work/family conflicts (related to both the care of children and frail elderly) (Abe, 2010; Peng, 2004; Tsai, 2011). In such a context, Schoppa (2010) argues, with reference to the case of Japan, that women (with presumably little “voice” in politics) face a fundamental decision between ca-reer and family. It is observed that n increasing number of women “exit” from the family, and make a decision for career. The situation in Korea and Taiwan, with similar family policy trajectories, shows much resemblance. The societal consequences are enormous. Not only do we witness a significant decline in marriage rates challenging the traditional Confucian fami-ly, East Asian societies have furthermore experienced a dramatic decline in fertility rates; es-pecially in Korea and Taiwan. Fertility rates in the region are now considerably below the av-erage across the developed world (see Table 1), and much below the replacement fertility rat of 2.1. (Insert Table 1 here) The “fertility crisis” and the associated population ageing have important consequences not only for social security systems (especially, pensions and health) but also for labour markets. However, East Asian families, as well as getting much smaller, are also much more “unsta-ble”, as expressed in divorce rates. In the 1970s, divorce was virtually unknown in Korea and Taiwan but has increased substantially over time. Eventually, both countries experienced di-vorce rates that exceeded the OECD average. Japan has also witnessed a significant increase in divorce rates over the last few decades but these have remained slightly below the OECD 17 average (see Table 2). Despite the somewhat different trajectory in Japan, it can be concluded that East Asian societies have lost their exceptional status of remarkable marital and family stability, which poses another challenge to the ideal of the Confucian family. In addition, the Confucian ideal of multi-generational families (Jones, 1993) has been withering away in “modern” East Asia, with only a small minority of families complying with this traditional ideal. Instead, the nuclear family has been becoming ever more predominant (see Table 3). (Insert Tables 2 and 3 here) Looking at labour market and family indicators, the overall picture appears to be that East Asia has “normalized”, and faces similar if not greater challenges than other OECD countries in the wake of post-industrialization (for instance, the challenge of very low fertility rates). In other words, as elsewhere in the developed world, families in East Asia are “under stress” and increasingly struggle to fulfil their assigned functions, which has fuelled calls for more public provision for families. One might want to argue that these developments have culminated in a functional “imperative” for a larger stake of the state in family affairs. This has considerable political-economic implications, as the developmental (welfare) state heavily relies on the care provided free of charge by families. The great role of families allowed the state to priori-tize investments in infrastructure and “national champions” for rapid industrialization and “catching-up” with the West, whilst social policy could remain minimalistic, geared towards the productive parts of society. This division of labour between families and the state has be-come ever less feasible in the post-industrial age. It has become difficult to assume women’s unpaid provision of household and care work. This not only undermines the developmental state but also the male breadwinner model that lies at the heart of the Confucian welfare state. 18 Post-Industrialization, Democratization, and the Rise of Family Policy Whilst the argument of a functional “imperative” against the background of increasing female employment participation and collapsing Confucian families might be attractive, it is puzzling that we find policy developments in Taiwan lagging behind policy innovations in Japan and especially Korea (An & Peng, 2016). Since Taiwan has experienced the most dramatic decline in fertility (not only across the region but also across the developed world), one might have expected, from a purely functionalist point of view, more ambitious policies to support fami-lies. This suggests the importance of politics in policy reform. Distinguishing the period of democratic consolidation from the post-industrial era, Peng and Wong (2008) describe the end of the “progressive coalition” (with civil society organiza-tions as important policy entrepreneurs) and instead emphasize the economic rationale of these new social policies, and accordingly present a case for cross-class support in their ex-pansion (that is, neo-liberal economic reformers and social policy activists joining forces) (see also Seeleib-Kaiser & Toivonen, 2011 for the economic rationale in policy discourses); and in light of the identified economic rationale, Peng (2012) suggests the “readjustment rather than the replacement” of developmental state strategies. Although there might be good economic reasons for new social policies (especially because of their human capital dimension), it needs to be noted that employers (who should have the greatest interest in social policies supporting economic development) expressed the strongest opposition to family policy expansion (S. C. Lee, 2012; Seeleib-Kaiser & Toivonen, 2011; Tsai, 2011), making it difficult to observe genuine cross-class support. Thus, in family policy, employers in three countries (though widely considered coordinate market economies [CMEs]) displayed policy preferences we find in liberal market economies rather than CMEs, where businesses in Sweden and Germa-ny, for instance, supported employment-oriented family policy expansion (Fleckenstein & Lee, 2014; Fleckenstein & Seeleib-Kaiser, 2011). Organized labour did not show much “en-thusiasm” for family policy expansion either, but prioritized the interests of male workers in 19 accordance with the insider/outsider model. Even in the Korean case (where trade unions pur-sued the interests of labour market outsiders in unemployment protection), family policy re-ceived, at best, “lukewarm” support from organized labour. In the face of these policy preferences of economic agency, we emphasize the interests of political agency in the expansion of family policy. Looking at the political dynamics of family policy expansion, we observe that the first wave of expansion to support for (working) women with dependent children and the frail elderly in all three countries was driven by the political left in power. In the 1990s, with the so-called “Angel Plan”, the Japanese left suc-cessfully spearheaded the expansion of childcare provision during its five years of govern-ment tenure (1993-8), in addition to the introduction of a parental leave scheme and long-term care insurance (Estévez-Abe, 2008, pp. 237-42; Peng, 2004, pp. 401-2). Following the re-gional pioneer, Korea – with the longest duration of left incumbency (that is, 10 years) – saw the greatest rise of family policies helping with work/family reconciliation (Peng, 2009). In Taiwan, the DPP also implemented a number of family policy measures to support mothers (Tsai, 2011). However, Taiwan failed to establish a long-term care insurance scheme, but with the 10-Year Plan for Long-Term Care from 2007 the country appears to move towards a more comprehensive system of elderly care (Fu & Hughes, 2010). To distinguish themselves from the conservative parties and to break their “hegemony” in welfare politics, left parties in all three countries campaigned with ambitious welfare state programs and were identified as pro-welfare parties by the electorate (Estévez-Abe, 2008; Fell, 2004; Fleckenstein & Lee, 2017a). In government, the left accelerated social policy ex-pansion, although it needs to be acknowledged that left parties (as with some of their Europe-an counterparts in government) struggled to fully implement their social policy programs. Nonetheless, social policy expansion in the region under left leadership shows the emerging importance of party-political agency and provides some support for the parties matter thesis, although one has to concede that the East Asian political left does not entirely comply with 20 the ideal of social-democratic parties in Scandinavia (Esping-Andersen, 1985; Huber & Stephens, 2001). However, the same applies to social democracy in Continental Europe, where conservative policy legacies have had an enormous impact on “social-democratic” so-cial policy preferences and electoral strategies (Baldwin, 1990; Seeleib-Kaiser, et al., 2008). Family policy expansion though should not be reduced to left parties in government, as Peng (in earlier work) argues, who highlights the role of female agency in family policy-making (Peng, 2004; see also Peng & Wong, 2008). Thus, early family policy expansion in the region, we suggest, seems to resemble the “social democracy cum feminism” argument we know from the paradigmatic case of family policy expansion in Sweden (Huber & Stephens, 2001). Surprisingly, one might argue, family policy expansion continued when the conserva-tive parties in Japan, Korea, and Taiwan succeeded the left in government. However, the con-servatives in the three countries, which had previously most strongly advocated male bread-winner policy rooted in their Confucian ideology, showed differences in their modernization efforts, leading to varying degrees of cross-party support for family policy expansion. At oneend of the spectrum, we find the Korean Saenuri Party, which moved considerably away from its previous position in order to gain an electoral advantage. The policy U-turn of the con-servatives triggered the left party to promise even more generous and universalist family poli-cy expansion in order to outbid its conservative competitor (S. C. Lee, 2017). As its Korean counterpart, the Japanese LDP underwent a modernization and expansion of its family policy platform after losing its dominance in the legislature (Boling, 2015; Estévez-Abe & Kim, 2014). In comparison to the conservative parties in Korea and Japan, the Taiwanese KMT showed only rather limited modernization efforts. However, after 10 years in opposition, the KMT also adopted a more pro-active family policy (Tsai, 2011). Apparently, the conservative parties in all three countries responded to family policy expansion under left leadership with the modernization of their policy “portfolios”. One can, thus, observe some convergence on pro-family platforms across the political spectrum, alt- 21 hough with varying degrees. We suggest that the unexpected development was driven by par-ty competition. Having been ousted from power, the conservatives (opportunistically as in the past) revised their electoral strategies. Specifically, to broaden their electoral appeal to those who turned towards left parties after the democratic transition became imperative. In Korea, it was young voters in their thirties in particular who were deemed critical for returning into government office (B.-K. Kim, 2008; S. C. Lee, 2017). In the Taiwanese case, it was women and middle-class voters that the DPP strove to win with their progressive family policy plat-form, and apparently the KMT learned its lesson (Fell, 2004). In Japan, the literature high-lights the importance of the growing number of independent voters, especially in urban areas and young voters (Estévez-Abe, 2008; Noble, 2010; Pempel, 2008; Rosenbluth & Thies, 2010). Our analysis of ISSP data (see Figure 3) highlights the great appeal of family policy for young female voters in particular. To woo these critical voters, the political right jumped on the pro-family policy bandwagon, from which young, dual-earner families in urban areas could benefit the most. Looking at the scope of family policy expansion, the ISSP data is also informative. In Korea, where we witnessed the most comprehensive family policy expansion, we find the strongest support for childcare policy. Admittedly, the overall support in Japan and Taiwan is fairly similar, but it is important to note that strong support for these policies is by far the lowest in Taiwan, where family policies experienced the least expansion. Apparent-ly, family policy is of less electoral importance in Taiwan, as compared to Korea and Japan; and unsurprisingly, this is reflected in relatively modest policy expansion and the limited pol-icy U-turn of the KMT. The presented findings suggest some responsiveness of East Asian political parties to electoral demands. For both parties of the left and right, it has become no longer feasible to ignore policy preferences in electorates. (Insert Figure 3 here) 22 Against this observation that political parties “discovered” the mobilizing capacity of family policies in the post-industrial age and responded (often in a somewhat opportunistic manner) to the public’s “appetite” for social welfare, we suggest a powerful interaction be-tween democratization and post-industrialization, as the latter reshaped policy preferences to which political parties, as vote- and office-seekers (cf. Strøm, 1990), responded. Thus, in terms of the politics of social policy, party competition, rather than illusive cross-class sup-port, appears at the core of family policy expansion in the region. Putting these developments into a broader comparative context, it is important to acknowledge that we have been observing family policy expansion across the OECD. Certain-ly, there is considerable variation in speed (and progress in some countries has been slow), but the overall direction is remarkably similar, as we have been witnessing great challenges to the male breadwinner ideology (Lewis, 2009; OECD, 2011). And, as with East Asian parties, po-litical parties in the West have experienced a decline of partisan difference, with conservative parties joining the parties of the left in the promotion of work/family reconciliation policies. We find left and right parties championing remarkably similar political discourses in their at-tempts to mobilize voters and especially female voters, who are most receptive to family poli-cy expansion (Fleckenstein, 2010; Seeleib-Kaiser, et al., 2008). Thus, research into how party competition has shaped family policy reform in East Asia not only has potential to make im-portant contributions to the East Asian welfare capitalism literature, but also allows cross-fertilization between the Eastern and Western scholarship in the field of welfare state research. Conclusions With the observed welfare state expansion and the rise of social citizenship in the region, East Asian welfare capitalism has been subject to comprehensive transformation; and democratiza-tion and post-industrialization have undermined both the political and functional underpin-nings of the previous welfare/production regime. Hence, the developmental welfare state ap- 23 proach has experienced a substantial loss of explanatory capacity. Democratization introduced competitive politics, which challenged the dominance of bureaucrats in economic and social policy-making. It has been shown that the developmental alliance, which was at the heart of rapid industrialization and economic growth, collapsed; and that electoral victories of the po-litical left challenged the conservative “ownership” of the welfare state. In the aftermath of democratization, conservative parties, in defence of their “hegemonic” status, engaged in lim-ited welfare state expansion for rather opportunistic reasons in the face of competitive politics. However, electoral victories of the political left in all three countries challenged the conserva-tive dominance and accelerated social policy expansion. These developments, at least tempo-rarily, provided some support for partisan difference in the region. In sum, in terms of both the substance and the politics of social policy, East Asian po-litical economies have “normalized”, calling into question the notion of “East Asian excep-tionalism.” East Asian welfare politics lost its exceptional feature of bureaucratic dominance as democratic transition gave rise to the “usual suspects” of Western welfare politics, espe-cially political parties. The transformation of welfare politic was then translated into East Asian social policy losing its exceptional feature of productivism. The social policy expansion in post-democratization era went far beyond protecting productivist populations. Whilst the early democratization literature focuses on “politics” (with an emphasis on “old” social policies, namely health insurance, old-age security, and unemployment protec-tion; in addition to downplaying party-political agency), we suggest that the far-reaching im-plications of post-industrialization and its interaction with democratization deserve greater attention for advancing our understanding of transformation of East Asian welfare capitalism. The interaction between political dynamics and socio-economic changes is most important for the second wave of welfare reforms expanding “new” social policies (especially child and eldercare policy), with which the region addressed the emergence of new social risks. This second wave of social policy expansion after democratic transition is insufficiently addressed 24 in the existing democratization literature. We have shown that the political left responded first to new electoral needs (in particular, young and female voters’ demands for policies support-ing work/family reconciliation), but conservative parties “caught up” with their competitors, and modernized their social policy platforms in an instrumentalist manner. We find both left and conservative parties, coping with intensified electoral competition, now claim the “driv-ing seat” in social policy-making (especially, in the development of “new” social policies in the face of the ideal of the Confucian family becoming ever less viable). Without denying the persistence of considerable cross-national difference, it is important to acknowledge that East Asian social policies have started to show greater similarity to social welfare in Western polit-ical economies. Certainly, despite recent expansion, East Asian welfare states (as their West-ern counterparts) struggle in coping with both old and new social risks, but this should not deflect from the fact that welfare states have been subject to significant reform to address identified social problems. Not only the substantive changes in social policy but also the new political dynamics pose a great problem to East Asian social policy analysis, where conventional wisdom seems exhausted. Here, we suggest the use of establi hed tools of analysis in the “mainstream” polit-ical economy and welfare state literature (in particular those highlighting partisanship and party competition). This not only improves our understanding of East Asian welfare capital-ism, it also allows us to better integrate the region into the wider comparative literature for important cross-fertilization and more robust theory development. 25 References Abe, A. K. (2010). The Changing Shape of the Care Diamond: The Case of Child and Elderly Care in Japan Gender and Development Programme Paper (Vol. 9). Geneva: UNRISD. Ahn, S.-H., & Lee, S. S.-y. (2012). Explaining Korean Welfare State Development with New Empirical Data and Methods. Asian Social Work and Policy Review, 6(2), 67-85. An, M. Y., & Peng, I. (2016). Diverging Paths? A Comparative Look at Childcare Policies in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. Social Policy & Administration, 50(5), 540-558. Aspalter, C. (2006). The East Asian welfare model. International Journal of Social Welfare, 15, 290-301. Baldwin, P. (1990). The Politics of Social Solidarity: Class Bases of the European Welfare State 1875-1975. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Boling, P. (2015). The Politics of Work-Family Policies: Comparing Japan, France, Germany and the United States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bonoli, G. (2005). The politics of new social policies: providing coverage against new social risks in mature welfare states. Policy & Politics, 33(3), 431-449. Buchanan, P. G., & Nicholls, K. (2003). Labour Politics and Democratic Transition in South Korea and Taiwan. Government and Opposition, 38(2), 203-237. Calder, K. E. (1989). Crisis and Compensation: Public Policy and Political Stability in Japan, 1949-1986. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Chang, C.-f. (2011). Workfare in Taiwan: From Social Assistance to Unemployment Absorber. In C. K. Chan & K. L. Ngok (Eds.), Welfare Reform in East Asia: Towards Workfare? (pp. 78-99). London: Routledge. Chen, F.-l. (2010). Unemployment and the Government's Role in a Risk Society: A Case Study in Taiwan. In R. K. H. Chan, M. Takahashi & L. L.-r. Wang (Eds.), Risk and Public Policy in East Asia (pp. 115-131). Farnham: Ashgate. Daly, M., & Rake, K. (2003). Gender and the Welfare State. Cambridge: Polity. Deyo, F. C. (1987). State and Labour: Modes of Political Exclusion in East Asian Development. In F. C. Deyo (Ed.), The Political Economy of the New Asian Industrialism (pp. 182-202). Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Deyo, F. C. (1992). The Political Economy of Social Policy Formation: East Asia's Newly Industrialized Countries. In R. P. Appelbaum & J. Henderson (Eds.), States and Development in the Asian Pacific Rim (pp. 289-306). Thousand Oaks: Sage. Esping-Andersen, G. (1985). Politics Against Markets: The Social Democratic Road to Power. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). The Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Estévez-Abe, M. (2008). Welfare and Capitalism in Postwar Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Estévez-Abe, M., & Kim, Y.-S. (2014). Presidents, Prime Ministers and Politics of Care Ȃ Why Korea Expanded Childcare Much More than Japan. Social Policy & Administration, 48(6), 666-685. Fell, D. (2004). Party Politics in Taiwan: Party Change and the Democratic Evolution of Taiwan, 1991-2004. London: Routledge. Fleckenstein, T. (2010). Party Politics and Childcare: Comparing the Expansion of Service Provision in England and Germany. Social Policy & Administration, 44(7), 789-807. 26 Fleckenstein, T., & Lee, S. C. (2014). The Politics of Post-Industrial Social Policy: Family Policy Reforms in Britain, Germany, South Korea, and Sweden. Comparative Political Studies, 47(4), 601-630. Fleckenstein, T., & Lee, S. C. (2017a). The Politics of Investing in Families: Comparing Family Policy Expansion in Japan and South Korea. Social Politics, 24(1). Fleckenstein, T., & Lee, S. C. (2017b). The Politics of Labor Reform in Coordinated Welfare Capitalism: Comparing Sweden, Germany, and South Korea. World Politics, 69(1), 144-183. Fleckenstein, T., & Seeleib-Kaiser, M. (2011). Business, skills and the welfare state: the political economy of employment-oriented family policy in Britain and Germany. Journal of European Social Policy, 21(2), 136-149. Fu, T.-h., & Hughes, R. (2010). New Social Risks and Family Change in Taiwan. In R. K. H. Chan, M. Takahashi & L. L.-r. Wang (Eds.), Risk and Public Policy in East Asia (pp. 75-87). Farnham: Ashgate. Goodman, R., & Peng, I. (1996). The East Asian Welfare States: Peripatetic Learning, Adaptive Change, and Nation-Building. In G. Esping-Andersen (Ed.), Welfare States in Transition: National Adaptations in Global Economies (pp. 192-224). London: Sage. Haggard, S. (2005). Globalization, Democracy, and the Evolution of Social Contracts in East Asia. Taiwan Journal of Democracy, 1(1), 21-47. Haggard, S., & Kaufman, R. R. (2008). Development, Democracy and Welfare States: Latin America, East Asia, and Eastern Europe. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Holliday, I. (2000). Productivist Welfare Capitalism: Social Policy in East Asia. Political Studies 48(4), 706-723. Holliday, I. (2005). East Asian social policy in the wake of the financial crisis: farewell to productivism? Policy & Politics, 33(1), 145-162. Holliday, I., & Wilding, P. (2003a). Conclusion. In I. Holliday & P. Wilding (Eds.), Welfare Capitalism in East Asia: Social Policy in the Tiger Economies (pp. 161-182). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Holliday, I., & Wilding, P. (2003b). Tiger Social Policy in Context. In I. Holliday & P. Wilding (Eds.), Welfare Capitalism in East Asia: Social Policy in the Tiger Economies (pp. 18-36). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Huber, E., & Stephens, J. D. (2001). Development and Crisis of the Welfare State: Parties and Policies in Global Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hundt, D. (2009). Korea's Developmental Alliance: State, Capital and the Politics of Rapid Development. London: Routledge. Johnson, C. (1987). Political Institutions and Economic Performance: The Government-Business Relationship in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. In F. C. Deyo (Ed.), The Political Economy of the New Asian Industrialism (pp. 136-164). Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Johnson, C. A. (1982). MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Industrial Policy, 1925-1975. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Jones, C. (1993). The Pacific Challenge: Confucian Welfare States. In C. Jones (Ed.), New Perspectives on the Welfare State in Europe (pp. 198-217). London: Routledge. Jung, D., & Park, C.-u. (2011). Welfare-Work Link in East Asia after the Economic Crisis: Korea and Japan since the 1990s. In G.-J. Hwang (Ed.), New Welfare States in East Asia: Global Challenges and Restructuring (pp. 90-107). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Jung, E.-H., & Cheon, B.-Y. (2006). Economic Crisis and Changes in Employment Relations in Japan and Korea. Asian Survey, 46(3), 457-476. 27 Kamimura, Y. (2010). The Tripartite Relationship and Social Policy in Taiwan: Searching for a New Corporatism? In K. Usami (Ed.), Non-Standard Employment under Globalization: Flexible Work and Social Security in the Newly Industrializing Countries (pp. 142-175). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Kasza, G. J. (2006). One World of Welfare: Japan in Comparative Perspective. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Kim, B.-K. (2008). The Korean Conservatives in Democratic Consolidation. In E. Friedman & J. Wong (Eds.), Political Transitions in Dominant Party Systems: Learning to Lose (pp. 169-187). London: Routledge. Kim, P. H. (2010). The East Asian welfare state debate and surrogate social policy: an exploratory study on Japan and South Korea. Socio-Economic Review, 8(3), 411-435. Kim, Y.-M. (2008). Beyond East Asian Welfare Productivism in South Korea. Policy & Politics, 36(1), 109-125. Kuhnle, S. (2004). Productive Welfare in Korea: Moving Towards a European Welfare State Type. In R. Mishra, S. Kuhnle, N. Gilbert & K. Chung (Eds.), Modernizing the Korean Welfare State: Towards the Productive Welfare Model (pp. 47-64). New Brunswick: Transaction. Kwon, H.-J. (1997). Beyond European Welfare Regimes: Comparative Perspectives on East Asian Welfare Systems. Journal of Social Policy, 26(4), 467-484. Kwon, H.-J. (2009). The reform of the developmental welfare state in East Asia. International Journal of Social Welfare, 18, 12-21. Lee, H.-K. (1999). Globalization and the Emerging Welfare State: The Experience of South Korea. International Journal of Social Welfare, 8(1), 23-37. Lee, S. C. (2012). The Transformation of East Asian Welfare States: The Politics of Welfare Reforms in South Korea. DPhil Thesis, University of Oxford, Oxford. Lee, S. C. (2017). Democratization, Political Parties and Korean Welfare Politics: Korean Family Policy Reforms in Comparative Perspective. Government and Opposition, 1-24. Lee, S. S.-y. (2011). Labour market risks in de-industrializing East-Asian economies: the cases of Korea, Japan and Taiwan. In G.-J. Hwang (Ed.), New Welfare States in East Asia: Global Challenges and Restructuring (pp. 61-89). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Lewis, J. (1992). Gender and the Development of Welfare Regimes. Journal of European Social Policy, 2(3), 159-173. Lewis, J. (2009). Work-Family Balance, Gender and Policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Miura, M. (2012). Welfare through Work: Conservative Ideas, Partisan Dynamics, and Social Protection in Japan. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Noble, G. W. (2010). The Decline of Particularism in Japanese Politics. Journal of East Asian Studies, 10(2), 239-273. OECD. (2011). Doing Better for Families. Paris. Pempel, T. J. (2008). Learning to Lose is for Losers. In E. Friedman & J. Wong (Eds.), Political Transitions in Dominant Party Systems: Learning to Lose (pp. 109-126). London: Routledge. Pempel, T. J., & Tsunekawa, K. (1979). Corporatism without Labor? The Japanese Anomaly. In P. C. Schmitter & G. Lehmbruch (Eds.), Trends toward Corporatist Intermediation (pp. 231-270). Beverly Hills: Sage. Peng, I. (2004). Postindustrial Pressures, Political Regime Shifts, and Social Policy Reform in Japan and South Korea. Journal of East Asian Studies, 4(3), 389-425. Peng, I. (2009). The Political and Social Economy of Care in the Republic of Korea Gender and Development Programme Paper. Geneva: UNSRID. 28 Peng, I. (2012). Social and political economy of care in Japan and South Korea. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 32(11/12), 636-649. Peng, I., & Wong, J. (2008). Institutions and Institutional Purpose: Continuity and Change in East Asian Social Policy. Politics & Society, 36(1), 61-88. Peng, I., & Wong, J. (2010). East Asia. In F. G. Castles, S. Leibfried, J. Lewis, H. Obinger & C. Pierson (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the Welfare State (pp. 656-670). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ringen, S., Kwon, H.-J., Yi, I., Kim, T., & Lee, J. (2011). The Korean State and Social Policy: How South Korea Lifted Itself from Poverty and Dictatorship to Affluence and Democracy. New York: Oxford University Press. Rosenbluth, F., & Thies, M. F. (2010). Japan Transformed: Political Change and Economic Restructuring. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Schoppa, L. (2010). Exit, voice, and family policy in Japan: limited changes despite broad recognition of the declining fertility problem. Journal of European Social Policy, 20(5), 422-432. Seeleib-Kaiser, M. (1995). The Development of Social Assistance and Unemployment Insurance in Germany and Japan. Social Policy & Administration, 29(3), 269-293. Seeleib-Kaiser, M., & Toivonen, T. (2011). Between Reforms and Birth Rates: Germany, Japan, and Family Policy Discourse. Social Politics, 18(3), 331-360. Seeleib-Kaiser, M., Van Dyk, S., & Roggenkamp, M. (2008). Party Politics and Social Welfare: Comparing Christian and Social Democracy in Austria, Germany and the Netherlands. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Strøm, K. (1990). A Behavioral Theory of Competitive Political Parties. American Journal of Political Science, 34(2), 565-598. Tsai, P.-Y. (2011). The Transformation of Social Risks: A Case Study of Work-Family Balance Policies in Taiwan. DPhil thesis, University of Oxford, Oxford. Wade, R. (1990). Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Government in East Asian Industrialization. Princeton: Princeton University Press. White, G., & Goodman, R. (1998). Welfare Orientalism and the search for an East Asian welfare model. In R. Goodman, G. White & H.-J. Kwon (Eds.), The East Asian Welfare Model: Welfare Orienalism and the State (pp. 3-24). London Routledge. Won, S.-Y., & Pascall, G. (2004). A Confucian War over Childcare? Practice and Policy in Childcare and Their Implications for Understanding the Korean Gender Regime. Social Policy & Administration, 38(3), 270-289. Wong, J. (2004). Healthy Democracies: Welfare Politics in Taiwan and South Korea. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Woo-Cumings, M. (2007). After the Miracle: Neoliberalism and Institutional Reform in East Asia. In M. Woo-Cumings (Ed.), Neoliberalism and Institutional Reform in East Asia (pp. 1-31). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Yang, J.-J. (2013). Parochial Welfare Politics and the Small Welfare State in South Korea. Comparative Politics, 45(4), 457-475. Zhu, Y. (2005). Unemployment in Taiwan: Globalisation, Regional Integration and Social Change. In J. Benson & Y. Zhu (Eds.), Unemployment in Asia (pp. 78-96). London: Routledge. 29 Figures and Tables Source: OECD, Taiwanese Executive Yuan. Source: OECD, Taiwanese Executive Yuan. 30 Source: ISSP Family and Gender Roles Survey 2002; Korean General Social Survey 2003 Table 1: Fertility Rates in Japan, Korea, and Taiwan 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 Japan 2.13 1.75 1.54 1.36 1.39 Korea 4.53 2.83 1.59 1.47 1.23 Taiwan 4.00 2.50 1.80 1.68 0.92 OECD 2.71 2.14 1.86 1.65 1.70 Source: OECD, Taiwanese Executive Yuan. Table 2: Divorce Rates in Japan, Korea, and Taiwan 1971 1980 1990 2000 2005 Japan 1.0 1.2 1.3 2.1 2.1 Korea 0.3 0.6 1.1 2.5 2.6 Taiwan 0.4 0.8* 1.4* 2.4 2.8 OECD 1.2 1.7 2.0 2.4 2.3 * Taiwanese Data is from 1981 and 1991, respectively. Source: OECD, Taiwanese Executive Yuan. Table 3: Family Types in Japan, Korea and Taiwan 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 Japan Nuclear Family 71.4 75.4 77.6 81.2 84.1 Extended Family 17.3 17.8 16.6 13.6 10.2 Korea Nuclear Family 71.5 72.9 76.0 82.0 82.2 Extended Family 18.8 11.0 10.2 8.0 6.2 Taiwan Nuclear Family - - 76.2* 76.2 76.0 Extended Family - - 18.4* 17.0 15.3 * Taiwanese data is from 1995 Source: Japanese Statistical Bureau, Statistics Korea, Taiwanese Executive Yuan. 