ABSTRACT: 
Working with diverse student populations productively depends on teachers and teacher educators recognizing and valuing difference. Too often, in teacher education programs, when markers of identity such as gender, ethnicity, \u27race\u27, or social class are examined, the focus is on developing student teachers\u27 understandings of how these discourses shape learner identities and rarely on how these also shape teachers\u27 identities. This article reports on a research project that explored how student teachers understand ethnicity and socio-economic status. In a preliminary stage of the research, we asked eight Year 3 teacher education students who had attended mainly Anglo-Australian, middle class schools as students and as student teachers, to explore their own ethnic and classed identities. The complexities of identity are foregrounded in both the assumptions we made in selecting particular students for the project and in the ways they constructed their own identities around ethnicity and social class. In this article we draw on these findings to interrogate how categories of identity are fluid, shifting and ongoing processes of negotiation, troubling and complex. We also consider the implications for teacher education.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Introduction The importance of education as both a site of and a powerful mediator in the shaping of ethnic, classed and gendered identities remains the subject of extensive research in Australia, the UK and the US (Olmedo, 1997; Ladson-Billings, 2001; Tsolidis, 2001; Echols & Stader, 2002; McLeod & Yates, 2003; Youdell, 2003). 115–129 ISSN 0305-764X (print)/ISSN 1469-3577 (online)/06/010115-15 # 2006 University of Cambridge, Faculty of Education DOI: 10.1080/03057640500491021 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 In Australia, expectations that teachers can plan for and work with diverse student populations are reflected in a number of national and state education policies (see National Board of Education, Employment and Training, 1995; Department of Education, Victoria, 1997; Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs, 1997; MCEETYA, 2000). In doing so, we sought firstly, to better understand our students’ Troubling identities 117 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 perspectives concerning identity categories; secondly, we aimed to problematize what constitutes ‘mainstream’ in discussions about curriculum and pedagogy; and thirdly, we tried to make overt their often taken-for-granted assumptions concerning cultural, ‘race’ and class differences. Two of the other participants, Kylie and Sally who are both of Anglo-Australian heritage, in their early 20s, and who both attended secondary schools in regional country towns, commented in their individual interviews about the impact of Troubling identities 121 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Australian, middle class schools as students and as student teachers, to explore their own ethnic and classed identities. The complexities of identity are foregrounded in both the assumptions we made in selecting particular students for the project and in the ways they constructed their own identities around ethnicity and social class. In this article we draw on these findings to interrogate how categories of identity are fluid, shifting and ongoing processes of negotiation, troubling and complex. We also consider the implications for teacher education. Introduction The importance of education as both a site of and a powerful mediator in the shaping of ethnic, classed and gendered identities remains the subject of extensive research in Australia, the UK and the US (Olmedo, 1997; Ladson-Billings, 2001; Tsolidis, 2001; Echols & Stader, 2002; McLeod & Yates, 2003; Youdell, 2003). As national populations grow more diverse, in part due to migration and the geopolitical realities of shifting national boundaries, the need for educationalists to better understand and work with difference productively becomes increasingly critical. Australia is one of the most ethnically diverse nations in the world (Howe, 1999) with 25% of all school students having a ‘Language background other than English’ (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2002). Yet, the teaching population is over- whelmingly Anglo-Australian (Rizvi, 1992; Santoro et al., 2001a). *Corresponding author. Deakin University, Faculty of Education, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia. Email: acallard@deakin.edu.au Cambridge Journal of Education Vol. 36, No. 1, March 2006, pp. 115–129 ISSN 0305-764X (print)/ISSN 1469-3577 (online)/06/010115-15 # 2006 University of Cambridge, Faculty of Education DOI: 10.1080/03057640500491021 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 In Australia, expectations that teachers can plan for and work with diverse student populations are reflected in a number of national and state education policies (see National Board of Education, Employment and Training, 1995; Department of Education, Victoria, 1997; Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs, 1997; MCEETYA, 2000). While policies and theoretical literature emphasize the importance of teachers engaging with students’ cultural and class identities, we know too little about how teachers and future teachers make sense of this imperative. Furthermore, we don’t know enough about how teacher education students construct their own sociocultural positionings in relation to those who are different from themselves. Recent research has focused on how class and ethnic differences are inscribed in educational practices (Gordon et al., 2000; Reay, 2001; Walkerdine et al., 2001; McLeod & Yates, 2003) but does so in terms of constructions of student identities— not with regards to teaching identities. Other research including Ball et al. (2001) and Teese and Polesel (2003) consider how schooling processes contribute to classed and gendered outcomes for students. While some attention has been paid to how gender, socio-economic status and ‘race’ impact on teaching identities (see Connell, 1985; Brown et al., 2000), the ways in which difference is played out in classroom interactions between student teachers and pupils is under-researched. Recent work by Ladson-Billings (2001) and Pearce (2003) focus on the need for ‘White’ teachers to reflect on their own identities. Ladson-Billings (2001, p. 96) for example argues that ‘Typically, white middle class perspective teachers have little or no understanding of their own culture. Notions of whiteness are taken-for-granted. They are rarely interrogated’. Like those already in the profession, the majority of teacher education students at many Australian universities have attended middle class, Anglo-Australian schools for their primary and secondary education. This means that opportunities to engage with others from different cultural, linguistic and socio-economic backgrounds are fairly restricted. At Deakin University’s Melbourne campus, where the project reported on here was sited, this homogeneity of experience can continue, due to the lack of cultural and linguistic diversity among the teacher education student population. Further, because of the location of the campus in the leafy eastern suburbs of middle class Melbourne, in their practicum,1 teacher education students often—but not always, are placed in schools not very different from their personal schooling experiences. Frequently, teacher education students in our Faculty of Education express little interest in teaching in schools where the students have different racial and ethnic backgrounds to their own. This lack of interest is sometimes motivated by fear of the unfamiliar or fear of stereotyping the ‘other’ and being accused of racism. Such fears are not adequately dealt with in the ways that teaching for diversity is generally taken up in teacher education. Too often, the focus is on developing student teachers’ understandings of how gender, ethnicity, ‘race’ and class shape learner identities but how these also shape teachers’ identities is rarely explored. This leaves subjectivities of teacher education students untouched and unexamined and serves to position 116 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 school students of non-Anglo and non-middle class status too often as ‘problems’ to be managed. How teacher education students’ identities intersect with those of their potential students is unexamined. The study reported here2 grew from our experiences and concerns to ensure that our graduates are better prepared to teach in diverse settings. As former teachers ourselves, we have worked in secondary schools with predominantly non-Anglo Australian students, many of whom were also on Education Maintenance Allowance (EMA), a Government subsidy available to students living in poverty. Because of our teaching experiences, we were aware of how ‘disadvantage’ can be constructed and reconstructed through pedagogy and curriculum. We frequently saw how main- stream ways of knowing were privileged and how this often marginalized our students from Language backgrounds other than English (LBOTE) and those who lived in poverty. As teacher educators, now working mainly with Anglo-Australian, middle class university students, we have become aware of the often taken-for-granted beliefs that our university students have about themselves as belonging to the mainstream or ‘norm’. For example, many of our students lay claim to achieving their academic success solely through ‘individual effort’. What is rarely understood, at least initially by teacher education students, is how their own privileged class status and Anglo- Australianness locates them securely in mainstream discourses of schooling. Their view from the centre of the hegemonic culture often leaves them unable to see how those outside the dominant discourses may be marginalized through curricula, pedagogies and assessment practices that do not take into account different kinds of knowledge, or different approaches to learning or different values and beliefs. Additionally, in tutorial discussions about difference and diversity in education, it is apparent that our students often see those from LBOTE as the ‘exotic other’. That is, some of our students see non-Anglo-Australians as the ones who have a culture or an ethnicity. They frequently describe their own heritage as ‘only Australian’. However, this exoticizing of the ‘other’, those who are different from themselves, is a double-edged sword. While it highlights the new and exciting aspects of difference, the ‘exotic other’ is inadvertently constructed in opposition to the mainstream and the ‘normality’ associated with membership of the dominant culture. This mainstream that our students understand to be ‘only Australian’ can also be read as the ‘real Australian’ (Tsolidis, 2001). Furthermore, while the ‘other’ might be viewed as exotic and exciting in certain contexts, their differences may create problems in terms of classroom management or lack of academic success that student teachers believe have to be overcome. Therefore, the ‘exotic other’ often becomes understood as deficit within classroom settings. None of these ways of making sense of difference and diversity seem to be particularly productive or helpful in enabling student teachers to connect with cultural and classed differences in new ways. To think about how to address these challenges, we designed a project that investigated how teacher education students construct their own identities around understandings of ethnicity and socio- economic class. In doing so, we sought firstly, to better understand our students’ Troubling identities 117 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 perspectives concerning identity categories; secondly, we aimed to problematize what constitutes ‘mainstream’ in discussions about curriculum and pedagogy; and thirdly, we tried to make overt their often taken-for-granted assumptions concerning cultural, ‘race’ and class differences. Recent theorizing about identity categories has challenged traditional and essentialist constructs of gender, ethnicity, ‘race’ and class (Twine, 1997; Weedon, 1999; Scott, 2000; Tsolidis, 2001; Allard, 2004). In our own research (Allard & Cooper, 2001; Santoro et al., 2001b; Santoro, 2003, in press), we have explored identities as fluid, dynamic, changing and changeable, in different contexts and times. According to researchers such as Britzman (1991) and Causey et al. (2000), a way of helping pre-service teacher education students is to begin from their personal constructs. In order to do this, we needed a means to understand their perspectives concerning ethnicity and class. We sought to trouble their taken-for- granted certainties, and to disrupt their notions of self in ways that would be productive. We recognized the difficulties of stepping outside the centre and trying to see life from the margins. As Pearce (2003) argues, this is an extraordinarily difficult task, not just for students but also for teachers. Methodology The participants in the research were eight teacher education students in the third year of the secondary course who appeared to represent mainstream cultural and classed formations. We worked with them as they prepared for, undertook and debriefed from their practicum experiences. The aspects of the study reported on here, aimed to: N Investigate how teacher education students construct their own identities around understandings of ethnicity and socio-economic class. N Explore the ways in which teacher education students make sense of students who have different cultural and socio-economic identities to themselves. In order to address these aims, our research design included an introductory focus group where we asked students to reflect on their understandings of ethnicity and social class. Following the focus group, the student teachers were placed in one of two inner city schools, Market Secondary College or Transition Secondary College.3 These schools were selected as practicum experience sites for this project since each has a culturally diverse student population of mainly LBOTE students. Many of the students are first generation Australians. As one indicator of socio-economic status, most students in both of the schools receive an Education Maintenance Allowance. As researchers, we visited the student teachers during their practicum. They also kept journals in which they recorded their experiences and reflections. Each student teacher was interviewed individually at the end of their practicum. All eight were brought together again for a final focus group to share and reflect on their experiences. All interviews and focus group discussions were audio-taped and transcribed. The transcriptions and journal entries were analysed using Critical 118 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 Discourse Analysis (CDA). This approach requires researchers to bring knowledge of social and cultural assumptions and frameworks to bear in a rigorous and systematic interrogation of written and/or spoken texts. In the analysis of texts presented here, we borrow from a number of different critical discourse theorists including Fairclough (1992, 2003) and Luke (1999). The data that informs this article was drawn from the first focus group and from individual interviews. Troubling our own assumptions As researchers and educators, we understand the difficulties of defining ethnicity and class and have often problematized these in our work. Elsewhere (Santoro et al., 2001b; Allard, 2002), we have interrogated how the category of ‘ethnicity’ is made to represent a variety of different meanings, depending on who is speaking and who is spoken about. That is, ‘ethnicity’ can be used as a marker of national belonging, of ‘culture’, of country of birth, or language spoken, as examples. Similarly, we are also aware of the multiple meanings represented in the phrase ‘social class’ (Santoro, in press). Nevertheless, in the process of selecting research participants from the student teachers who volunteered, we discovered again how relying on simple markers of ethnicity, ‘race’ or class can be complex and troublesome. We tell this story to highlight how we have been reminded again of the multifaceted dimensions of ‘identities’ and the challenges of ‘praxis’ (Stanley, 1990). To recruit participants for this project, we visited Year 3 teacher education classes, explaining the project, and inviting student teachers to participate. On an ‘Expression of interest form’, students were asked to enter their name, contact details and the name of their secondary school as well as the school where they had done their previous practicum. After receiving replies from 24 students, we selected eight: two male and six female, one of whom was Susan. Her first name appeared to locate her as Anglo- Australian, and her surname suggested that she was possibly of German heritage. She named an eastern suburbs private school as the place she’d completed her secondary education and specified that she had worked in an eastern suburbs school for her last practicum. However, at our first focus group, we were surprised to find that Susan was in fact not ‘White’, Anglo-Australian but of Sri Lankan heritage. In our haste to pin down the ‘right’ research participants, we had naively failed to take into account the complexities of ethnic identity and the ways in which it is ‘constantly (re)invented and (re)negotiated’ (Ang, 1993, p. 14). As we reflect on this experience, we wonder whether it was our unexamined assumptions about Susan’s private secondary school (where tuition costs can be up to $15,000 per year) as middle class that led us to assume that she was a member of the dominant Anglo (i.e., ‘White’) majority? What assumptions were we making about students who attend such a school? Do only Anglo-Australian, along with maybe a handful of ‘international’ (that is, privileged Asian) students, attend non- Government schools in the Eastern suburbs? While on the basis of her surname, we Troubling identities 119 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 considered briefly that she might have been of German heritage, clearly this possibility did not make her different enough to be too different. If she had had a Chinese or an Arabic name, would we have made such an assumption? Would we have judged her as ‘too different’ then and thus disqualified her from participation on that basis? While we hesitate to admit such a naı¨ve assumption, we do so because it is by asking such questions of ourselves, interrogating our own subjective assumptions, that we are better able to understand the complexities around difference that confront our students’ experiences of ‘others’. This experience also clearly demonstrates how, as researchers, our values and understandings are embedded implicitly in the projects through which we seek to better understand others. Troubling ethnicity The first focus group held with the student teachers before they embarked on their teaching rounds was the first time that all eight participants came together with us. Most of the students had not met each other before nor had we met any of them. We opened the discussion by introducing ourselves, highlighting how we understood our own ethnic and classed identities and spoke about why we saw the project as being important to teacher education in general. We asked students to introduce themselves and discuss their understandings of ethnicity and socio-economic status. It came as some surprise to us when four of them said they’d never been asked to think about this before. Susan, however, had a very different and clearly articulated point of view. As the only student there whose skin colour clearly marked her as not belonging to the Anglo-Australian majority, she made it clear to the group that ethnicity was a dimension of her identity of which she was reminded constantly. She said, ‘I’m tired of being asked ‘‘Where do you come from?’’’ While for many of the other students, talking about their own ethnicity and class was a new and challenging experience, for Susan the focus on ethnicity was too often part of her experience of being ‘othered’. The child of immigrants from Sri Lanka, she talked about her resentment of being questioned by people she met for the first time. Too often they assumed that she, due to the colour of her skin, had been born elsewhere. Her disclosure initiated discussion amongst the group about the taken-for-granted assumptions that operate regarding skin colour and culture, culture and nationality, and indeed, about culture and social class. Susan’s comments provided her peers with a means to begin troubling their understandings of ethnicity, nationality and ‘Australianness’. During her three-week practicum, Susan was again asked ‘Where do you come from?’ by her Year 11 students at Market Secondary College. In reflecting upon this incident, she wrote in her journal: I was surprised today when a Year 11 student asked me ‘Where do you come from? Are you Indian?’ I was stunned and didn’t expect a question like that. I responded with: Me: I’m Australian. Student: You don’t look Aussie. 120 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 Me: How does an Aussie look? Student: Are you Brazilian? Me: Should I open the betting ring now? Anyone else want to guess? Seriously, my parents are from Sri Lanka. Student: You don’t look Sri Lankan. You’re not that dark. Susan went on to reflect upon this exchange by writing: How the hell does a person respond to that? In retrospect, although the moment was not tense, I could have questioned the students more but I was a little flabbergasted at the question at the time. In this exchange, it is not the question itself that surprises Susan. After all, she stated during the focus group that, despite her resentment, she was used to being asked that. Rather, here she appears to be surprised that students, many of whom are born elsewhere, have dared to ask this and thus position her as ‘other’, that is, like one of them. An alternative reading suggests that Susan is surprised by what she considers ‘inappropriate’ questioning of a teacher by a student. She attempts to assert power by claiming the authoritative status of Australian. She refuses to be constructed as ‘other’ and deflects attention away by asking the student to define ‘Australianness’. When the student persists in trying to categorize Susan, she again resists, resorting to humour before finally conceding that her parents were born elsewhere. Such dialogue indicates how Susan struggles to assert herself as a member of the mainstream against the students’ reading of her as different—and therefore like them. Her students appear to accept unquestioningly that a ‘real’ Australian cannot look like Susan. The stereotype of a ‘real’ Australian, and one that Susan is clearly tired of, still persists regardless of her claim to being legitimately Australian. For Susan, unlike the other student teachers, such a struggle over national belonging, ethnicity and culture troubles her own sense of identity. Susan’s discussion at the initial focus group about her experiences and feelings of being ‘othered’ became the catalyst for much dialogue and reflection among the rest of the group. As noted earlier, unlike Susan, several of the student teachers found the request to discuss their ethnicity puzzling. For example, Jody, who was of Anglo- Australian heritage, said: I had to stop and think about my own perception of ethnicity and culture because I’d always assumed that I had none—or one that wasn’t all that interesting. … It made me stop and think, oh well, there’s people from another country here and they’ve got their own culture, but I’ve also got one as well. While Jody’s comments suggest that she does not distinguish between ethnicity and culture, nevertheless it appears that her experience at Transition Secondary College has served to trouble her taken-for-granted assumptions about her self as being devoid of an ethnic identity. Through knowledge of the ‘others’ culture and ethnicity, Jody came to some realization about her own positioning. Two of the other participants, Kylie and Sally who are both of Anglo-Australian heritage, in their early 20s, and who both attended secondary schools in regional country towns, commented in their individual interviews about the impact of Troubling identities 121 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 Susan’s views on their thinking. For example, Sally said about her students at Market Secondary College: Sally: I didn’t know what part of Asia they came from, and you feel like it’s a bit politically incorrect to ask. Ninetta: Why? Why do you say that? Sally: Because it’s so bound up, I think this whole cultural diversity thing is so bound up in political correctness, that everybody forgets about the fact that it’s OK to ask somebody where they are from. But then people like Susan says she hates it when people say ‘Where are you from?’ I think it’s better to say ‘What cultural background do you have?’ or something. I don’t know, but … as a teacher you do want to know that kind of stuff. Sally in these comments begins to recognize the dilemmas invoked around questions of ethnicity and identity. On the one hand, she reduces the ‘whole cultural diversity thing’ to a question of ‘political correctness’, implying that it is not acceptable to ask about this dimension of identity. Because of Susan’s comments, Sally understands that asking someone ‘Where are you from?’ constructs them as ever the ‘outsider’. Nevertheless, she also believes as a teacher it is important to get to know her students, including something of their cultural heritage and first language. She seeks a way through the dilemma suggesting a focus on ‘cultural background’ as a way of recognizing difference without ‘othering’. In terms of how her practicum at Market Secondary College made her more aware of her own ethnicity and class, Sally said: I don’t know about my own. It’s made me more aware of other people’s and that there are places in Australia like Market Secondary College where you’re not part of a majority. … Just because I might be in the majority in the country town I grew up in, that doesn’t mean I’m always going to be in the majority … it [being in the minority] didn’t bother me that much. This comment suggests recognition of differences and perhaps, acceptance that in some situations, she will be seen as the ‘outsider’. This doesn’t appear to trouble Sally as much as Susan, perhaps because Sally is so used to being part of the dominant culture that being seen as ‘other’ doesn’t necessarily threaten her sense of identity. Kylie, like Sally also claims that Susan’s comments have impressed upon her the need for sensitivity when working cross-culturally; she states that she felt ‘awkward’ asking her students about their cultures because of Susan’s expressed resentment. Kylie, however, unlike Sally, remained unconvinced that there might be pedagogical reasons to come to a better understanding of her students’ cultural or classed identities; rather, she often wrote in her journal and stated at the interview that she believes everyone is essentially ‘the same’. Kylie’s refusal to recognize how gender, ethnicity, ‘race’ or class shapes identity formations and relationships in the classroom made it difficult to engage with her in discussions around difference or diversity. Instead, she seemed to feel reassured by insisting that difference doesn’t matter and that students are ‘all the same’. Susan’s complaint about being continually situated as an outsider because of how her identity is read by others seemed to provide Kylie with justification to avoid working with and through questions concerning diversity. 122 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 This explanation that ‘students are all the same’ is often deployed by student teachers and seems to be used to negate difference, and/or to manage the fear that difference sometimes evokes. It also allows them to position themselves within a key Australian discourse, that of egalitarianism. By insisting that any difference doesn’t really matter, they are able to avoid confronting the challenges of teaching for difference, and of acknowledging that some differences do matter (Delpit, 1995). Such differences can shape how people will see the world, make sense of new knowledge and indeed can work to impact on life chances. Troubling class While ‘socio-economic status’ is always a difficult concept to clarify, in our selection procedures, as already noted, as an indicator of social class we attempted to select students who attended schools located in affluent, middle class suburbs or who attended private schools. Choosing participants using only this criteria is of course a limited reading of class—that is, tied mainly to financial status, and perhaps educational aspirations. Nevertheless, it was one indicator that we saw as somewhat reliable. As one of the questions in the first focus group, we asked the students to describe their socio-economic status. The personal discussions that ensued provided opportunities to explore how fluid the notion of class is, how personal values and moral judgments can operate to exclude or misinterpret other people’s perspectives, and how by making different ideas about class explicit, we can begin to trouble the taken-for-granted assumptions that people bring concerning questions of class identities. What emerged early in the discussion was that, despite differences in the geographical locations where each student grew up, wide disparities in parental occupations and educational levels, or their different ages, all of the eight participants named themselves as middle class or lower middle class. The discussion proved to be an illuminating one. For example, Kylie, in defining herself and family as ‘middle class’ did so by arguing that her family had ‘earned everything we’ve got … we’re not one of those hanging around waiting for hand-outs’ in terms of welfare. Her mother was trained as a nurse and her father worked as a labourer in a provincial town. Thus, Kylie’s definition of class seemed to suggest that (a) people not on welfare were independent contributors to society, and therefore, ‘middle class’; and (b) people on welfare were ‘bludgers’ and therefore couldn’t be considered middle class. This prompted a response from one of the other participants, Margaret, a mature age student and single mother living in a housing commission flat on a Government benefit while she studied. Margaret declared herself as ‘middle class’ due to her family background (German migrants) and her mother’s aspirations for her. She challenged Kylie’s moral stance that those who took welfare were bludgers and members of the ‘underclass’. Margaret argued that she was currently on a Government pension not because she was a bludger but because she had made a Troubling identities 123 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 ‘mistake’ in marrying a drug addict who had since left her and her children. For Margaret, class wasn’t about financial affluence, or lack thereof, but about values and aspirations. Another interesting example concerning class was how Susan commented on her own class positioning in relation to those of her inner city students. When asked about how the practicum at Market Secondary College made her more aware of her ethnicity and class, she replied: I think it made me aware of my own class more than ethnicity. I think it has. Just going in there and your eyes are opened to what happens on the other side. You can only imagine or read about things in a magazine or newspaper, but to really experience it is different—from going through it—and to have that idea that they have gone home—not into a home—they have gone into a place really. Yet I can catch a train out and come home for a dinner. We hear in Susan’s comments a set of binaries that set her experiences of ‘home’ and ‘place’ in opposition to those of her students. She can go ‘home’—they go into a ‘place’—not a real home. Where they ‘go’ (but not live) is the stuff of the tabloids, the place of crime—horror depicted in newspapers daily. Her use of the phrase ‘catch a train out’ suggests that she knows that she has a choice to leave and exercises it. In contrast, she sees her students as entrapped and having no choice. According to Susan, they can’t get ‘out’—not from their location geographically and perhaps—by implication, not from their classed location either. Additionally in some ways, Susan appears to take for granted her right as a middle class visitor to the neighbourhood to make a judgment about these students’ homes—a positioning which to her is invisible. Being middle class, like ‘Whiteness’, has a normative sense about it and remains largely unexamined by those whose lived experiences are centred within this space. So, while Susan claims that the practicum experience has caused her to become more aware of her class, what she doesn’t recognize is her own taken-for-granted beliefs about her status. She feels free to judge her students’ experiences/family/community as ‘lacking’ in comparison to hers. On the basis of these reflections, we have to ask whether we have managed to ‘trouble’ Susan’s assumptions at all. Similarly, when speaking about the ‘poor’ manners of the students at Market Secondary College, Susan’s initial judgments are again based on her own classed position. Perhaps because of her cultural and schooling experiences, Susan perceived the ways in which her Market Secondary College students interacted as ‘rudeness’. She expressed shock at their use of vulgar language, and interpreted inappropriate behaviours as due to their ethnicity and/or class. Such uninterrogated assumptions are illustrated when she writes in her journal: ‘… good manners means that you’re a better person. I don’t know—as a child you were brought up believing that these are the things to do.’ Her use of the universal ‘you’ suggests that she believes ‘all children’ do—or should, learn the same manners—and importantly for Susan, manners are a measure of morality: goodness. Lack of manners she equates with being ‘bad’. 124 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 In a later entry in her journal, while Susan again comments on her ‘shock’ and ‘surprise’ at the manner in which the students interact with her and each other, this later reflection suggests to us that she has become less judgemental and more insightful about how her values have been shaped by her middle class positioning. She writes: Another area that I am troubled by is the way students can swear or enter classrooms without knocking. I think my reaction is due to my schooling and home life. Somehow, my mother’s voice has never entered my thoughts so frequently within one day. This type of environment (i.e., Market Secondary College) is one that I will have to adapt to regardless of my instinctive reactions. Here, Susan seems to suggest that she is beginning to understand that there are other, valid ways of being in the world, that class is not a moral stance and that as a professional, she will need to take a less judgemental approach to the different ways that students may perform their classed identities. Her final comment in the journal entry however, still carries the suggestion that she doesn’t yet see class as a sociocultural construct, and still views her own (middle class) reactions to the environment as somehow innate. Interestingly, Margaret, whose life experiences seem to us to be more diverse than Susan’s, commented that she had little difficulty establishing relations with the same students at Market Secondary College. About this she says: I tried to just accept what was going on and accept what they were doing, rather than imposing any standards of what I thought they should be doing, or what I think. Susan had a lot of trouble with things because she thought that they should be calling her ‘Miss’, and they should stop talking and things. I didn’t have any of those preconceptions. Perhaps Margaret is more aware of socio-economic class differences because of her own experiences. Growing up in a ‘respectable’ migrant family with middle class aspirations, living in a poverty stricken neighbourhood as a single mother, attending university with middle class colleagues, she appears to more clearly understand the fluidity of the category. For Margaret, class is not equated with a particular moral stance as it appears to be for Susan—and indeed, for Kylie as well who felt able to judge those on Government pensions as morally reprehensible. Margaret appears to us to accept the context and the class status of the students that she worked with without imposing or judging them on the basis of her belief system. Discussion In thinking about the project and our aim to trouble our students’ understandings of ethnicity and class as sociocultural constructs, we wondered just who we have managed to unsettle. Did we disrupt their taken-for-granted beliefs about the ‘norm’? (How) did we dis/place their own sense of centrality? Did we enable them to think differently about difference? In reflecting on these questions we would suggest that the insights and changes that we aimed for were uneven and unpredictable. For example, while Jody came to Troubling identities 125 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 recognize that she did have an ethnicity and a culture, she didn’t move much beyond this understanding. How her membership in the dominant culture influenced her engagement with students different to herself is something that she has not yet explored. Sally, we suggest, was able to recognize that getting to know about her students culturally would make her a better teacher. She sets herself up to find out about the ‘other’ or the ‘unknown’ in order to understand her students’ learning needs and difficulties. In this way she appears to recognize the significance of culture on learning. However, in her need to know, she still seems to construct culture as something of a problem that must be overcome if she is able to ‘help’ these students. She is untroubled by the recognition that while she may find herself in the minority in specific contexts, as she was at Market Secondary College, her membership in the mainstream culture will always position her powerfully. In contrast to Sally, Kylie with the best of egalitarian intentions, at the beginning and the end of the project still asserted that ‘everyone is the same’. Therefore, ethnicity is best ignored. What would it take to move Kylie to a deeper understanding of cultural difference as a positive? However, in terms of socio-economic class, we felt that Kylie, because of her interactions with Margaret, gained some insight. Margaret was able to challenge Kylie’s taken-for-granted beliefs and present another interpretation to her of people receiving welfare payments. If nothing else, we felt that Kylie would be less hasty next time in expressing publicly her own value judgements or damning those who are economically not well off. Susan’s comments about always being positioned as an outsider also served as a catalyst for much discussion and journal reflections on the part of other participants. The focus group discussion provided a forum for Susan to express her frustration. However, being positioned by her students as an outsider, Susan found most troubling. This caused her to reflect on how she might work with her own students to challenge their taken-for-granted assumptions about what a ‘real’ Australian looks like. Here, Susan is asking the same sorts of questions of her students (and herself) as we are asking through this project. Struggle takes place on many different levels. Some troubling of Susan’s sense of class is also evident in her journal entries. There is some indication that she is beginning to realize that she will need to become more flexible and accepting of others and how they present themselves if she is to respect and work with social class differences. We feel some satisfaction in reflecting on these small but significant shifts. The five teacher education students we have discussed here have begun to understand how ethnicity and class are complex and fluid identity markers. We have also learned how powerful the research context can be as a site of teaching. By bringing together interested students in a supportive environment, they were able to publicly own and reflect on their values and beliefs and in doing so teach their colleagues, including us as researchers, about difference. Engaging in such pedagogies opens up possibilities for discussion that can be personally risky for our students. We are reminded of the need to establish teaching and research environments where participants feel safe 126 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 enough and trusting enough to speak about these very complex, troubling and deeply challenging notions of identity. A key question that follows from this initial exploration with student teachers about the dynamics of their own identity constructions and one that that is currently under examination4 is how to enable teacher education students to utilize these insights in their classroom interactions with their students. A fundamental issue that emerges is: what does working productively with difference look like in the classroom? More to the point, what differences matter when? Is it enough to recognize that cultural, classed and ethnic identities shape the way students learn and therefore must be taken into account in planning meaningful curriculum and pedagogical practices? Clearly, from our students’ perspectives, while most made some headway in coming to deeper insights concerning difference, the focus on their own identities, while a critical stage in their professional development as teachers who can work in diverse settings, served more as an awareness raising exercise rather than an explicit development of necessary professional knowledge and pedagogical skills. This project did not provide them with strategies that they could then deploy in classrooms as important dimensions to fulfil their professional responsibilities to teach all students—not just those who fit easily into mainstream culture. Educators such as Gloria Ladson-Billings (2001) have called for a fundamental reshaping of teacher education programs where student teachers spend far more time in the diverse communities where they intend to work. While we recognize this direction as a critical turning point in preparing teachers to take seriously the complexities of culture, class, ethnicity and ‘race’, the difficulties in reshaping teacher education programs in an era of neo-conservative politics and economies that demand teacher efficiency over efficacy can not be underestimated. Nevertheless, we remain convinced that change is not only necessary but possible. To that end, we are using the findings of this project, together with the follow up project that explores experienced teachers’ practices of working with diversity to shape a mandatory teacher education unit, entitled ‘Teaching for diversity.’ In this unit, while we begin with an exploration of ‘Whiteness’ and ‘difference’, we will also be incorporating a range of practical strategies, informed by theoretical perspectives, to enable our fourth year student teachers to work through how difference and diversity plays out in classroom practices. Finally, through this project, we as researchers have learned again of the importance of continually interrogating our own assumptions and the often too- quick readings that we ourselves do of students’ class and cultural identities. No doubt, as we continue to reflect, with our student teachers, we will continue to learn how difference and identity might be explored and utilized in providing more meaningful learning experiences for all. Notes 1. We use the terms ‘practicum’, ‘teaching rounds’ and ‘teaching experiences’ interchangeably; these refer to the three week blocks which teacher education students spend full time in Troubling identities 127 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 schools under the supervision of an experienced teacher, developing their classroom curriculum and pedagogical skills. 2. This project, ‘A Different Quality Practicum: Investigating student teachers understandings of sameness and difference’ was funded through a Deakin University, Faculty of Education Quality Learning Research Priority Grant in 2003. 3. Pseudonyms have been used throughout for students and for the schools. 4. In 2004, we received funding for a follow-on research project entitled ‘Quality Teaching for difference: Investigating teachers’ beliefs and practices in culturally diverse classrooms.’ In this project, we explored, with experienced teachers, how they engage through their classroom practices productively with students whose ethnicity and class identities are different to their own. Analysis of data is currently underway and initial results have been reported in a conference paper: A. Allard and N. Santoro, ‘Making sense of difference? Teaching identities in postmodern contexts’, presented at the Australian Association of Research in Education (AARE) National Conference, Melbourne, Australia, November 2004. References Allard, A. (2002) ‘Aussies’ and ‘wogs’ and the ‘group in-between’: Year 10 students’ constructions of cross-cultural friendships, Discourse: studies in the cultural politics of education, 23(2), 193–209. Allard, A. (2004) Speaking of gender: teachers’ metaphorical constructs of male and female students, Gender & Education, 16(3), 347–363. Allard, A. & Cooper, M. (2001) ‘Learning to cooperate’: a study of how primary teachers and children construct relations of power, Asia Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 29(2), 153–169. Ang, I. (1993) To be or not to be Chinese: diaspora, culture and postmodern ethnicity, Southeast Asian Journal of Social Science, 21, 1–17. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2002) Australian social trends. Available online at: www.abs. gov.au (accessed 20 May 2003). Ball, S., Maguire, M. & Macrae, S. (2001) Choice, pathways and transitions post-16 (London, Routledge Falmer). Britzman, D. P. (1991) Practice makes practice: a critical study of learning to teach (Albany, State University of New York Press). Brown, A., Cervero, R. & Johnson-Bailey, J. (2000) Making the invisible visible: race, gender and teaching in adult education, Adult Education Quarterly, 50(4), 273–288. Causey, V., Thomas, C. & Armento, B. (2000) ‘Cultural diversity is basically a foreign term to me’: the challenges of diversity for pre-service teacher education, Teaching & Teacher Education, 16, 33–45. Connell, R. W. (1985) Teachers’ work (Sydney, George Allen & Unwin). Delpit, L. (1995) Other people’s children: cultural conflict in the classroom (New York, Routledge). Department of Education, Victoria (1997) Multicultural policy for Victorian schools (Melbourne, Department of Education). Echols, C. & Stader, D. (2002) Education majors’ attitudes about diversity, Education Leadership Review, 3, 1–7. Fairclough, N. (1992) Discourse and social change (Cambridge, Polity Press). Fairclough, N. (2003) Analysing discourse. Textual analysis for social research (London, Routledge). Gordon, T., Holland, J. & Lahelma, E. (2000) Making spaces. Citizenship and difference in schools (New York, St. Martin’s Press). Howe, J. (1999) Early childhood, family and society in Australia: reassessment (Katoomba, NSW, Social Science Press). Ladson-Billings, G. (2001) Crossing over to Canaan. The Journey of new teachers in diverse classrooms (San Francisco, Jossey-Bass). 128 A. C. Allard and N. Santoro D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 Luke, A. (1999) Critical discourse analysis, in: J. Keeves & G. Lakomski (Eds) Issues in educational research (Oxford, Pergamon), 161–173. McLeod, J. & Yates, L. (2003) Who is ‘Us’? Students negotiating discourses of racism and national identification in Australia, Race, Ethnicity & Education, 6, 29–49. Ministerial Committee Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs (1997) Gender equity: a framework for Australian schools (Canberra, Australian Government Printing Service). Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs (2000) The National statement of principles and standards for more culturally inclusive schooling in the twenty- first century. Available online: www.dest.gov.au/archive/ministers/kemp/ (accessed 15 January, 2005). National Board of Education, Employment and Training (1995) Meeting the educational needs of Aboriginal adolescents. Commissioned report no. 35 (Canberra, Australian Government Printing Service). Olmedo, I. (1997) Challenging old assumptions: preparing teachers for inner city schools, Teaching & Teacher Education, 13, 245–258. Pearce, S. (2003) Compiling the White inventory: the practice of whiteness in a British primary school, Cambridge Journal of Education, 33, 273–288. Reay, D. (2001) The paradox of contemporary femininities in education: combining fluidity with fixity, in: B. Francis & C. Skelton (Eds) Investigating gender (Buckingham, Open University Press). Rizvi, F. (1992) Racism, multiculturalism and the cultural politics of teaching, in: L. Logan & N. Dempster (Eds) Teachers in Australian schools: issues for the 1990s (Canberra, ACE). Santoro, N. (2003) Teacher or trainer? Confusing professional identities, Continuing Studies in the Education of Adults, 25, 211–224. Santoro, N. (in press) Training for the new work order: the adult education classroom as a site of class(ed) work, Studies in the Education of Adults. Santoro, N., Kamler, B. & Reid, J. (2001a) Making difference count: a demographic study of overseas born teachers, Australian Journal of Education, 45, 62–75. Santoro, N., Reid, J. & Kamler, B. (2001b) Teachers talking difference: teacher education and the poetics of anti-racism, Teaching Education Journal, 12, 191–212. Scott, J. (2000) Class and stratification, in: G. Payne (Ed.) Social divisions (Houndsmills, MacMillan). Stanley, L. (1990) Feminist praxis. Research, theory and epistemology in feminist sociology (London, Routledge). Teese, R. & Polesel, J. (2003) Undemocratic schooling. Equity and quality in mass secondary education in Australia (Melbourne, Melbourne University Press). Tsolidis, G. (2001) Schooling, diaspora and gender (Philadelphia, Open University Press). Twine, F. (1997) Brown-skinned white girls: class, culture, and the construction of white identity in suburban communities, in: R. Frankenberg (Ed.) Displacing whiteness, essays in social and cultural criticism (London, Duke University Press). Walkerdine, V., Lucey, H. & Melody, J. (2001) Growing up girl. Psychosocial explorations of gender and class (Hampshire, England, Palgrave). Weis, L. & Fine, M. (1993) Beyond silenced voices: class, race and gender in United States Schools (Albany, State University of New York Press). Weedon, C. (1999) Feminism, theory and the politics of difference (Oxford, Blackwell). Youdell, D. (2003) Identity traps or how black students fail: the interaction between biographical, subcultural, and learner identities, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 24, 3–20. Troubling identities 129 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 1: 19 1 1 Ma y 20 10 