ABSTRACT: 
This paper begins from the claim that the currently dominant approaches to the study of political resistance in global politics, namely the (Neo-)Gramscian and Foucauldian traditions, suffer from a common problem in that the forms of resistance they conceptualise are highly susceptible to appropriation by, or reinscription within, prevailing forms of global ordering. In an attempt to respond to this shortcoming, or, more properly, to explore how this reinscription of resistance might itself be resisted, the paper offers an account of political resistance developed using the thought of Jacques Derrida. Having established the parallel between the way in which prevailing relations of sovereign power and governmental ordering all too quickly co-opt and engulf resistance, and the way in which metaphysics calls thought back to order and tends towards onto-political totalisation, it is argued that by means of a deconstructive approach, acts of resistance may be further radicalised by adding to them second- and third-order onto-political critiques—namely of the resistance-act itself and the agent or actor of resistance herself. The core claim made is that inasmuch as deconstruction attempts to interrupt forms of thinking and knowing right up to and including processes of conscious and unconscious subjectification, it can provide valuable means by which the micro-gestures of onto-politics can be resisted at the (fundamentally interrelated) levels of political thought and concrete praxis. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This odig of oeetio o the oeetio of oeetio o the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oeetio i the oeetio of oee 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Introduction The study of political resistance in the field of global politics has expanded and diversified over the last decade; the escalation of global dissent and protest activities, from the Arab uprisings to the Occupy movements, to ongoing struggles against the neo-liberalisation of higher education and the privatisation of public sector institutions, has injected renewed energy into academic research on the topic. In the Anglophone literature, the emergent scholarship has fallen broadly into two main traditions, namely a (Neo-)Gramscian approach and a Foucault-inspired orientation. These divergent approaches suffer, however, from a common problem in that the forms of resistance they conceptualise are highly susceptible to appropriation by, or reinscription within, prevailing forms of global ordering. In particular, existing accounts of the subject or agent of resistance, whether framed in terms of Gramscian counter-hegemonic social movements or the Foucauldian practitioner of counter-conduct, frequently fall prey to enacting unwitting reproductions of precisely the forms of both macro and micro-disciplinary processes of ordering they seek to resist. As Lara Montesinos ColeŵaŶ aŶd KaƌeŶ TuĐkeƌ Ŷote, ͚goǀeƌŶŵeŶtal poǁeƌ ŵaǇ ďe eǆeƌĐised aŶd the status Ƌuo staďilised iŶ aŶd thƌough eǀeŶ the ŵost gƌassƌoots oƌ suďalteƌŶ pƌaĐtiĐes of ĐoŶtestatioŶ͛ ;ϮϬϭϭ, p. 401). More forcefully put, in Judith Butler's words, one may believe that one is resisting, for instance, FasĐisŵ, ͚oŶlǇ to fiŶd that the ideŶtifiĐatoƌǇ souƌĐe of oŶe's oǁŶ oppositioŶ is FasĐisŵ itself, aŶd that FasĐisŵ depeŶds esseŶtiallǇ oŶ the kiŶd of ƌesistaŶĐe oŶe offeƌs͛ ;ϮϬϬϬ, p. ϭϳϯͿ.ϭ In an attempt to respond to this problem of the reappropriation of resistance back into the folds of global ordering, or, more properly, how this reinscription might itself be resisted, this paper builds upon the existing critical literature by offering a conceptualisation of political resistance and its agents or subjects utilising the thought of Jacques Derrida. The argument made begins from Derrida's claim that politics and metaphysics are fundamentally interrelated; the paper shows that a parallel may be drawn between the way in which prevailing relations of sovereign power and governmental ordering all too quickly co-opt and engulf resistance, and the way in which metaphysics calls thought back to order and tends towards onto-political totalisation. Both political and metaphysical ordering, it is suggested, operate through a cumulative plethora of micro-disciplinary gestures, sometimes clearly, but often imperceptibly, closing down avenues of thought and steering potentially disruptive action back towards the status quo. Accordingly, resistance to such ordering processes must meet both these obvious and barely visible but endless series of cooptations as they occur, pulling, in a variety of different directions, away from the appropriation of thought and action back into the same. It is here that a deconstructive approach to resistance has purchase; insofar as the ceaseless movements of deconstruction seek to knock relentless processes of ontologisation off course, they endeavour to interrupt and thereby resist such intricate processes of conceptual consolidation. Consequently, while not claiming that such a formulation can finally avoid or resolve this complex problem, it is suggested that Derrida's thought provides means by which acts of resistance may be further radicalised, as they are conceived of and enacted, by adding to them second- and third-order onto-political critiques—namely of the resistance-act itself and the agent or actor of resistance herself—intended to pull away from such ontologisation. The paper argues that such second- and third-order critiques can have at least three politically radical consequences: an insistence on the limitlessness of responsibility which takes seriously the urgency of the political; the politicisation of intervention precisely as a consequence of its ultimate indefensibility; and the self-conscious attempt of the subject to interrogate and thereby endeavour to (re)write herself in light of the aforementioned. It thus proposes a different kind of subject of resistance to Gramscian counter-hegemonic movements and the Foucauldian practitioner of counter-conduct, that is, an auto-deconstructionist actor committed to viewing her own subjecthood, as well as her concrete interventions,2 as a site of political struggle. The paper begins by providing a brief overview of the prevailing Gramscian and Foucauldian approaches to the study of resistance, specifically as regards their respective framings of the subject or agent of resistance. Having provided this contextualisation, the discussion then turns to developing an account of the ways in which deconstruction provides salient means by which a form of resistance more resistant to its cooptation into forms of global ordering might function, drawing directly from Derrida's texts as well as from the work of scholars who utilise his thought. The paper finally turns to the crucial question of the concrete consequences of such a deconstructive mode of political resistance; countering the well-rehearsed charges that deconstruction is of significance only at the level of the philosophical or metaphysical (a claim which vastly underestimates the degree to which theory and practice—thought and action—are profoundly intertwined), a discussion of some of the substantive praxiological implications of deconstruction at the level of concrete intervention is provided via a brief engagement with feminist, queer, and post-colonial political sites. The core claim made in the paper is that inasmuch as deconstruction attempts to interrupt forms of thinking and knowing right up to and including processes of conscious and unconscious subjectification, it can provide valuable means by which the micro-gestures of onto-politics can be resisted at the (fundamentally interrelated) levels of both thought and concrete praxis. Challenging the limitations of both a Gramscian and Foucauldian reading of the subject or agent of resistance, it is argued that deconstruction can help one conceptualise modes of subject-becoming and political intervention which both take seriously their own indefensibility and violence in the context of a post-foundational political landscape and insist upon active and interventionary, if ultimately indefensible and therefore explicitly politicised, forms of radical praxis. Conceptualising Deconstruction as a form of Political Resistance Amongst other differences, what divides the prevailing Gramscian and Foucauldian approaches to the study of resistance in global politics is their respective accounts of the subject of resistance, the persons or groups conceptualised as the agents of dissent. The former, Catherine Eschle and Bice MaiguashĐa suggest, has pƌoĐeeded ďǇ ͚[d]eploǇiŶg the ĐoŶĐept of ͞soĐial ŵoǀeŵeŶts͟ oƌ ͞foƌĐes͟ aŶd situatiŶg theŵ iŶ the ƌealŵ of ͞Điǀil soĐietǇ͟'. These aĐtoƌs, they continue, are characterised as ͚ĐouŶteƌ-hegemonic' to the extent that they reflect a collective will and seek to overturn class forms of oppression. We suggest that, for Gramscians, such movements embody alliances of diverse forces which transcend different ways of being and understanding, unite distinct realms of subjectivity around the interests of subordinated classes and reflect shared truths and goals. (2007, p. 292) In Gramscian approaches, in other words, the subject of resistance is presented as more or less united collective social and political groupings, which intervene to pursue their interests in the political sphere. This conceptualisation of the subject of dissent has been challenged by, amongst others, James C. Scott in his articulation of iŶfƌapolitiĐal ƌesistaŶĐes ͚ǁhiĐh fall shoƌt of opeŶlǇ deĐlaƌed ĐoŶtestatioŶ͛ ;MittleŵaŶ & ChiŶ, ϮϬϬϱ, p. ϮϮͿ, ‘olaŶd Bleikeƌ ǀia his eǆaŵiŶatioŶ of ͚Ŷetǁoƌks of aŶti-disĐipliŶe͛ aŶd ͚eǀeƌǇdaǇ foƌŵs of ƌesistaŶĐe͛ ;ϮϬϬϬ, p. ϮϬϬͿ aŶd aŶaƌĐhist-inspired engagements with a range of contemporary resistance movements (Day, 2004; Rossdale, 2010). Similarly, scholars drawing eǆpliĐitlǇ oŶ FouĐault, EsĐhle aŶd MaiguashĐa suggest, haǀe ǀoiĐed suspiĐioŶ of the ͚eƌasuƌes entailed in narratives of identity and unity', eŵphasisiŶg iŶstead ͚the tƌaŶsitoƌǇ aŶd ĐoŶtiŶgeŶt Ŷatuƌe of aĐtiǀist politiĐs', aŶd ͚esĐheǁ[iŶg] the teƌŵ ͚soĐial ŵoǀeŵeŶt' iŶ faǀouƌ of ĐoŶĐepts seeŶ as less hoŵogeŶisiŶg'. IŵpoƌtaŶtlǇ, theǇ Ŷote, fƌoŵ suĐh a FouĐauldiaŶ ǀaŶtage poiŶt, ͚theƌe is Ŷo unified subject performing acts of resistance; rather resistance acts are constitutive of an always iŶĐoŵplete suďjeĐt͛ ;ϮϬϬϳ, p. ϮϵϮͿ. At stake iŶ this deďate is the ƋuestioŶ of the Đoŵpleǆities aŶd complicities of the subject or agent of resistance; the Gramscian framing of an oppositional relation of hegemonic and counter-hegemonic forces both homogenises actors within resistance movements and underestimates the implications of their embeddedness within power relations. While it concurs with this Foucauldian critique, this paper suggests that a turn to Derrida's thought can provide avenues which help resist the reinscription of resistance back into forms of global ordering which the former cannot. Derrida's thought enjoys considerable influence in the critical literature within the discipline of Global Politics. The many ways in which it is of significance for the study of the political have been elucidated at length by, amongst others, Arfi (2012), Bulley (2009, 2007, pp. 128–142), Campbell (1998a, 1998b), Dillon (2007, pp. 80–96, 2010, pp. 191–207, 2013), Edkins (1999, pp. 65–86, 2007, pp. 172–192), Fagan (2013), Hirst (2013a, pp. 120–197, 2013b), O'Callaghan (2012), Pinkerton (2012), Vaughan-Williams (2007), and Zehfuss (2002, pp. 196–249, 2007, pp. 97–111, 2009). It is not, accordingly, the intention of this paper to set out an extensive overview of the fundamentals of deconstruction or Derrida's oeuvre more broadly. Instead, the aim here is to respond to the specific problem of the reappropriation of resistance back into the folds of global ordering, or, more properly, to demonstrate how this reinscription of resistance might itself be resisted, utilising elements of Derrida's thought. The question of such reinscription has played a central role in the ongoing debates which ensued following the events of 1968 between leftist movements of various denominations, both within and beyond the academy. Deconstruction has been widely criticised in these exchanges, not least for its apparent failure to provide a concrete platform from which an actor or agent may enact political interventions; the charge levelled has been that in undermining the political, ethical, and ontological foundations assumed to be necessary for radical intervention, deconstruction leads to immobilisation, acquiescence to the status quo, and/or relativism and nihilism. Pragmatists like Richard Rorty, for instance, have argued that deconstruction has done little for leftist politics. On the contrary, by diverting attention from real politics, it has helped create a self-satisfied and insular academic left which—like the left of the 1960s—prides itself on not being co-opted by the system and thereby renders itself less able to improve the system. (1996, p.15) Similarly, many associated with the Marxian tradition, such as Terry Eagleton, have accused pƌaĐtitioŶeƌs of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ of iŶdulgiŶg iŶ a foƌŵ of ďouƌgeois jouissaŶĐe iŶ ǁhiĐh ͚politiĐal Ƌuietisŵ aŶd Đoŵpƌoŵise aƌe pƌeseƌǀed͛ as a ĐoŶseƋueŶĐe of ͚a dispeƌsal of the suďjeĐt so ƌadiĐal as to ƌeŶdeƌ it iŵpoteŶt as aŶǇ kiŶd of ageŶt at all, least of all a ƌeǀolutioŶaƌǇ oŶe͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, pp. ϭϯϳ–138). In such readings, deconstruction quickly slips back into propping up the status quo by removing any defensible platform from which to enact resistance. Eagleton's critique provides, however, a useful platform from which to begin to elucidate an alternative account of deconstruction in which it can be viewed as having purchase in the context of political resistance. On the one hand, deconstruction can, he argues, be read as an extraordinarily modest proposal: a sort of patient, probing reformism of the text, which is not, so to speak, to be confronted over the barricades but cunningly waylaid in the corridors and suavely chivvied into revealing its ideological hand. Stoically convinced of the unbreakable grip of metaphysical closure, the deconstructionist, like any responsible trade union bureaucrat confronting management, must settle for that and negotiate what he or she can within the left-overs and stray contingencies casually unabsorbed by the textual power system. (1981, p. 134) In this reading, deconstruction's interventionary potential is limited in advance because the metaphysical structures and strictures characteristic of Western political thought and praxis leave only the possibility of surface-leǀel ƌefoƌŵ. DeƌiǀiŶg fƌoŵ aŶd ƌepƌoduĐiŶg the ͚ďleŶd of euphoƌia aŶd disillusioŶŵeŶt, liďeƌatioŶ aŶd dissipatioŶ, ĐaƌŶiǀal aŶd Đatastƌophe, ǁhiĐh ǁas ϭϵϲϴ͛, post-structuralism in general, according to EagletoŶ, fouŶd itself uŶaďle to ͚ďƌeak the stƌuĐtuƌes of state poǁeƌ͛, aŶd tuƌŶed iŶstead to the task of ͚suďǀeƌtiŶg the stƌuĐtuƌes of laŶguage͛ ;ϭϵϵϲ, p. ϭϮϯͿ. What eŶsues iŶ the Đase of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ iŶ paƌtiĐulaƌ, he Đlaiŵs, is that ͚the Maoist ͞Đultuƌal reǀolutioŶ͟ is ŶaiǀelǇ tƌaŶsplaŶted to the aƌeŶa of laŶguage, so that politiĐal ƌeǀolutioŶ ďeĐoŵes iŵpliĐitlǇ eƋuated ǁith soŵe Đeaseless disƌuptioŶ aŶd oǀeƌtuƌŶiŶg͛ ;ϭϵϵϭ, p. ϭϵϳͿ. The ultiŵate consequence of this is a process of emptying out of both the subject and object of political thought; Anglo-AŵeƌiĐaŶ deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ aŵouŶts, foƌ EagletoŶ, to ͚a poǁeƌ gaŵe, a ŵiƌƌoƌ-image of oƌthodoǆ aĐadeŵiĐ ĐoŵpetitioŶ. It is just that Ŷoǁ … ǀiĐtoƌǇ is aĐhieǀed ďǇ keŶosis oƌ self-emptying: the winner is the one who has ŵaŶaged to get ƌid of all his Đaƌds aŶd sit ǁith eŵptǇ haŶds͛ ;ϭϵϵϲ, p. ϭϮϳͿ. The iŵpliĐatioŶ of this is that deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚pƌaĐtiĐes a ŵode of self-destruction that leaves it as invulnerable as an empty page. As such, it merely rehearses in different terms a gesture common to all ideologǇ: it atteŵpts to ǀaŶƋuish its aŶtagoŶist ǁhile leaǀiŶg itself uŶsĐathed͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, p. ϭϯϲͿ. Such a process offers little by way of politicised intervention. On the other hand, however, Eagleton suggests that to frame it as such ignores the other fact of deconstruction which is its hair-raising radicalism – the nerve and daring with which it knocks the stuffing out of every smug concept and leaves the well-groomed text shamefully dishevelled. It ignores, in short, the madness and violence of deconstruction, its scandalous urge to think the unthinkable, the flamboyance with which it poses itself on the very brink of meaning and dances there, pounding away at the crumbling cliff-edge beneath its feet and prepared to fall with it into the sea of unlimited semiosis or schizophrenia. (1981, p. 134, emphases in original) “uĐh aŶ iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶ is, foƌ EagletoŶ, ͚ultƌa-leftist͛; ďeĐause ͚teǆts͛, uŶdeƌstood as ďoth ǁƌitteŶ artefacts and concrete socio-politiĐal ĐoŶfiguƌatioŶs, aƌe ͚poǁeƌ sǇsteŵs͛, the deconstructionist ͚ŵust tƌaĐk a Đat-and-mouse game within and across them without ever settling for either signifier oƌ sigŶified͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, p. ϭϯϰͿ. IŶ this ƌeadiŶg, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ's ƌadiĐalisŵ ĐoŶsists iŶ its ĐapaĐitǇ to substantively and tirelessly interrupt prevailing conceptual and praxiological modes of operating. In Deƌƌida's ǁoƌds, the effeĐt of this is to iŶstigate ͚the suďǀeƌsioŶ of eǀeƌǇ kiŶgdoŵ. WhiĐh ŵakes it obviously threatening and infallibly dreaded by everything within us that desires a kiŶgdoŵ͛ ;Đited iŶ Bowman, 2010, p. 39). Amongst other things, what such a response poses is the question of what it is iŶ ͚us͛ that seeks suĐh a staďle oƌ defeŶsiďle platfoƌŵ fƌoŵ ǁhiĐh to eŶaĐt politiĐal iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶ. What is interesting about this dual framing is that it points to the possibility, on the one hand, that deconstruction, read as the continuous reflection upon, and evaluation of, norms, assumptions, and principles, is not really a big ask; any critical position worthy of the name should be engaging in reflexive auto-critique as a matter of course in order to respond to its inevitable shortcomings, exclusions, and oversights. On the other hand, the radicalism of deconstruction, Eagleton shows, consists in the scope, depth, and endurance of such auto-critique. Far from simply an isolated instance or contained process, deconstruction is interminable, never ceasing, and insists that no claim, assumption, or principle is to be viewed as given or unproblematic, no matter how apparently praiseworthy. Even as political interventions are conceptualised and performed, a deconstructive engagement insists upon reflecting again, challenging again the grounds upon which an action was taken, and making any certitude of one's correctness ultimately impossible. As will be shown below, hoǁeǀeƌ, the aďseŶĐe of suĐh ͚ĐoƌƌeĐtŶess͛ is iŶ ŵaŶǇ ǁaǇs a salutaƌǇ, as opposed to deďilitatiŶg, political moment. This raises a second important question, namely that of the animating drive or momentum of deconstruction; if the grounds upon which one can base a political intervention have been fundamentally shaken, it is legitimate to ask what is it that animates deconstruction's ceaseless movements. On the one hand, both Derrida and many utilising his thought suggest that deconstruction can be described as always already in motion due to its relation to an uŶdeĐoŶstƌuĐtaďle otheƌŶess to ǁhiĐh oŶe is alǁaǇs alƌeadǇ ƌespoŶsiďle: ͚OŶĐe Ǉou ƌelate to the otheƌ as the otheƌ, theŶ soŵethiŶg iŶĐalĐulaďle Đoŵes oŶ the sĐeŶe… That is ǁhat gives deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ its ŵoǀeŵeŶt͛ ;ϮϬϬϲ, pp. ϭϳ–18). Derrida frames this as springing from a relation to justiĐe: ͚JustiĐe is ǁhat giǀes us the iŵpulse, the dƌiǀe, oƌ the ŵoǀeŵeŶt to iŵpƌoǀe the laǁ, that is, to deĐoŶstƌuĐt the laǁ͛ ;ϮϬϬϲ, p. ϭϲͿ. IŶ otheƌ ǁoƌds, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ fiŶds ͚its ͞foƌĐe, its ŵoǀeŵeŶt oƌ its ŵotiǀatioŶ͟ iŶ the ͞alǁaǇs uŶsatisfied appeal͟ to justiĐe͛ ;BoǁŵaŶ, ϮϬϭϬ, pp. ϰϯ–44, citing Protevi). Such momentum is similarly framed by John Caputo in terms of a faith (2006, p. 165), or a ͚Ŷameless love' (2006, p. 173). The imperative that emanates from this relation to otherness is, Derrida suggests elsewhere, so significant that no other authoring force of deconstruction is ŶeĐessaƌǇ: ͚the iŶsisteŶĐe oŶ uŶďiŶdiŶg…, oŶ the iƌƌeduĐiďilitǇ of difference is so massive as to need Ŷo fuƌtheƌ iŶsisteŶĐe͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, p. ϮϳͿ. The apoƌia uŶdeƌpiŶŶiŶg deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ, he aƌgues, ͚is just ǁhat impels deconstruction, what rouses it out of bed in the morning, what drives it on and calls it into aĐtioŶ͛ ;ϮϬϬϲ, p. 32). Whether framed as emanating from an always unsatisfied appeal to justice, faith, love, or aporia, ǁhat these aĐĐouŶts shaƌe is the seŶse that deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚happeŶs͛ as a ĐoŶseƋueŶĐe of the ƌelatioŶ to otheƌŶess, that the authoƌisiŶg foƌĐe ͚is͛ this relation. This is, perhaps, the deconstruction of the ͚to Đoŵe͛, the deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ assoĐiated ǁith the ŵessiaŶiĐ pƌoŵise ŵade ŵost eǆpliĐit iŶ Deƌƌida's lateƌ ǁoƌk; iŶ Caputo's fƌaŵiŶg, the ͚iŵpoƌt aŶd the iŵpulse, the dƌiǀe aŶd desiƌe of deconstruction is not cognitive or constative but performative; deconstruction is not matter of kŶoǁiŶg oƌ seeiŶg, ďut of ďelieǀiŶg…[,] dƌiǀeŶ ďǇ a faith iŶ the iŵpossiďle aŶd uŶdeĐoŶstƌuĐtiďle͛ (2006, p. 166). In contrast to this, on the other hand, Derrida and numerous scholars employing his ideas frame deconstruction as requiring a more explicit and deliberate intervention on the part of an actor or suďjeĐt. IŶ BoǁŵaŶ's fƌaŵiŶg, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚has Ŷo poǁeƌ of its oǁŶ͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϯϴͿ. Deƌƌida similarly states that far fƌoŵ siŵplǇ ͚happeŶiŶg͛, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ŵust ďe eŶaĐted: ͚deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ is ͞Ǉes͟, is liŶked to the ͞Ǉes͟, is aŶ affiƌŵatioŶ͛ ;Đited iŶ Caputo, ϮϬϬϲ, p. ϮϳͿ.ϯ As suĐh, aŶ aĐtiǀe effort on the part of an agent is assumed; rather than springing solely from a relation to otherness, deconstruction is an interventionary process requiring constant work. Far from it occurring spontaneously as a consequence of the relation to otherness, one must try to find, for instance, the heterogeneity in texts (Derrida, 2006, p. ϵͿ. This ŶeĐessitates aŶ ͚iŶĐessaŶt ǀigilaŶĐe aďout the dooƌs that aƌe ĐoŶstaŶtlǇ ďeiŶg shut ďǇ the ͞possiďle͛͟ ;Caputo, ϮϬϬϲ, p. ϭϯϰͿ; as suĐh it ƌelies oŶ aŶ endless series of interventions on the part of an actor, a ceaseless resistance to the ever-present appropriations of the onto-political. This is crucial in the context of resistance because it is precisely the commitment made on the part of the subject which makes possible the resistances deconstruction pertains to. To rely on the assumption that deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ siŵplǇ ͚happeŶs͛ ǁithiŶ the teǆt, oĐĐuƌs spoŶtaŶeouslǇ as a consequence of a relation to otherness, profoundly underestimates the struggle required to attempt to ceaselessly resist the micro-disciplinary ensnarements of the onto-political at intertwined levels of thought and the concrete political sphere. It further underemphasises the degree to which deconstruction is itself a violent and even fraught enterprise: in Derrida's words, deconstruction iŶǀolǀes a ͚suffeƌaŶĐe': ͚ǁhat ŵakes it suffer and what makes those it torments suffer is perhaps the absence of rules, of norms, of definitive criteria that would allow one to distinguish unequivocally ďetǁeeŶ dƌoit aŶd justiĐe͛ ;ϭϵϵϮ, p. ϰͿ. I would argue that this latter reading of deconstruction as interwoven with struggle, experienced through the violence of the indefensible, is of much greater value in the context of conceptualising resistance than is the former messianic vision; as I and others have argued elsewhere (Hirst, 2013b; Houseman, 2ϬϭϯͿ, iŶsofaƌ as the ͚death of God͛ϰ pƌeĐludes the possiďilitǇ of aŶ authoƌiŶg ͚Alteƌ͛, aŶd the horrors of Auschwitz and countless past and contemporary political violences situate the beatific hopefulness of the messianic promise beyond the bounds even of irony, such a promise is problematic at best. It may be that such a messianic framing of deconstruction informs Eagleton's iŵpoƌtaŶt ĐhalleŶge that, ͚iŶ a ǁoƌld gƌoaŶiŶg iŶ agoŶǇ, ǁheƌe the ǀeƌǇ futuƌe of huŵaŶkiŶd haŶgs by a hair, there is something objeĐtioŶaďlǇ luǆuƌious aďout deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, p. ϭϰϬͿ. “iŵplǇ put, one cannot wait for deconstruction to simply unfold before one's eyes; the urgency of the political demands an active, even fraught mode of engagement, in which the subject or agent proceeds with her own irredeemable violence in the forefront of her account of herself in a bid to write and rewrite herself anew in light of the political landscape encountered. Accordingly, the paper now turns to Derrida's thought in order to develop an account of how such a deconstructive mode of resistance might function. Derrida and Political Resistance While Derrida's oeuvre is vast, explicit references to the concept of resistance are few. The account of a deconstructive mode of resistance provided here, accordingly, focuses primarily on the works in which the issue is most directly addressed. In Resistances of Psychoanalysis, Derrida begins his aĐĐouŶt of the ĐoŶĐept of ƌesistaŶĐe ďǇ ŵaƌkiŶg his loǀe of the sigŶifieƌ: ͚Eǀeƌ siŶĐe I ĐaŶ ƌeŵeŵďeƌ, I have always loved this word'. He continues: This ǁoƌd… ƌesoŶated iŶ ŵǇ desiƌe aŶd ŵǇ iŵagiŶatioŶ as the ŵost ďeautiful ǁoƌd iŶ the politics and history of this country, this word loaded with all the pathos of my nostalgia, as if, at any cost, I would like not to have missed blowing up trains, tanks, and headquarters ďetǁeeŶ ϭϵϰϬ aŶd ϭϵϰϱ… WhǇ haǀe I alǁaǇs dƌeaŵed of ƌesistaŶĐe? ;Deƌƌida, ϭϵϵϴ, p. ϮͿϱ Paul Bowman takes up this question of why one might dream of resistance, noting a number of potential dangers assoĐiated ǁith the ĐoŶĐept. He ideŶtifies, fiƌst, a ŽižekiaŶ ƌeadiŶg iŶ ǁhiĐh ͚͞politiĐs͟ aŶd ͞ƌesistaŶĐe͟ ŵight ďe ƌegaƌded as aliďis ĐoǀeƌiŶg a dƌiǀe to ƌepeat ĐeƌtaiŶ gestuƌes ;suĐh as ͞politiĐiziŶg͟ oƌ ͞seekiŶg ƌesistaŶĐe͟Ϳ ƌatheƌ thaŶ aŶǇthiŶg like aŶ ͞autheŶtiĐ͟ desiƌe to ŵake a ĐhaŶge͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϰϳ. Eŵphasis iŶ oƌigiŶalͿ. “uĐh a dƌiǀe has ŵoƌe to do ǁith the geŶeƌatioŶ of particular forms of jouissance than it does substantive political intervention. Bowman similarly notes the pessimism of Baudrillard aŶd AdoƌŶo, ďoth of ǁhoŵ ŵight take ͚the possibility of an intimate intertwining or wedlock between power and resistance to mean that oppositioŶal ƌesistaŶĐe peƌ se is ͞alǁaǇs alƌeadǇ Ŷegated ďǇ the stƌuĐtuƌe of the eŶtitǇ ǁhiĐh it ǁishes to oppose͛͟ ;ϮϬϭ0, p. 48, citing Docherty, 1993, p. 322). It is easy, he continues, to move from this positioŶ to the ĐoŶĐlusioŶ of Bouƌdieu aŶd WaĐƋuaŶt that ͚the ǀeƌǇ idea of ƌesistaŶĐe… is siŵplǇ a fetish concept which demonstrates a profound misrecognition and delusion of the part of those ǁho ͞ďuǇ iŶto it͛͟; iŶ this ƌeadiŶg, ͚dƌeaŵs of ƌesistaŶĐe aƌe ƌeallǇ oŶlǇ ƌesistaŶt dƌeaŵs. Those involved in cultural theory may (claim to) dream of resistance, but that doesn't mean that anything is actually being resisted. ClaimiŶg to ƌesist is Ŷot ŶeĐessaƌilǇ to ƌesist͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϰϵ, eŵphases iŶ oƌigiŶalͿ. Deƌƌida is, of Đouƌse, ŵiŶdful of this: iŶ BoǁŵaŶ's teƌŵs, Deƌƌida shoǁs that ͚eǀeŶ resistance organised by explicit appeal to the idea of (its own) freedom may not be free or self-determining and may instead be entirely overdetermined, symptomatic—possibly even more an expression of the power that is ostensibly being resisted than something independently resistant or alter-Ŷatiǀe͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϰϴ. Eŵphasis iŶ oƌigiŶalͿ. Neǀeƌtheless, Derrida risks elucidating his self-ideŶtified ͚idioŵatiĐ͛, eǀeŶ ͚idiosǇŶĐƌatiĐ͛, iŶteƌest iŶ the ĐoŶĐept of ƌesistaŶĐe iŶ the ĐoŶteǆt of psychoanalytic theory. PsǇĐhoaŶalǇsis, Deƌƌida suggests, ĐaŶ ďe uŶdeƌstood as ͚aŶalǇsis of ƌesistaŶĐe͛ iŶsofaƌ as the manifestations of resistance enacted both consciously and unconsciously by the analysand to the treatment offered by the analyst lay bare the limitations of, and violences immanent to, the latter. In his exploration of Freud's commentary on the problem of resistance to psychoanalysis, he is ĐoŶĐeƌŶed, iŶ his ǁoƌds, ͚ǁith soŵethiŶg otheƌ thaŶ aŶalǇsis, a ĐeƌtaiŶ aŶalǇsis, soŵethiŶg that, iŶ aŶotheƌ seŶse, peƌhaps, ƌesists aŶalǇsis, a ĐeƌtaiŶ aŶalǇsis͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, p. ϱͿ. Deƌƌida tƌaĐes this ͚soŵethiŶg otheƌ͛ through a series of different forms of resistance to psychoanalysis; he shows that Freud identified five distinct registers at which resistance operates, which emanate variously from the ego, the id, and the superego, but suggests that the most enduring and resilient resistances are associated with the repetition compulsion and function at the level of the unconscious (1998, p. 23). This ͚soŵethiŶg otheƌ͛ ǁhiĐh pƌoŵpts suĐh ƌesistaŶĐes is ƌead ďǇ Deƌƌida as iŶteƌƌuptiŶg psychoanalysis's claim to internal coherence, self-sameness, and reasonableness. This is because it transpires that the only means by which resistances can be finally overcome are non-rational, affective, and emotive; in Andrea Hurst's framing, Freud acknowledges that resistances can be nonrational, which means that struggles against them haǀe to ŵoďilize foƌĐes otheƌ thaŶ those of ƌatioŶal eŶlighteŶŵeŶt… IŶ otheƌ ǁoƌds, to persuade analysands to accept interpretations, analysts are required to capitalize on the eŵotioŶal dǇŶaŵiĐs of a ͚poleƌos', that is, the polemics and erotics of resistance, power, and authoƌitǇ … ;ϮϬϬϴ, p. ϭϳϮͿ It is this ͚soŵethiŶg otheƌ͛ that ĐoŶŶeĐts the ŶotioŶ of ƌesistaŶĐe to the ŵoǀeŵeŶts of deconstruction. Just as this force sabotages the imposition of order and stability of narrative on the part of the analyst in the context of psychoanalysis, so too does the deconstructive imperative resist the instantiation of totality in the sphere of the onto-political. Oliver Marchart describes something similar in his framing of the distiŶĐtioŶ ďetǁeeŶ ͚politiĐs', uŶdeƌstood as a paƌtiĐulaƌ set of instantiated socio-politiĐal aƌƌaŶgeŵeŶts, aŶd ͚the politiĐal͛, uŶdeƌstood as soŵethiŶg otheƌ ǁhiĐh inexorably exceeds and disrupts these forms of ordering as a consequence of the exclusions and ǀioleŶĐes of aŶǇ ĐoŶfiguƌatioŶ of ͚politiĐs͛ ;ϮϬϬϳͿ. The Ŷatuƌe of this saďotagiŶg ͚soŵethiŶg otheƌ͛ at ǁoƌk iŶ ďoth ƌesistaŶĐe to psǇĐhoaŶalǇsis aŶd a deconstructive political ethos can be discerned through an elucidation of the relationship between Foucault's and Derrida's respective approaches to resistance. For Foucault, as Jenny Edkins and Veronique Pin-Fat shoǁ, ͚ƌelatioŶs of poǁeƌ eŶtail ƌesistaŶĐe: theǇ ǁould Ŷot ĐouŶt as ƌelatioŶs of poǁeƌ ǁeƌe ƌesistaŶĐe Ŷot pƌeseŶt͛ ;ϮϬϬϰ, p. ϱͿ. As suĐh, resistance is immanent to the structures of global order for Foucault in a manner not dissimilar to Derrida's identification of a resistant ͚soŵethiŶg otheƌ͛ alǁaǇs alƌeadǇ at ǁoƌk ǁithiŶ psǇĐhoaŶalǇsis; iŶ ďoth aĐĐouŶts, ƌesistaŶĐe is contained within and always already part of the relational ordering processes at work. Similarly, Foucault and Derrida share in certain respects a commitment to genealogy as a mode of ƌesistaŶĐe. AĐĐoƌdiŶg to ‘olaŶd Bleikeƌ, geŶealogies ͚tƌaĐe the pƌoĐesses ďǇ ǁhiĐh ǁe haǀe come to aĐĐept ouƌ ǁoƌld as Ŷatuƌal oƌ ŵeaŶiŶgful͛; theǇ aƌe historical investigations into the ideas and events that have shaped our thinking, speaking aŶd aĐtiŶg… [TheǇ] foĐus oŶ the pƌoĐess ďǇ ǁhiĐh ǁe haǀe ĐoŶstƌuĐted oƌigiŶs aŶd giǀeŶ meaning to particular representations of the past, representations that continuously guide our daily lives and set clear limits to political and social options. GeŶealogies thus eŶaĐt ƌesistaŶĐe ďeĐause ͚ƋuestioŶs of ageŶĐǇ aƌe aďoǀe all ƋuestioŶs of poǁeƌ relations. And power relations are best understood, Michel Foucault argues convincingly, by eǆaŵiŶiŶg speĐifiĐ atteŵpts that aƌe ŵade to upƌoot theŵ͛ ;ϮϬϬϬ, pp. Ϯϱ–26). Differently put, what is suggested here is that by conducting a genealogical exploration into specific configurations of power relations via an examination of forms of dissent, the political fault lines inherent to such relations are exposed and thereby (potentially or actually) challenged. Such forms of counter-writing can provide alternative accounts of particular power relations which expose and address the hierarchies, silences, and exclusions of prevailing historical and contemporary socio-political arrangements, and these can be used to conceptualise interventions intended to resist them. Deconstruction shares with Foucauldian genealogy a commitment to such conceptual and concrete distuƌďaŶĐes: iŶ Deƌƌida's ǁoƌds, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ is ͚alǁaǇs a ŵatteƌ of uŶdoiŶg, desediŵeŶtiŶg, decomposing, deconstituting sediments, artefacta, presuppositions, institutions'. To this degree, he eǆplaiŶs, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ŵaǇ ďe ƌead as a ͚ĐƌitiĐo-geŶealogiĐal ƌetuƌŶ͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, p. Ϯϳ. Eŵphases iŶ oƌigiŶalͿ. DeĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ, he Đlaiŵs, folloǁs the logiĐ of the dual ŵeaŶiŶg of the ǁoƌd ͚aŶalǇsis͛: it ͚uŶdeŶiaďlǇ oďeǇs aŶ aŶalǇtiĐal exigency, at once critical and analytic'. What emerges, he continues, is ďoth aŶ ͚aƌĐheologiĐal oƌ aŶagogiĐal ŵotif… aŶd the philolǇtiĐ ŵotif of the dissoĐiatiǀe—always very close to the saying dis-social—uŶďiŶdiŶg͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, p. Ϯϳ. Eŵphases iŶ oƌigiŶalͿ. IŶ other words, what Derrida identifies here is the dimension of deconstruction which shares a good deal with genealogy's commitment to an excavation and reinterpretation of the past and/or present in a manner which intervenes so as to denaturalise dominant social understandings and forces. At this stage, hoǁeǀeƌ, Deƌƌida appeŶds a footŶote ǁhiĐh stipulates that ͚the ŶeĐessitǇ of this geŶealogǇ ŵust alǁaǇs ďe ĐoŵpliĐated ďǇ a ͚ĐouŶteƌ-genealogy'. Simple genealogy always risks privileging the archeo-genetic motif, or even the at least symbolic schema of filiation, family, or ŶatioŶal oƌigiŶ͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, Ŷ. ϴ, p. ϭϮϬͿ. While I ǁould Ŷot use the ǁoƌd ͚siŵple͛ iŶ the ĐoŶteǆt of Foucault's genealogical interventions, Derrida's comment highlights a crucial issue at stake in processes of counter-writing and counter-ĐoŶduĐt. IŶ his ǁoƌds, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚ƌadiĐalizes at the saŵe tiŵe its aǆioŵatiĐs aŶd the ĐƌitiƋue of its aǆioŵatiĐs'. What this eŶtails is ͚a ŵoǀeŵeŶt of deconstruction that is not only counter-archeological but counter-geŶealogiĐal'. This is ďeĐause ͚the deconstructive necessity drives one to put into question even this principle of self-presence in the unity of consciousness', (1998, pp. 27–28. Emphasis in original) upon which the construction of a genealogy depends. In other words, through deconstruction, critique extends not only to the object or issue prompting the initial genealogical re-writing but also, at the same time, to both any alternative story told and, indeed, the author or subject of any such alternative narrative. The extension of critique to such second- and third-order sites is necessary because however apparently politically laudable the intervention, one cannot engage in a project of genealogical counter-writing or counter-conduct without enacting a privileging of a particular subject position and, consequently, a necessarily violent rendering of the objects in question. As such, as Paul Patton Ŷotes, geŶealogǇ ŵaǇ thus ďe ƌead as a ͚fiƌst step' iŶ deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ;ϮϬϬϳ, p. ϳϲϴͿ, ďut ďeǇoŶd this first-order engagement, both the alternative account provided and the agent herself must also be put into question. This is because any alternative history or conceptual apparatus as such risks becoming its own totalising gesture, one as problematic as the last; the intention is to resist the possibility that the critico-genealogical intervention itself becomes consolidated into a new prevailing account, as blind as was the last to its own exclusions, hierarchies, and violences. This gesture adds, I would submit, a further radical intervention which genealogy alone cannot provide. Michael Dillon suggests something similar in his statement that an interrogation of the politics of security requires something in addition to genealogy as well; because genealogy, however politicising it might be – Foucault arguing, powerfully, that this politicising takes place for, or rather aƌouŶd, the ďattle oǀeƌ tƌuth as ͚the eŶseŵďle of ƌules aĐĐoƌdiŶg to ǁhiĐh the tƌue aŶd the false are separated and specific effects of power attached to the true' – does not directly pose and seek to think the question of the political as such. (1996, p. 22) Without an accompanying series of counter-genealogical interruptions, any genealogy proffered, in other words, is implicated in precisely the politics of ontological totalisation and closure which underpin the historical or political phenomena genealogical counter-writing seeks to challenge. In attending to these second- and third-level critiques—of the alternative narrative and the narrator, respectively—deconstruction thus enacts a further form of onto-political resistance. This neither serves to undermine or destroy such interventions, nor does it entail the immobilisation of the subject; rather, it insists upon critique and reflexivity at the same moment as political interventions are being constructed and enacted. In insisting on these second- and third-order critiques in addition to the original act of counter-ǁƌitiŶg, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ĐaŶ ďe fƌaŵed as a ͚pƌiŶĐiple of iŶteƌŵiŶaďle aŶalysis: an axiom of iŶteƌŵiŶaďilitǇ, peƌhaps͛ ;Deƌƌida, ϭϵϵϴ, p. ϯϯͿ. “iŵplǇ put, the deĐoŶstƌuĐtiǀe iŵpeƌatiǀe aŵouŶts to a commitment to disrupting processes of conceptual or ontological unification wherever they occur, whether within institutions of global ordering or within one's own discourse; for Derrida, if theƌe ǁeƌe a sole thesis of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚it ǁould pose diǀisiďilitǇ: diffeƌeŶĐe as diǀisiďilitǇ͛; ďeĐause ͚theƌe is Ŷo iŶdiǀisiďle eleŵeŶt oƌ siŵple oƌigiŶ … aŶalǇsis is iŶteƌŵiŶaďle͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, pp. 33–34). In its commitment to ceaselessly unpicking the apparent internal coherence of prevailing forces of material and conceptual ordering, which are at work within one's own attempts to enact resistance as much as within concrete processes of global politics, deconstruction performs a ͚hǇpeƌaŶalǇtiĐisŵ͛: it aŵouŶts to ͚a hǇpeƌďoliĐisŵ of aŶalǇsis that takes soŵetiŵes, iŶ ĐeƌtaiŶ people's eǇes, the foƌŵ of hǇpeƌdiaďoliĐisŵ͛ ;ϭϵϵϴ, p. ϮϵͿ. Such a hyperanalytic mode of engagement is both paradoxical and crucial because, in order to prevent the critique of originarism in its transcendental or ontological, analytic or dialectical form from yielding, according to the law that we well know, to empiricism or positivism, it was necessary to accede, in a still more radical, more analytical fashion, to the traditional demand, to the very law which had just been deconstructed. (1998, p. 29) In other words, deconstruction paradoxically mobilises the very analytical and conceptual tools which it itself has already identified as divisible and deconstructible in order to challenge both these tools and resist the traditions of thought and praxis they derive from. For Bowman, deconstruction thus aŵouŶts to a pƌoĐess of ͚liteƌalisatioŶ͛; it siŵplǇ looks foƌ ͚that ǁhiĐh is Đlaiŵed oƌ assuŵed to be real, present, actual or true (such as the notions of presence, justice, responsibility, univocal truth, etc). In looking, it reveals that these are both undecidable and yet forcefully imposed, in ĐoŶtiŶgeŶt ĐoŶstitutioŶal foƌŵs͛ ;BoǁŵaŶ, ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϯϵͿ. But it iŶsists that suĐh lookiŶg ďe ĐoŶstantly undertaken both at the level of processes of global ordering and within one's own attempts to enact resistance to such ordering. The radicalism of such an extensive critical imperative is suggested by Adorno: such thought as such, before all particular contents, is an act of negation, of resistance to that which is forced upon it; this is what thought has inherited from its archetype, the relation between laďoƌ aŶd ŵateƌial… The effoƌt iŵplied iŶ the ĐoŶĐept of thought itself, as a ĐouŶteƌpaƌt to passive contemplation, is negative already – a revolt against being importuned to bow to every immediate thing. (2004, p. 19) As this suggests, the reason such second- and third-order resistances are necessary relates to the question of violence. Deconstruction attempts to render explicit and address the violence which is immanent to political thought and praxis as such. In Adorno's terms, [w]hile doing violence to the object of its synthesis, our thinking heeds a potential that waits in the object, and it unconsciously obeys the idea of making amends to the pieces for what it has doŶe… [T]he ƌesistaŶĐe of thought to ŵeƌe thiŶgs iŶ ďeiŶg, the ĐoŵŵaŶdiŶg fƌeedoŵ of the subject, intends in the object even that of which the object was deprived by its objectification. (2004, p. 19)6 What this means is that a form of resistance which comprises second- and third-order critiques, as opposed to a single gesture of supposedly correct intervention, can better attend to, expose, and attempt to ameliorate the violent exclusions that necessarily accompany it. A prevailing response to such a deconstructive imperative has been to insist that radical politics ƌeƋuiƌes ͚ĐoŶstƌuĐtiǀe͛, positiǀe iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶs aŶd aĐtiǀities, Ŷot aŶ eŶdless piĐkiŶg apaƌt of these; as Noys relays, it is Đlaiŵed that ͚the ŵiĐƌo-politics of deconstruction can never pass to a constructive stage of ďuildiŶg oƌ ĐƌeatiŶg ƌadiĐal alteƌŶatiǀes…͛ ;ϮϬϭϮ, p. ϮϵͿ. It is assuŵed iŶ this ƌeadiŶg, iŶ other words, that deconstruction amounts to fruitless process of undermining intervention and a cyclical pattern of disruption which ultimately leads nowhere. On the contrary, however, these movements are precisely productive and generative of substantive political interventions; much as when an issue or concept is discussed in a classroom without ultimate resolution, or a text read which challenges one's views without offering an immediate ready solution, the consequence of a deconstructive engagement is not stasis and silence, but rather a sparking of fresh reflections, a rethinking and reimagining which itself amounts and makes possible further generative and productive acts, even if the ground upon which one bases such interventions has become decidedly shakieƌ. CoŶseƋueŶtlǇ, faƌ fƌoŵ iŶeffeĐtual, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ is ͚the act of taking a position, in the very work it does with regard to the political-institutional structures that constitute and govern our pƌaĐtiĐes, ouƌ ĐoŵpeteŶĐes, aŶd ouƌ peƌfoƌŵaŶĐes͛ ;Deƌƌida, Đited iŶ Elaŵ, ϭϵϵϰ, p. ϵϬͿ. It ƌeŵaiŶs to provide some specific examples of such deconstructive political praxis. Deconstruction as Political Praxis There are many manifestations of the practical consequences of deconstructive resistance across a range of academic disciplines and activist sites. Drawing on the work of scholars and activists who have explicitly linked their radical political projects to deconstruction, whether through endorsing or critiquing it, this section provides two accounts of deconstruction read as a form of activism, followed by a brief snapshot of three examples of its praxiological utility in the contexts of feminist, queer, and post-colonial political interventions. Crucially, I am not trying to claim for deconstruction the successes of these latter movements, nor am I suggesting that the actors involved by any means do or should self-identify as proponents of deconstruction. To do so would be a crude and colonising appropriation. Rather, the point made is that the movements and interventions discussed share with deconstruction a commitment to disrupting prevailing norms and assumptions reflective of the second- and third-order critiques outlined above, specifically as regards problematising essentialised or naturalised agents of resistance. One pertinent account of the concrete consequences of deconstruction is provided by Martin MĐQuillaŶ. He suggests it ĐaŶ ďe ĐoŶĐeptualised as a foƌŵ of ͚teǆtual aĐtiǀisŵ͛: iŶ deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ's ŵoǀeŵeŶts, he aƌgues, ͚aŶ iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶ takes plaĐe ;a teǆtual aĐtiǀisŵͿ ǁhiĐh pƌoduĐes the movement, history and becoming of a necessary political analysis which links the political to critical thought todaǇ͛ ;ϮϬϬϴ, p. ϲͿ. This is ďeĐause deconstruction (unlike philosophy) reads. Such reading qua reading does not generalise from the exemplary but accepts the challenge of the exemplary to thought as an articulation of the troubling otherness which presents itself as an arrival in reading. Reading in this sense has ǀeƌǇ little to do ǁith the Ƌuiet spaĐes of uŶiǀeƌsitǇ liďƌaƌies… ‘atheƌ, this ƌeadiŶg is aŶ interminable, unconditional critical liveliness to the world around us, its histories and its futures. (2008, p. 6–7) In elucidating this notion of textual activism, McQuillan makes the point that deconstruction intervenes not simply at the level of thought or philosophy but rather in ways which have substantive material effects. Simply put, this is because the ways we think have a direct bearing on the ways we act; in the post-9/11 world, the stupefaction and mystification of domestic thought is inseparable from the military violence which is only one aspect of this world-wide struggle. Thus, critical reason and deconstruction are more important now than ever and this textual activism will be affiliated iŶ uŶpƌediĐtaďle ǁaǇs… to the ŵateƌial pƌoĐesses of the politiĐal. ;2008, p. 9) MĐQuillaŶ eŵphasises heƌe the eǆteŶt to ǁhiĐh ͚teǆtual͛ ƌeadiŶgs aŶd iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶs aƌe ďǇ Ŷo ŵeaŶs dissociable from the concrete sphere of global politics. While certainly not their sole origin or source, socio-political framings and discourses of war and militarism in the post-9/11 world clearly functioned to provide the conceptual foundations and parameters without which the justifications proffered by statespersons in the USA and elsewhere for the invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan could not have been convincing or indeed intelligible. Many scholars of global politics using Derrida's thought have made similar points in a range of empirical contexts (Arfi, 2012; Bulley, 2009; Edkins, ϭϵϵϵ; FagaŶ, Gloƌieuǆ, Hašiŵďegoǀić, & “uetsugu, ϮϬϬϳ; )ehfuss, 2002). CoŶĐuƌƌeŶtlǇ, Paul BoǁŵaŶ fƌaŵes deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ as a foƌŵ of ͚ŵaƌtial aƌt͛. He suggests that ͚although Deƌƌida ŵaiŶlǇ ƌead aŶd ǁƌote ;ŵoŶstƌouslǇ faithfullǇͿ aďout ͞ŵeƌe͟ philosophiĐal teǆts, these teǆts aƌe to ďe uŶdeƌstood as ͞iŶdiĐes of ƌeal histoƌǇ͟, pƌoduĐed ďǇ aŶd pƌoduĐtiǀe of paƌtiĐulaƌ ďiases: effeĐts that haǀe effeĐts͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϯϴͿ. This aŶalogǇ eŵeƌges iŶ paƌt fƌoŵ the eŵďeddedŶess of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ iŶ ƌelatioŶs of ǀioleŶĐe: it is ͚ĐoŶstƌued as ƌespoŶdiŶg to challenges, intimately attentive, listening, sticking, yielding, inverting and displacing, always patient, Đalŵ aŶd adaptiǀe͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϰϬͿ iŶ a ŵaŶŶeƌ ƌefleĐtiǀe of ŵaƌtial aƌts, paƌtiĐulaƌlǇ t'ai Đhi. BoǁŵaŶ elaďoƌates oŶ paƌallel ŵisƌeadiŶgs of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ aŶd t'ai Đhi as ͚philosophical, isolated, inward-looking, navel-gaziŶg: as Ŷot ƌeallǇ ƌeal͛; ďoth aƌe fƌaŵed as ͚digƌessioŶs aǁaǇ fƌoŵ ƌealitǇ, tƌuth, aŶd diƌeĐt, pƌaĐtiĐal eŶgageŵeŶt͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϰϭͿ. Hoǁeǀeƌ, like t'ai Đhi, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ has, he demonstrates, a series of concrete praxiological implications. For instance, deconstruction makes possiďle a foƌŵ of eŶgageŵeŶt ǁith politiĐal aŶtagoŶists ǁhiĐh eŵphasises ͚listeŶiŶg͛: iŶ ĐoŶtƌast to siŵplǇ deŶouŶĐiŶg aŶd disŵissiŶg iŶteƌloĐutoƌs, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚listeŶs ďǇ stiĐkiŶg to the otheƌ… Derrida listened, stuck and yielded to the texts and institutions of philosophy, in order to invert and displaĐe ĐoŶĐeptual oƌdeƌs aŶd foĐi͛ ;ϮϬϭϬ, p. ϰϰͿ. BoǁŵaŶ suggests that iŶ aĐadeŵiĐ ĐoŶteǆts, this might mean, for instance, seeking to publish in journals other than those reflecting one's own disciplinary and ethico-political commitments, dealing with difference in terms and contexts other than the familiar. The practical consequences of such deconstructive resistance can be seen in a host of political sites. To take the example, first, of feminist political struggles, Diane Elam, for instance, suggests that feminism and deconstruction can usefully be read alongside each another because, [o]n the one hand, feminism shifts the ground of the political, interrogating the opposition between the public and the private spheres. On the other hand, deconstruction displaces our understanding of how theory relates to practice by rethinking the opposition of philosophical reflection to political action. (1994, p. 1) Elam connects the rise of deconstruction to the rise of third-wave feminism, posing the question: ͚ŵust feŵiŶisŵ alǁaǇs seek to eƌase diffeƌeŶĐe ďǇ giǀiŶg ďiƌth to a faŵilǇ of ideŶtiĐal daughteƌs ǁho all fight for the same causes, who all pretend to share the same feminist goals? (1994, p. 73). In third-wave feminism's de-esseŶtialisatioŶ of the ĐategoƌǇ ͚ǁoŵaŶ͛, foƌŵs of iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶ ǁhiĐh insist upon the inclusion of race, class, age, ethnicity, and sexuality in the forms of intervention they proffer have emerged, something which, as Elam shows, has hugely important consequences for issues such as the representation of women in institutions of government, abortion, past configurations of conjugal rights, gay marriage, and the gendered and Westerncentric writing of history, psychoanalysis, and philosophy. To the aŶǆieties espoused ďǇ those ǁoƌƌied that pƌoďleŵatisiŶg the ĐategoƌǇ ͚ǁoŵaŶ͛ spells disasteƌ for the feminist project, Elam replies: this is not the same thing as being condemned to the land of relativistic nihilism, where political action—or any action for that matter—ďeĐoŵes iŵpossiďle. UŶĐeƌtaiŶtǇ… is Ŷeitheƌ an absolute obstacle to action nor a theoretical bar to political praxis. (1994, p. 31) Such interventionism is reflected in Elaŵ's foƌŵulatioŶ of the ŶotioŶ of ͚gƌouŶdless solidaƌitǇ͛, a foƌŵ of solidaƌitǇ ͚ǁhiĐh is Ŷot ďased oŶ ideŶtitǇ͛ ďut ƌelies ƌatheƌ upoŶ ͚a ĐoalitioŶ ďuilt aƌouŶd suspiĐioŶ of ideŶtitǇ as the esseŶtial gƌouŶdiŶg foƌ ŵeaŶiŶgful politiĐal aĐtioŶ͛ ;ϭϵϵϰ, p. ϲϵ). She suggests, iŶ shoƌt, that ͚the gaiŶs of feŵiŶisŵ haǀe pƌoduĐed a situatioŶ iŶ ǁhiĐh the ŵeta-narrative of the affirmation of female identity has foundered precisely because its realization can only be imperialist'. Consequently, she continues, feminism and deconstruction work similarly towards ĐhalleŶgiŶg suĐh esseŶtialisŵ: suĐh aŶ eŶdeaǀouƌ eŶtails ͚eŶdless ǁoƌk, aŶ aďǇssal politiĐs…͛ ;ϭϵϵϰ, p. 120). This example shows how the problematisation of foundational claims about sex and gender has lead not to the death of feminism but rather to a form of feminism committed to interrogating its own past and present exclusions and violences such that it can better resist (although by no means entirely avoid) reperforming conventional forms of onto-political ordering in its theoretical and concrete interventions. Concurrently, in the context of queer activism and queer theory, Joshua Gamson explores the controversies which ensued following the announcement made in San Francisco that the 1993 pride celebrations weƌe to ďe Ŷaŵed the ͚Yeaƌ of the Queeƌ͛. Foƌ ŵaŶǇ, the sigŶifieƌ ͚Ƌueeƌ͛, GaŵsoŶ shoǁs, ͚shakes the gƌouŶd oŶ ǁhiĐh gaǇ aŶd lesďiaŶ politiĐs has ďeeŶ ďuilt[,]… haphazaƌdlǇ attempting to build a politics from the rubble of deconstructed collective categories͛ ;ϭϵϵϱ, p. ϯϵϬͿ. Fƌoŵ this, GaŵsoŶ Ŷotes, a seƌies of dileŵŵas eŵeƌge ƌegaƌdiŶg ͚foƌ ǁhoŵ, ǁheŶ, aŶd hoǁ aƌe staďle ĐolleĐtiǀe ideŶtities ŶeĐessaƌǇ foƌ soĐial aĐtioŶ aŶd soĐial ĐhaŶge?… WheŶ aŶd hoǁ ŵight deconstructive strategies take aim at institutional foƌŵs [of oppƌessioŶ]͛. What oĐĐuƌƌed iŶ the shift toǁaƌds eŵďƌaĐiŶg the sigŶifieƌ ͚Ƌueeƌ͛, he suggests, ǁas a pƌoĐess of de-essentialisation, the very fracturing nature of which was politically salutary: Queer movements pose the challenge of a form of organizing in which, far from inhibiting accomplishments, the destabilization of collective identity is itself a goal and accomplishment of collective action. When this dynamic is taken into account, new questions arise. (Gamson, 1995, p. 403, emphasis in original) As Gamson shows, the integration of transgender and bisexual issues into the sphere of debate represents a concrete effect of such a process of de-essentialisation. Thus, in challenging the contours and parameters of subject of resistance, the queer movement displays an imperative similar to the generative effects of a deconstructive mode of resistance. To turn, finally, to post-colonial politics, Michael Syrotinski has explored what he frames as the ͚uŶeasǇ eŶĐouŶteƌ ďetǁeeŶ deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ aŶd the postĐoloŶial͛ ;ϮϬϬϳ, p. ϮͿ. He aƌgues that foƌ soŵe, suĐh as ‘oďeƌt YouŶg, ͚Deƌƌida's ǁoƌk has alǁaǇs, eǀeŶ if soŵeǁhat iŶdiƌeĐtlǇ, ĐhalleŶged the ethico-politiĐal teŶsioŶs at the heaƌt of ĐoloŶialist ideologǇ͛ ;ϮϬϬϳ, p. ϭϭͿ. Foƌ Alďeƌto Moƌeiƌas, the two tƌaditioŶs, “ǇƌotiŶski Ŷotes, shaƌe the ǀieǁ that ͚iŶ oƌdeƌ to ǁƌest the possiďilitǇ of a politiĐal affirmation from its continual foreclosure, we require a double articulation, akin to Spivak's ͞stƌategiĐ esseŶtialisŵ͟ aŶd Deƌƌida's ͞douďle iŶsĐƌiptioŶ͛͟ ;ϮϬϬϳ, p. ϯϲͿ. Foƌ otheƌs, hoǁeǀeƌ, he ĐoŶtiŶues, Deƌƌida ͚is ultiŵatelǇ a ƌepƌeseŶtatiǀe of the WesteƌŶ philosophiĐal tƌaditioŶ he is deĐoŶstƌuĐtiŶg, aŶd… deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ is theƌefoƌe at ďest a-political and a-historical, and at worst complicitous with a ĐeƌtaiŶ theoƌetiĐal iŵpeƌialisŵ͛ ;ϮϬϬϳ, p. ϭϮͿ. This ƌaises the ƋuestioŶ of the Eurocentric and colonising dimensions of deconstructive thought itself. In particular, as Mustapha Pasha, amongst others, has shown, there is a danger in many prevailing critical-theoretical traditions that the insistence of putting into relief all forms of individual and collective identity in a similar manner assumes a general condition of post-foundational subjectivity and its consequences, a move which effaces other onto-political configurations (2011; 2013). As a form of engagement based on pƌoďleŵatisiŶg its oǁŶ as ǁell as otheƌs͛ iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶs, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ĐaŶ aŶd ŵust ƌespoŶd to its own violences, exclusions, and reinscriptions of hierarchy, and view such critique as a matter of urgency. In insisting on second- and third-order critiques, deconstruction impels its agent to pursue forms of auto-critique which problematise such potential colonialisms to the fullest extent possible, which is to say interminably, and without final resolution. To restate, I am emphatically not suggesting that the radical political changes associated with third-wave feminism, queer movements, or post-colonial politics can or should be subsumed within, or be conceived of as derivative of or synonymous with, Derrida's thought or deconstruction as a philosophical tradition. Rather, the claim made is that the sites of political intervention mentioned here share with deconstruction, as I have framed it in this paper, a commitment to attempting to resist the hierarchies and exclusions associated with of prevailing forms of ordering by disrupting apparently stable categories and assumptions, in particular as regards problematising the subject or agent of resistance herself. Conclusion This paper has argued that there are a series of ways in which deconstruction contains the potential to resist resistance's cooptation back into interrelated processes of conceptual and global ordering. Such a form of resistance can be framed as occurring at three interconnected registers. First, as EagletoŶ's aĐĐouŶt of its puƌsuit of ͚eǀeƌǇ sŵug ĐoŶĐept͛ suggests, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ's ƌadiĐalisŵ consists in its resistance to the possibility, or rather its highlighting of the violence of any claim to the possibility, of asserting defensibly that a particular issue or problem is not of concern or falls ͚outside͛ the ďouŶds of oŶe's ƌespoŶsiďilitǇ. IŶasŵuĐh as deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ highlights ǀioleŶĐe, its imperative is to identify and disrupt processes of totalisation wherever they occur. That one cannot attend to even a fraction of such processes adequately does not absolve one of this responsibility; this state of affairs comprises only a further layer of violence for which one cannot atone. Any claims to legitimate borders which demarcate the limits of responsibility are themselves subject to deconstructive reflection, and their necessarily forceful imposition demonstrated thereby. Such an intervention proceeds on the basis that responsibility is limitless, following the logic of both Emmanuel Levinas and Derrida. The all-too-common refusal of such limitless responsibility is thereby called into question, and all possible justifications exposed as indefensible. As such, the urgency of political intervention is reemphasised. As this suggests, second, a deconstructive engagement is radically, if paradoxically, politicising. WheŶ the possiďilitǇ of ďeiŶg fiŶallǇ ͚ĐoƌƌeĐt͛ oƌ ͚just͛ is ƌeŵoǀed iŶ the ĐoŶteǆt of the suďjeĐt's political deliberations, that is, when it is acknowledged that one's political interventions are inexorably violent, that one can only choose between violence and violence, the subject is obliged to consider the very difficult question of what s/he would intervene for or against, whether in concrete political practice or more conceptually, in spite of its ultimate indefensibility. Far from resulting in immobilisation or fatalistic resignation, this encounter with the indefensible can serve to allow the subject to encounter the violence of his/her position and commit to it nevertheless. That no position ĐaŶ ďe ultiŵatelǇ uŶpƌoďleŵatiĐallǇ ĐoƌƌeĐt does Ŷot ŵeaŶ that ͚aŶǇthiŶg goes͛ oƌ that ͚ŶothiŶg ŵatteƌs͛; ƌatheƌ, this apoƌetiĐ ĐoŶditioŶ ŵeaŶs that the Đouƌse of aĐtioŶ oŶe Đhooses ;ďeĐause oŶe always chooses, even, and especially, if one attempts to evade the taking of a position) must be argued for, defended, and reflected upon constantly in light of new ideas and encounters. Furthermore, this condition entails that the responsibility for the subject's position rests with her alone, rather than being legitimated in advance by some external principle. This has a denaturalising and politicising effect on positions taken, making possible a radical shaking up of notions once assumed to be essential or universal. It is to this that Derrida points when he notes that deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ ͚is too politiĐal foƌ soŵe people, ĐaŶ seeŵ paƌalǇziŶg to those ǁho oŶlǇ ƌeĐogŶize politics with the help of pre-ǁaƌ slogaŶs͛ ;Đited iŶ Elaŵ, ϭϵϵϰ, p. ϵϬͿ. Consequently, the radical potential of deconstruction consists, third, in the extent to which it intervenes at the level of conscious and unconscious processes of subject-production and reproduction. The question of the subject of resistance is explored by Eagleton, who suggests that deconstruction ultimately precludes the possibility of a functional and effective revolutionary suďjeĐtiǀitǇ: it pƌeseƌǀes ͚soŵe of the doŵiŶaŶt theŵes of tƌaditioŶal ďouƌgeois liďeƌalisŵ ďǇ a desperate, last-ditch strategy: by sacrificing the subject itself, at least in any of its customary modes'. The suďjeĐt is ĐoŶseƋueŶtlǇ ƌeŶdeƌed ͚iŵpoteŶt as aŶǇ kiŶd of ageŶt at all, least of all a ƌeǀolutioŶaƌǇ oŶe͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, p. ϭϯϴͿ. IŶ ĐoŶtƌast to this ƌeadiŶg, Deƌƌida suggests that ͚a deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶist appƌoaĐh to the ďouŶdaƌies that iŶstitute huŵaŶ suďjeĐtiǀitǇ… [ĐaŶ] lead to ƌeiŶteƌpƌetatioŶ of the ǁhole apparatus of boundaries within which a history and culture have been able to confine their ĐƌiteƌiologǇ͛ ;ϭϵϵϮ, p. ϭϵͿ; as suĐh, it is pƌeĐiselǇ the ͚ĐustoŵaƌǇ ŵodes͛ of suďjeĐthood ideŶtified ďǇ Eagleton that Derrida seeks to problematise. At the heart of Derrida's intervention is the suggestion that prevailing Western modes of subjectification themselves are not innocent as regards contemporary concrete ethico-political problems, and that resistances to onto-political totalisations can emanate from challenging such processes at the level of one's subjecthood. The question that arises here is whether such a challenge to conventional forms of subjectivity amounts to a ͚saĐƌifiĐe͛, as EagletoŶ aƌgues, oƌ ƌatheƌ a politically salient attempt to reflect upon and intervene in the process of subjectification and identity-production and reproduction, as Derrida suggests. For Eagleton, insofar as the subject itself become impliĐated iŶ aŶd destaďilised as a ĐoŶseƋueŶĐe of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ, the pƌiĐe oŶe paǇs ͚is the highest of all: death͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, p. ϭϯϲͿ. He eǆplaiŶs: Deconstruction is the death drive at the level of theory: in dismembering a text, it turns its violence masochistically upon itself and goes down with it, locked with its object in a lethal complicity that permits it the final inviolability of pure negation. The deconstructionist nothing lieth because he nothing affirmeth. (1981, p. 136–7) Yet, he continues, such death is not final because metaphysics will live on; similarly deconstruction, as a ͚liǀiŶg' death, ǁill ƌegƌoup its foƌĐes to assault aŶeǁ. EaĐh agoŶist is eǀeƌ-slain and ever-resurrected; the compulsion to repeat, to refight a battle in which antagonist can never be destroyed because he is always everywhere and nowhere, to struggle towards a (self)-killing that ǁill Ŷeǀeƌ Ƌuite Đoŵe, is the dǇŶaŵiĐ of deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ… [D]eĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ is kept aliǀe by what contaminates it, and can therefore reap the pleasures of a possible self-dissolution which, as one form of invulnerability, is mirrored by another, the fact that it can never die because the enemy is within and unkillable. (1981, p. 137) In short, in this reading deconstruction is self-defeating; it comprises a form of intervention which renders it, and its subject, highly vulnerable to its own violent gestures whilst ensuring it, and its subject, live on to continue this masochistic process ad infinitum. Key here is the notion that a certain pleasure is derived from such self-aŶŶihilatioŶ; EagletoŶ ĐoŶĐludes that ͚the ŵoŵeŶt iŶ ǁhiĐh all of this oĐĐuƌs is of Đouƌse the ŵoŵeŶt of jouissaŶĐe oƌ petite ŵoƌt͛ ;ϭϵϴϭ, p. ϭϯϳͿ. The ĐƌuĐial ƋuestioŶ thus eŵeƌges of ǁhetheƌ suĐh a ƌadiĐal ͚eŵptǇiŶg out͛ effeĐts aŶǇthing politically salient, or whether it simply results in catatonic self-torturing/pleasuring at the precipice of a self-styled abyss. In contrast to Eagleton's reading, in the spirit of a more Derridean (and, on a different day, Nietzschean) tone, I would suggest that such a death only follows if the subject is construed in a particular Cartesian manner. To the degree that it insists upon second- and third-order critiques—of alternative narratives proffered and of the author of such re-writings herself—in addition to initial challenges to processes of conceptual and political ordering, deconstruction aims to ͚put ĐoŶsĐiousŶess iŶto ƋuestioŶ iŶ its assuƌed ĐeƌtaiŶtǇ of itself͛ ;Deƌƌida, ϭϵϴϮ, p. ϭϳͿ, aŶd iŶ so doing, following gestures made by, amongst others, Nietzsche, Freud, Heidegger and Lacan, to begin to think the possibility of post-foundational forms of subjectivity. Eagleton objects to this on the basis that Derrida's thought ignores the extent to which a certain provisional stability of identity is essential not only for psychical well-being but for revolutionary political agency. It contains no adequate theory of such agency, since the subject would now seem no more than the decentered effect of the semiotic process; and its valuable attention to the split, precarious, pluralistic nature of all identity slides at worst into an irresponsible hymning of the virtues of schizophrenia. PolitiĐal ƌeǀolutioŶ ďeĐoŵes, iŶ effeĐt, eƋuiǀaleŶt to ĐaƌŶiǀalesƋue deliƌiuŵ… ;ϭϵϵϭ, p. ϭϵϳ–8) In this reading, such self-referentiality and fracturing precisely serves the interests of forces of global ordering insofar as a subject possessing particular, if provisional, certitudes about itself and socio-political orientation is necessary for radical political intervention and resistance. I would suggest, in contrast, that to the extent that the micro-workings of ordering occur simultaneously at the level of the material and within the subject, learning to explore the ways in which one is formed and reformed in light of processes of global and inter-personal ordering can comprise a crucial site of political resistance. This is, of course, not to suggest that one can finally identify and thereby renounce such processes, but rather that within the confines of these one can attempt to unpick parts of oneself such that elements of such micro-gestures of ordering and subject-(re)production become at least partially identifiable and interpretable. This reflects closely, for instance, ongoing feminist and post-colonial calls for the interrogation of patriarchal and colonial logics at work at the level of thought, consciousness, and language, the invisible micro-violences which undergird ĐoŶĐƌete politiĐal ǀioleŶĐes. Foƌ HoǇ, suĐh aŶ iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶ aŵouŶts to ͚pƌoposiŶg a diffeƌeŶt ŵoƌal psǇĐhologǇ͛ ;ϮϬϬϰ, p.ϭϴϬͿ. “uĐh a pƌoĐess eŶtails that the suďjeĐt take itself as ǁell as its politiĐal locale as the object to be resisted; attempting to elucidate the ways which one is always constructed as part of, and therefore complicit in, that which one seeks to resist can be, somewhat paradoxically, a gesture of both defiance and agency. Part of the radicalism of such a deconstructive mode of engagement is its defiance of the licence so central to prevailing forms of subjecthood cultivated with contemporary Western societies of the ƌight to ͚look aǁaǇ͛, to ƌead liǀes, oƌ taĐitlǇ aĐĐept sĐƌiptiŶg of liǀes, as ďeiŶg of diffeƌiŶg ǀalue, of tolerating and sanctioning hierarchies of grievability and mournability (Butler, 2004). In a cultural context which accepts and encourages ignorance of and indifference to one's embeddedness in relations of violence, deconstruction can enact a form of resistance by insisting on looking, thinking, and feeling in sites of acute discomfort from which it would be easier to turn away. In this sense, deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ takes seƌiouslǇ NietzsĐhe's Đall foƌ politiĐal suďjeĐts ǁho aƌe ͚iŶƋuisitiǀe to a fault, investigators to the point of cruelty, with unhesitating fingers for the intangible, with teeth and stomachs for the most indigestiďle͛ ;ϭϵϵϳ, p. ϯϮͿ, suďjeĐts eŶdeaǀouƌiŶg to ƌesist the ǀioleŶĐes of onto-political consolidation in the spheres of the material, the philosophical, and the recesses of their own subjecthood. Notes 1 Concrete examples of this are too numerous to mention any but a few: one would be the prevalence of highly problematic gender politics as seen in many activist sites for instance, in the recent scandals surrounding the occurrence and handling of sexual assault and rapes within the Socialist Workers Party in the UK; another, the transphobia and colonialisms rife in many feminist organisations in Europe and the USA; a third, the widespread use of militarised imagery, clothing, and vocabularies utilised in many anti-militarist organisations. Specific examples of these will be discussed below. While I am not intending to draw a clear line between acts of resistance and acts which are re-entangled into propping up prevailing forms of global ordering—to do so would be neither possible nor desirable—what I am suggesting is that there is a widespread problem within radical sites, both within and beyond the academy, in that the reproduction of certain violences is ignored. This, in my view, amounts to at least a partial reinscription of the forms of resistance proffered in these spaces back into normalised forms exclusion and hierarchy characteristic of current of global ordering. Ϯ IŶ iŶǀokiŶg the ŶotioŶ of ͚ĐoŶĐƌete͛ heƌe, I aŵ aŶtiĐipatiŶg the ĐƌitiĐisŵ that suĐh aŶ auto-deconstructionist mode of resistance remains aďstƌaĐted aŶd ƌeŵoǀed fƌoŵ ͚ƌeal ǁoƌld͛ oƌ ͚ŵateƌial͛ iŶteƌǀeŶtioŶ. As ǁill ďe deŵoŶstƌated ďeloǁ, the ƌealŵs of thought aŶd aĐtioŶ, oƌ theoƌǇ and practice, are by no means distinct, the one having a direct bearing on the other. ϯ The ƋuestioŶ of ͚affiƌŵatioŶisŵ͛ iŶ ĐoŶteŵpoƌaƌǇ ƌadiĐal thought has ďeeŶ skilfullǇ iŶteƌƌogated ďǇ Noys (2012). Further discussion of this important critique is, unfortunately, beyond the scope of this paper. 4 This is to be understood figuratively as a shorthand for indicating the (post)Enlightenment exposure of a certain abyss in which stable onto-political foundations and grounds were fundamentally undermined, rather than as a claim that religion has ceased to play a crucial role in contemporary political life. For discussion of this see the Foƌuŵ eŶtitled ͚IŶteƌŶatioŶal PolitiĐs aŶd the ͞Death of God͟', iŶ MilleŶŶiuŵ: JouƌŶal of IŶteƌŶatioŶal “tudies, ϰϮ ;ϭͿ. 5 The problems of the romanticism of this are important for what follows; such a framing is ripe for a deconstructive analysis itself. 6 There is much more to be said regarding the intersections and parallels between Derrida's deĐoŶstƌuĐtioŶ aŶd AdoƌŶo's ͚Ŷegatiǀe dialeĐtiĐs͛, iŶ paƌtiĐulaƌ theiƌ diffeƌeŶt fƌaŵiŶgs of the relationship between the subject and object of thought. This is, however, unfortunately beyond the scope of this paper. References 1. Adorno, T. W. (2004). Negative dialectics. London: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 2. Arfi, B. (2012). Re-thinking international relations theory via deconstruction. London: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 3. Bleiker, R. (2000). Popular dissent, human agency and global politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 4. Bowman, P. (2010). Deconstruction is a martial art. In S. Houppermans, R. Sneller, P. van Zilfhout, (Eds.), Enduring resistance: Cultural theory after Derrida/La résistance persevere: la théorie de la Đultuƌe ;d͛Ϳapƌès Deƌƌida ;pp. ϯϳ–56). Amsterdam: Rodopi. OpenURL City University London 5. Bulley, D. (2007). Ethical assassination? Negotiating the (Ir)responsible decision. In M., Fagan, L., Gloƌieuǆ, I. Hašiŵďegoǀić & M. “uetsugu ;Eds.Ϳ, Deƌƌida: NegotiatiŶg the legaĐǇ ;pp. ϭϮϴ–142). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. OpenURL City University London 6. Bulley, D. (2009). Ethics as foreign policy: Britain, the EU and the other. Abingdon: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 7. Butler, J. (2004). Precarious life: The powers of mourning and violence. London: Verso. OpenURL City University London 8. Campbell, D. (1998a). National deconstruction: Violence, identity and justice in Bosnia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. OpenURL City University London 9. Campbell, D. (1998b). Writing security: United States foreign policy and the politics of identity. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. OpenURL City University London 10. Caputo, J. D. (Ed.). (2006). Deconstruction in a nutshell: A conversation with Jacques Derrida. New York, NY: Fordham. OpenURL City University London 11. Coleman, L. M. & Tucker, K. (2011). Between discipline and dissent: Situated resistance and global order. Globalizations, 8, 397–410. dio:10.1080/14747731.2011.585823 doi: 10.1080/14747731.2011.585823 [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 12. Day, R. J. F. (2004). From hegemony to affinity: The political logic of the newest social movements. Cultural Studies, 18, 716–748. doi:10.1080/0950238042000260360 [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 13. Derrida, J. (1982). Margins of philosophy. Brighton: Harvester. OpenURL City University London ϭϰ. Deƌƌida, J. ;ϭϵϵϮͿ. FoƌĐe of laǁ: The ͚MǇstiĐal FouŶdatioŶ of AuthoƌitǇ͛. IŶ D. CoƌŶell, M. Rosenfeld, & D. G. Carlson (Eds.), Deconstruction and the possibility of justice (pp. 3–67). New York: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 15. Derrida, J. (1998). Resistances of psychoanalysis. Stanford: Stanford University Press. OpenURL City University London 16. Derrida, J. (2006). The Villanova roundtable: A conversation with Jacques Derrida. In J. D. Caputo (Ed.), Deconstruction in a nutshell: A conversation with Jacques Derrida (pp. 1–27). New York: Fordham. OpenURL City University London 17. Dillon, M. (1996). Politics of security: Towards a political philosophy of continental thought. London: Routledge. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London ϭϴ. DilloŶ, M. ;ϮϬϬϳͿ. FoƌĐe of tƌaŶsfoƌŵatioŶ. IŶ M. FagaŶ, L. Gloƌieuǆ, I. Hašiŵďegoǀić, & M. Suetsugu (Eds.), Derrida: Negotiating the legacy (pp. 80–93). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. OpenURL City University London 19. Dillon, M. (2010). Violences of the messianic. In A. Bradley & P. Fletcher (Eds.), The politics to come: Power, modernity and the messianic (pp. 191–207). London: Continuum. OpenURL City University London 20. Dillon, M. (2013). Deconstructing international politics. Abingdon: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 21. Docherty, P. (Ed.). (1993). Postmodernism: A reader. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf. OpenURL City University London 22. Eagleton, T. (1981). Walter Benjamin or towards a revolutionary criticism. London: Verso. OpenURL City University London 23. Eagleton, T. (1991). Ideology: An introduction. London: Verso. OpenURL City University London 24. Eagleton, T. (1996). Literary theory: An introduction. New York: University of Minnesota Press. OpenURL City University London 25. Edkins, J. (1999). Poststucturalism and international relations: Bringing the political back in. Boulder: Lynne Rienner. OpenURL City University London 26. Edkins, J. (2007). What it is to be many: Subjecthood, responsibility and sacrifice in Derrida and NaŶĐǇ. IŶ M. FagaŶ, L. Gloƌieuǆ, I. Hašiŵďegoǀić & M. “uetsugu ;Eds.Ϳ, Deƌƌida: NegotiatiŶg the legacy (pp. 172–192). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. OpenURL City University London 27. Edkins, J., & Pin-Fat, V. (2004). Introduction: Life, power, resistance. In J. Edkins, V. Pin-Fat, & M. J. Shapiro (Eds.), Sovereign lives: Power in global politics (pp. 1–22). New York: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 28. Elam, D. (1994). Feminism and deconstruction: Ms. En Abyme. London: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 29. Eschle, C., & Maiguashca, B. (2007). Rethinking globalised resistance: Feminist activism and critical theorising in international relations. British Journal of International Relations, 9, 284–301. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-856X.2007.00284.x [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 30. Fagan, M. (2013). Ethics and politics after poststructuralism: Levinas, Derrida and Nancy. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London ϯϭ. FagaŶ, M., Gloƌieuǆ, L., Hašiŵďegoǀić, I., & “uetsugu, M. ;Eds.Ϳ. ;ϮϬϬϳͿ. Deƌƌida: NegotiatiŶg the legacy. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. OpenURL City University London 32. Gamson, J. (1995). Must identity movements self-destruct? A queer dilemma. Social Problems, 42(3), 390–407. OpenURL City University London 33. Hirst, A. (2013a). Leo Strauss and the invasion of Iraq: Encountering the Abyss. Abingdon: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 34. Hirst, A. (2013b). Violence, self-authoƌship aŶd the ͚Death of God͛: The ͚Tƌaps͛ of the ŵessiaŶiĐ and the tragic. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 42, 135–154. doi: 10.1177/0305829813497822 [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 35. Houseman, T. (2013). Auschwitz as Eschaton: Adorno's negative rewriting of the messianic in critical theory. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 42. doi:10.1177/0305829813492579 [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 36. Hoy, D. C. (2004). Critical resistance: From poststructuralism to post-critique. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. OpenURL City University London 37. Hurst, A. (2008). Derrida Vis-à-vis Lacan: Interweaving deconstruction and psychoanalysis. New York, NY: Fordham University Press. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 38. Marchart, O. (2007). Post-foundational political thought: Political difference in Nancy, Lefort, Badiou and Laclau. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 39. McQuillian, M. (2008). Textual activism: Deconstruction and the global political. Unpublished manuscript. OpenURL City University London 40. Mittleman, J. H., & Chin, C. B. N. (2005). Conceptualising resistance to globalization. In L. Amoore (Ed.), The global resistance reader (pp. 17–27). London: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 41. Nietzsche, F. (1997). Beyond good and evil: Prelude to a philosophy of the future. Mineola: Dover. OpenURL City University London 42. Noys, B. (2012). The persistence of the negative: A critique of contemporary continental theory. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. OpenURL City University London 43. O'Callaghan, R. (2012). Secular theology and noble sacrifice: The ethics of Michael Walzer's just war theory. Review of International Studies, 39, 361–383. doi: 10.1017/S0260210512000125 [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 44. Pasha, M. (2011). Western Nihilism and dialogue: Prelude to an uncanny encounter in international relations. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 39, 683–699. doi: 10.1177/0305829811406573 [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 45. Pasha, M. (2013). Nihilism and the otherness of Islam. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 42. doi:10.1177/0305829813498806 [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 46. Patton, P. (2007). Derrida, politics and democracy to come. Philosophy Compass, 2/6, 766–780. doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2007.00098.x [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 47. Pinkerton, P. (2012). Resisting memory: The politics of memorialisation in post-conflict Northern Ireland. The British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 14, 131–152. doi:10.1111/j.1467-856X.2011.00458.x [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 48. Rorty, R. (1996). Remarks on deconstruction and pragmatism. In C. Mouffe (Ed.), Deconstruction and pragmatism (pp. 13–18). London: Routledge. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 49. Rossdale, C. (2010). Anarchy is what Anarchist make of it: Reclaming the concept of agency in IR and security studies. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 39, 483–501. doi:10.1177/0305829810384006 [CrossRef], [Web of Science ®]OpenURL City University London 50. Syrotinski, M. (2007). Deconstruction and the postcolonial: At the limits of theory. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 51. Vaughan-Williams, N. (2007). Beyond a cosmopolitan ideal: the politics of singularity. International Politics, 44, 107–124. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.ip.8800161 [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 52. Zehfuss, M. (2002). Constructivism in international relations: The politics of reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [CrossRef]OpenURL City University London 53. Zehfuss, M. (2007). Derrida's memory, war and the politics of ethics. In M. Fagan, L. Glorieux, I. Hašiŵďegoǀić, & M. “uetsugu ;Eds.Ϳ, Deƌƌida: ŶegotiatiŶg the legaĐǇ ;pp. ϵϳ–111). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. OpenURL City University London 54. Zehfuss, M. (2009). Jacques Derrida. In J. Edkins & N. Vaughan-Williams (Eds.), Critical theorists and international relations (pp. 137–149). Abingdon: Routledge. OpenURL City University London 