ABSTRACT: 
Immigration brings both benefits and challenges to communities. This article provides insight into the needs of these communities and offers suggestions for how foundations can consider immigrant and refugee communities in their work. This article combines information from Minnesota Compass, a foundation-governed social-indicators initiative, and Speaking for Ourselves, a study of immigrants and refu- gees in Minnesota’s Twin Cities metropolitan area that identifies the needs and strengths immigrants bring to our communities. The results can help guide foundations and their grantees on how to improve a community’s quality of life for immigrants and refugees – to the benefit of all residents. By understanding demographic trends and cultural nuances, organizations can increase awareness, access, and trust among immigrants and refugees, and influence public policy. 
 
PREDICTION: 
for primary arrivals, more than 2,000 “secondary refugees” – those who origi-nally settle in one state and then move to another FIGURE 1 Number of Minnesota Foreign-Born by BirthplaceMartinRogers, Evans, and Mattessich020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,0001870 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000Number of foreign-born residentsMexicoIndiaHmong*VietnamSomaliaGermanyNorwaySweden1880 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 '07-'09'10-'12Figure 1. Number of Minnesota foreign-born by birthplace*Hmong (born primarily in Laos and Thailand)020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,0001870 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000Number of foreign-born residentsMexicoIndiaHmong*VietnamSomaliaGermanyNorwaySweden1880 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 '07-'09'10-'12Figure 1. Strengths and Limitations of Study MethodsBy using respondent driven sampling, we were able to survey a group of immigrants and refu-gees who are more representative of their cul-tural communities in the Twin Cities than would have been the case had we used convenience sampling methods (e.g., surveying people who are all affiliated with one program, religious organization, housing site, or neighborhood group). MartinRogers, Evans, and MattessichSECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 43that these and other data be used with consider-ation of the unique contextual factors that influ-ence research findings.2Key FindingsThe 459 immigrants and refugees who partic-ipated in Speaking for Ourselves offered many insights into the experience of moving to the Twin Cities. On the other hand, over half of participants reported feel-ing that they were not accepted at least once in Minnesota because of their race, culture, religion, or immigration status; 2 out of 10 par-ticipants said they feel this way once or twice a month or more often.Education From Early Childhood Through Job Training Research has shown that participation in high-quality early childhood education helps prepare children for kindergarten and can be particularly beneficial for children who do not speak English at home (Yo 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 doi: 10.9707/1944-5660.1312SECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 39Immigration in the U.S. brings challenges to the communities where these newest Americans live, including shortages in affordable housing; students who arrive at schools and workers who arrive at jobs needing to learn English; health and human services systems that may be ill-equipped to handle increased demands; and cultural, generational, religious, and/or racial tensions and misunderstandings. But immigration also brings benefits. In many communities, immigrants have alleviated labor shortages that might have driven away indus-try. In 2013, the Minnesota State Demographic Center indicated that “greater numbers of migrants, both domestic and international, will be necessary to meet our state’s workforce needs and to buttress economic activity” (2013, p. 22). The Kauffman Foundation’s Index of Entrepreneurship shows that for most of the past 10 years, immigrants have been roughly twice as likely as people born in the U.S. to start new businesses (Fairlie, Morelix, Reedy, & Russell, 2015). Corrie and Radosevich (2013, p. 2) noted the following economic benefits of immigrants in Minnesota: • “Immigrants are younger than native Minnesotans: They fill jobs vacated by retir-ing workers, and pay taxes that provide needed state and local revenues. • As consumers, immigrants in Minnesota have an estimated $659 billion in lifetime earnings and annual purchasing power of $5 billion. Immigration slows population decline in rural towns and struggling urban neighborhoods, and contributes to the growth of housing values. • Immigrants comprise 7 percent of the state’s population, but 9 percent of the workforce. In six industry sectors and 17 occupations, both higher- and low-er-skilled, immigrants comprise more than one quarter of the workforce. • Immigrants pay an estimated $793 million in state and local taxes annually. • Six percent of the state’s business owners are immigrants. • Through networks and cultural assets, immi-grants strengthen Minnesota’s global connec-tions and make the state more attractive to global investors, businesses, and talent.” This article combines information from Minnesota Compass, a foundation-governed social indicators initiative,1 and a new study of immigrants and refugees in the Twin Cities met-ropolitan area. The study, Speaking for Ourselves, identifies the needs and strengths immigrants bring to our communities. The results offer guid-ance on how foundations and their grantees can improve the quality of life for a community’s immigrants and refugees, to the benefit of all residents. By understanding demographic trends 1See www.mncompass.org.The study, Speaking for Ourselves, identifies the needs and strengths immigrants bring to our communities. The results offer guidance on how foundations and their grantees can improve the quality of life for a community’s immigrants and refugees, to the benefit of all residents. By understanding demographic trends and cultural nuances, organizations can increase awareness, access, and trust among immigrants and refugees, and influence public policy.Foundation Support of Immigrant CommunitiesSECTOR40 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.organd cultural nuances, organizations can increase awareness, access, and trust among immigrants and refugees, and influence public policy. Immigrants and Refugees in Minnesota Minnesota’s experience with immigration is an informative case study of the dynamics existing in many American communities. From 1850 to about 1950, Minnesota had a larger proportion of immigrant residents than the U.S. as a whole. The movement of foreign-born people into the state then declined, and from the 1970s to about 1990 only about 3 percent of Minnesota’s pop-ulation was foreign-born. Since 1990, however, while the U.S. immigrant population doubled, Minnesota’s immigrant population almost qua-drupled. By 2014, Minnesota ranked 22nd in the nation in terms of proportion of foreign-born res-idents (Minnesota Compass, n.d. a). Minnesota is home to a variety of immigrant communi-ties, representing different cultures, reasons for migrating, and lengths of time in the U.S. Minnesota’s immigrant population has changed over the years; countries of origin have shifted and immigrants are increasingly people of color. In the 1950s, as the proportion of immi-grants among Minnesota’s residents dropped below the country’s average, the most common countries of origin of foreign-born residents were European, predominantly from Germany, Sweden, and Norway. These three countries remained the most common places of birth for foreign-born residents in Minnesota until about 1980 (Minnesota Compass, n.d. b). Starting in 1970 and continuing into the new millen-nium, the number of foreign-born residents from Central and South America, Asia, and Africa grew substantially. As of 2012, the larg-est number of foreign-born Minnesota residents came from Mexico; followed by India; Laos and Thailand (Hmong); Somalia; and Vietnam. (See Figure 1.) Between 1970 and 2000, the proportion of all Minnesota’s foreign-born residents living in the Twin Cities increased from roughly 55 per-cent to 80 percent (Minnesota Compass, n.d. c).Immigrants’ experiences in Minnesota vary greatly depending on their country of origin, length of residency in the U.S., and immigra-tion status. A pivotal difference is immigration and refugee status. Between 2004 and 2007, Minnesota ranked among the top five states for the arrival of “primary refugees” – people who arrive directly from their country of origin – with a peak of more than 6,000 primary arrivals in 2005. While the state has since dropped to 13th place in the U.S. for primary arrivals, more than 2,000 “secondary refugees” – those who origi-nally settle in one state and then move to another FIGURE 1 Number of Minnesota Foreign-Born by BirthplaceMartinRogers, Evans, and Mattessich020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,0001870 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000Number of foreign-born residentsMexicoIndiaHmong*VietnamSomaliaGermanyNorwaySweden1880 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 '07-'09'10-'12Figure 1. Number of Minnesota foreign-born by birthplace*Hmong (born primarily in Laos and Thailand)020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,0001870 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000Number of foreign-born residentsMexicoIndiaHmong*VietnamSomaliaGermanyNorwaySweden1880 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 '07-'09'10-'12Figure 1. Number of Minnesota foreign-born by birthplace*Hmong (born primarily in Laos and Thailand)SECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 41– now live in Minnesota (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015). Having pri-mary refugee status is significant because federal resettlement assistance, which provides initial aid for housing, food, health screenings, and other basic needs, is available to refugees only in the state where they first settled. Social-indicator data – especially disaggregated data that shows results for specific cultural com-munities – reflects differences in experiences among population groups. Multiple social indi-cators show that white residents in Minnesota fare better than people of color. Since a substan-tial proportion of Minnesota’s people of color are foreign-born or the children of foreign-born parents, it is important to consider these dispari-ties when reflecting on the experiences of immi-grants in the community. For example:• In 2014, 79 percent of white adults age 16-64 in Minnesota were employed, com-pared with 68 percent of adults of color (Minnesota Compass, n.d. d).• In 2015, the on-time high school gradua-tion rate of white students in Minnesota was 87 percent; the rate for students of color was 68 percent (Minnesota Compass, n.d. e). Furthermore, only 39 percent of third-grade students of color met grade-level reading standards, compared with 68 percent of white third-graders (Minnesota Compass, n.d. f ). • For Minnesotans under age 65, 14 per-cent of people of color do not have health insurance; the uninsured rate for white Minnesotans is 5 percent (Minnesota Compass, n.d. g). Speaking for Ourselves: An In-Depth Study Although some population-level data are avail-able from the U.S. Census Bureau and other sources, these data do not provide an in-depth understanding of the immigrant experience in our communities. As a public charity that pro-vides direct services to these communities, the Amherst H. Wilder Foundation needs informa-tion about immigrants and refugees in order to be responsive to our community’s needs. For example, the foundation recognized the need to adapt its mental health programs for Minnesota’s newest immigrants, such as Karen and Karenni refugees from Burma who have recently moved by the thousands to Saint Paul. Wilder Research first surveyed immigrants in 2000 and reported the findings in Speaking for Themselves, a study of Hmong, Latino, Russian, and Somali immigrants in the Twin Cities (Mattessich, 2000). Many community organiza-tions, students, government agencies, and others found the information valuable and, after a few years, started asking for updated information. The foundation saw the need for new data and, in 2010, provided funding to Wilder Research to repeat and even expand this important initiative. The second study, Speaking for Ourselves, is a com-munity-based effort that looks at the experiences Although some population-level data are available from the U.S. Census Bureau and other sources, these data do not provide an in-depth understanding of the immigrant experience in our communities. As a public charity that provides direct services to these communities, the Amherst H. Wilder Foundation needs information about immigrants and refugees in order to be responsive to our community’s needs.Foundation Support of Immigrant CommunitiesSECTOR42 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgof Hmong, Karen, Latino, Liberian, and Somali immigrants and refugees living in the Twin Cities (MartinRogers, 2015). Among the members of an advisory group for the study were both individu-als from the cultural communities included in the study and professionals in organizations across a variety of sectors that serve immigrants and refu-gees. They offered guidance on all major aspects of the study’s design and implementation. For the study, 459 immigrants and adult children of immigrants were interviewed about their lives – their families, education, jobs, health, and engagement in their communities. Speaking for Ourselves sought to identify the biggest needs of immigrant and refugee communities in the Twin Cities, the issues of greatest concern, and the assets available to address those needs and issues. Study Methods Wilder Research used respondent driven sam-pling, an innovative and culturally appropriate data collection approach, to identify and recruit eligible community members to participate in the study. This approach involves randomly selecting a handful of “seed” respondents within each community and asking those respondents to refer up to three additional people from the community. Those respondents are then asked to refer other respondents, ultimately creating respondent referral “chains” that in some cases carried out as far as 11 “waves.” (See Table 1.) Adults were eligible to participate in the study if they or a parent were born outside of the U.S., were from one of the cultural communities included in the study, and lived in Minnesota’s Hennepin or Ramsey counties. Wilder Research hired bilingual staff to help with data collection. Each respondent received $20 for completing the survey and $5 for each referral. Strengths and Limitations of Study MethodsBy using respondent driven sampling, we were able to survey a group of immigrants and refu-gees who are more representative of their cul-tural communities in the Twin Cities than would have been the case had we used convenience sampling methods (e.g., surveying people who are all affiliated with one program, religious organization, housing site, or neighborhood group). Study participants are not statistically representative of their broader cultural commu-nities, however, because scientific random sam-pling was not used, and the complete respondent driven sampling method for weighting and ana-lyzing the survey data was not feasible. We believe that for many topic areas and pur-poses, the data produced by this study are better than any other existing source of data about these immigrant and refugee communi-ties. Also, the key findings have been endorsed strongly enough by a wide enough range of study participants and community stakeholders to be considered valid and actionable for many practical purposes. However, we recommend All Respondents1 Hmong Karen Latino Liberian SomaliSeeds 52 11 7 11 3 9Referrals 407 94 94 90 57 60Maximum No. of Waves -- 11 7 8 9 6Total Respondents 459 105 101 101 60 69TABLE 1 Speaking for Ourselves Study Respondents 1In addition to the members of the five main cultural communities, the respondents include six Lao, seven Oromo, and 10 Vietnamese. Too few completed surveys from members of these communities were submitted to report data for these communities separately. MartinRogers, Evans, and MattessichSECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 43that these and other data be used with consider-ation of the unique contextual factors that influ-ence research findings.2Key FindingsThe 459 immigrants and refugees who partic-ipated in Speaking for Ourselves offered many insights into the experience of moving to the Twin Cities. They told us that health care, employment assistance, housing, and food were the most helpful resources provided to them when they arrived. They were also most likely to say they needed more help with basic needs, like food, housing, and clothing, and with jobs and employment training. Participants said organi-zations, including foundations, would be able to provide better services to new immigrants, and help them feel more welcome in Minnesota, if they learned more about their communities.Regarding the experience of discrimination, most Speaking for Ourselves participants said they feel safe where they live. On the other hand, over half of participants reported feel-ing that they were not accepted at least once in Minnesota because of their race, culture, religion, or immigration status; 2 out of 10 par-ticipants said they feel this way once or twice a month or more often.Education From Early Childhood Through Job Training Research has shown that participation in high-quality early childhood education helps prepare children for kindergarten and can be particularly beneficial for children who do not speak English at home (Yoshikawa, et al., 2013). But only 9 percent of Speaking for Ourselves par-ticipants with children up to age 4 send their children to child care centers or early childhood education programs; 75 percent receive child care from someone living in the home. When asked about challenges related to their family’s school experiences, Speaking for Ourselves participants most commonly men-tioned learning English and difficulties transi-tioning between languages used at school and at home. Just 24 percent of participants who have school-age children said they feel “fully able” to help their children with homework in English, and only one-third – 34 percent – feel “fully able” to volunteer at their child’s school. On the other hand, three-quarters of participants – 77 percent – said they feel “fully able” to provide a home environment that is good for studying. When they were asked an open-ended question about their cultural community’s strengths with regard to education, parental encouragement was the most commonly mentioned key strength of cul-ture or family that helps children be successful in school. More work is needed to best understand how service providers and funders can build on this strength within these communities while also addressing educational needs, especially English-language learning. 2See the detailed study methodology report and data book (MartinRogers, 2015) for more information about the study methods and limitations and for detailed findings by cultural community.Research has shown that participation in high-quality early childhood education helps prepare children for kindergarten and can be particularly beneficial for children who do not speak English at home. But only 9 percent of Speaking for Ourselves participants with children up to age 4 send their children to child care centers or early childhood education programs; 75 percent receive child care from someone living in the home.Foundation Support of Immigrant CommunitiesSECTOR44 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgThe most commonly mentioned barriers to post-secondary education access, named by 75 percent of participants, are financial issues. Despite these barriers, nearly all participants – 98 percent – said they believe that their children will go to college, and just over three-quarters – 78 percent – want to obtain additional education for themselves. With respect to securing a job, Speaking for Ourselves participants most commonly reported language barriers and the need for additional education or training as challenges to obtain-ing employment. Physical and Mental Health Immigrant and refugee communities in the Twin Cities have significant health problems that may be related to their experiences in refugee camps and other traumatic settings. Immigrants and refugees in the Twin Cities experience the types of racial/ethnic health disparities that are also found in American-born minority communities in Minnesota. Speaking for Ourselves partici-pants frequently expressed concerns about their cultural community’s health, with diabetes, unhealthy eating, and lack of access to healthy food as the top concerns (respondents were also asked about tobacco, alcohol, and illegal drug use; physical activity; and related public health issues). When asked if they have trouble access-ing health care, participants identified a lack of health insurance as a primary barrier. Nearly one-quarter of participants – 22 percent – indicated that they would be embarrassed to seek help for an emotional or mental health problem. In this study, simply finding culturally appropri-ate ways to meaningfully inquire about mental health, trauma, and similar sensitive topics – and to effectively translate questions about these topics into several different languages – was extremely challenging. Transportation, Personal Finance, and HousingJust like American-born people living in low-er-income communities, many immigrants and refugees struggle with access to transportation, credit, and housing. Twenty-seven percent of Speaking for Ourselves participants said they have “occasional problems” with transportation and 12 percent said they have “significant problems” getting where they need to go, although these challenges varied substantially by cultural com-munity. Eleven percent said that being able to pay the rent or mortgage is a “serious problem” for their household; 22 percent said it is a “small problem.” The most common housing-related needs were more space; repairs, maintenance, and pest control; subsidized or affordable hous-ing; utilities assistance; and household items.The study indicated that many immigrant and refugee communities struggle to access main-stream financial systems. The biggest concern in this area was the inability to get credit. Slightly over half of respondents from the Karen commu-nity – 58 percent – reported that the inability to obtain credit was a serious problem. Only 6 per-cent of Somali respondents reported this prob-lem, however – a difference that is likely related to Islamic beliefs related to lending and credit. Nearly one-quarter of participants – 22 percent – indicated that they would be embarrassed to seek help for an emotional or mental health problem. In this study, simply finding culturally appropriate ways to meaningfully inquire about mental health, trauma, and similar sensitive topics – and to effectively translate questions about these topics into several different languages – was extremely challenging. MartinRogers, Evans, and MattessichSECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 45A particular concern made salient by the Speaking for Ourselves study was the lack of long-term care planning for older immigrants and refugees. This issue highlights how systems developed within certain social norms can create barriers for immigrant and refugee communities: Many American households consist of just two generations of family members, and the standard expectation is that older parents will opt for a nursing home or other long-term care facility or arrangement when they can no longer care for themselves. But in many immigrant com-munities, older parents typically expect to move in with an adult child not only to receive care, but also to continue to contribute to the home environment by assisting with child care, food preparation, housekeeping, and other responsi-bilities. There is a lack of public and institutional understanding about how to adapt the safety net and long-term care systems to meet the needs of these populations. It is important to note that differences often exist in expectations among immigrant families depending on the age of the person needing care, when they moved to the U.S., the degree of acculturation, socioeconomic status, and other factors. Civic Participation and Social EngagementSeven out of 10 Speaking for Ourselves participants reported volunteering informally to help neigh-bors, family, or friends, but only about two out of ten respondents formally volunteer through an organization. This gap could indicate an oppor-tunity: Many mainstream cultural institutions in the Twin Cities struggle to attract participation from immigrant families. This may be due in part to the fact that formal volunteering may be more prevalent in individualistic cultures, while a stan-dard practice of informally helping each other out may be more common in collectivist cultures that are more commonly represented by these immigrant cultural communities. Organizations might consider how to structure their programs and volunteer opportunities to better align with a community’s accustomed way of giving their time back to their community. While most of the participants in Speaking for Ourselves – 75 percent – said they have used a public library, very few reported visiting many other mainstream cultural institutions in the Twin Cities. The most common explanations for not using or volunteering at these institutions involved a lack of culturally or linguistically appropriate programming, a lack of staff or vol-unteers from their cultural community, and feel-ing out of place or doubtful that they would have Many American households consist of just two generations of family members, and the standard expectation is that older parents will opt for a nursing home or other long-term care facility or arrangement when they can no longer care for themselves. But in many immigrant communities, older parents typically expect to move in with an adult child not only to receive care, but also to continue to contribute to the home environment by assisting with child care, food preparation, housekeeping, and other responsibilities. There is a lack of public and institutional understanding about how to adapt the safety net and long-term care systems to meet the needs of these populations.Foundation Support of Immigrant CommunitiesSECTOR46 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.organything to contribute as a volunteer. Two Twin Cities institutions that are partners in Speaking for Ourselves are exploring ways of engaging cultural communities: A new program at the Minnesota Historical Society highlights historic sites of interest to the Latino community, and the Science Museum of Minnesota is creating vol-unteer alternatives that are more closely aligned with Hmong cultural practices.How Foundations Can Work With Immigrant CommunitiesOur research with and for immigrant and refugee communities has found that culture and context matter. Speaking for Ourselves identified specific needs and strengths within several immigrant and refugee communities in the Twin Cities; here, we present recommendations for respond-ing to those needs, and building on the strengths, that are most relevant for foundations.3 • Support for secondary refugees. Foundations can fund grantees that can help fill the gap between the end of resettlement bene-fits (e.g., cash assistance and housing) and self-sufficiency. Assistance dollars stay with the first state that accepts a refugee through the federal resettlement program. If a refu-gee subsequently relocates to another state (such as the Somali enclave known as “little Mogadishu” in Minneapolis, where many Somalis refugees from around the U.S. relo-cate), that refugee loses those federal benefits. • Early childhood education. Foundations can support high-quality, culturally and linguis-tically based programs as well as the pro-fessional training of immigrants and other bilingual adults in the field of early child-hood education. And, by helping bridge the language and culture gap between public systems and immigrant families, founda-tions can improve access to available dollars for child care assistance.• Postsecondary and employment training. Most survey respondents expressed a desire for further education. Foundation funding for scholarships and other need-based assistance could be directed toward immigrant com-munities; in Minnesota, that also represents an opportunity to fill projected labor short-ages across many sectors.• Health care. Foundations can support out-reach efforts to ensure that immigrants and refugees obtain available health insurance benefits and connect to culturally respon-sive primary care providers.• Mental and behavioral health. Foundations can respond to the significant unmet and misunderstood behavioral health and well-ness needs of immigrants and refugees by ensuring that they and their grantees use a trauma-informed approach to mental health; supporting the development of cul-turally responsive behavioral health assess-ments and treatment; and addressing the stigma often associated with mental illness, through outreach and education in partner-ship with community and religious leaders. • Long-term care plans. Funders can provide support for families considering long-term care plans for family members who are elderly or disabled. They can also convene policymakers, public administrators, and providers to consider how local and federal systems can better meet the needs of immi-grant and refugee families. Foundations can also learn from and build on the cul-tural values and practices around elder care that come from these communities as we shape elder care for baby boomers and future generations.• Housing. Foundations can work with local governments, real estate developers, and property owners to ensure that safe, ade-quate, affordable, and culturally appropriate housing is available for the immigrant and refugee communities in their area. • Financial institutions. Foundations can encourage and work with financial institu-tions, and community-based organizations 3Complete study findings are available at www.wilder.org/studies/Speaking%20for%20Ourselves/1518MartinRogers, Evans, and MattessichSECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 47serving as intermediaries between immi-grant communities and financial institu-tions, to encourage the development and modification of existing financial products and services to be culturally and reli-giously responsive. • Welcoming spaces. Funders can reach out to immigrants and other under-represented communities by sponsoring events with positive impacts on those communities. For example, a foundation might assist a com-munity organization in hosting a celebration for a specific cultural or traditional holiday, provide a forum for the organization to net-work with other area funders or service pro-viders, or help draw immigrants to general community events through outreach and by ensuring that materials are translated and that culturally appropriate refreshments, language support, etc., are available. • Capacity building. Funders can help empower immigrant and refugee commu-nities to advocate for themselves. For exam-ple, Wilder Center for Communities, the leadership training division of the Wilder Foundation, offers the Community Equity Pipeline, which is a training program for people of color to learn more about the legislative process and how to get their communities’ interests represented in public-policy debates. The Wilder Center for Communities also runs the Latino Leadership Program, which trains Latino community members in leadership skills and in various strategies for community advocacy work. In addition to funding or working directly with immigrant or refugee communities, there are approaches that apply across sectors that can help foundations enhance their impact on an improved quality of life for these communities. First, we recommend taking a balanced approach to any issue, considering not only needs and deficits, but also strengths and assets. While a particular individual, family, or cultural community may appear to have a need that a foundation can fill, it is important to look at other perspectives – including those from within the community itself. A community’s cultural assets and other resilience factors might ulti-mately be a part of a solution. Second, proceed slowly when starting a new project or initiative within a cultural commu-nity, with full appreciation of the time and resources necessary to cultivate true commu-nity engagement and collaboration (Mattessich, Murray-Close, & Monsey, 2001). We have often seen efforts fail because timelines were too short to allow for authentic relationship-building or because projects lacked the resources necessary to achieve real impact. A community’s lack of experience navigating U.S. systems and pro-cesses, or preferences for doing things according to certain cultural traditions, may mean more time and other resources are required for a suc-cessful initiative. A funder’s preconceptions about how to do the work may also create prob-lems that require extra time to work through. A foundation’s time and flexibility, willingness to step back or start over as needed, and openness to authentic collaboration, dialogue, and critical input from start to finish are the hallmarks of successful efforts to better serve communities of While a particular individual, family, or cultural community may appear to have a need that a foundation can fill through funding and grantee efforts, it is important to look at other perspectives – including those from within the community itself. A community’s cultural assets and other resilience factors might ultimately be a part of a solution. Foundation Support of Immigrant CommunitiesSECTOR48 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgimmigrants. In some cases, initiatives without these key ingredients do more harm than good, and could permanently damage the relationship between a cultural community and a foundation. Third, foundations should beware of funding efforts to “solve the problems” of the immi-grants and refugees in their communities unless potential grantees have made special effort to understand and respond to the specific needs and preferences of the cultural communities they seek to serve. Foundations should act cautiously if a grantee wants to use or adapt an existing model or best practice in a new cultural context, especially if the grantee’s staff and leadership do not come from that cultural community. Foundations should ask who is informing the program design, how models are adapted and who is doing the adaptation, and whether the target community would truly benefit. Several specific factors should be considered when adapt-ing a program or service to a particular cultural community: language (oral, written, jargon); ethnic matches; values, customs, and traditions; concepts; goals; methods; and social and political context (Bernal, Bonilla, & Bellido, 1995). When converting materials to other languages, foundations and their grantees should emphasize conceptualization of materials in each language and for each cultural community while main-taining the intent, salience, tone, and context of the original message or materials, rather than mere literal, word-for-word translation. This pro-cess of “transcreation” ensures all participants, even those for whom English is not the primary language, have access to the complete and cultur-ally relevant program, service, or product. As a public charity with an endowment, the Amherst H. Wilder Foundation delivers ser-vices in the same manner as an operating foundation. It has the financial flexibility that many smaller nonprofits do not have to take the time necessary to develop the expertise to create and implement innovative programs to serve our community’s emerging needs. One of Wilder Foundation's model programs, the Social Healing Center, is a social-adjustment program that serves refugees from a variety of Southeast Asian cultural communities. The program helps refugees get basic services, make social and cultural connections, and connect to their new country, and is integrated with health and mental health services that are linguistically and culturally appropriate. Also, the program offers a space to garden and to celebrate holidays, such as the Cambodian New Year. Through reflection and use of data, foundations can make an impact on the degree to which philanthropy improves the quality of life for immigrants and refugees. Foundations should assess their decision-making processes and assumptions, which may be based on dominant social and cultural norms that are not effective for immigrant and refugee communities. They should work toward increased transparency in Ultimately, what funders don’t know about immigrant and refugee communities can hurt them and the communities they are trying to help, resulting in failed initiatives that have no impact – or worse, negative impact. Learning more about immigration trends in communities, building capacity to work effectively with immigrants and refugees, and learning about the impacts of these efforts will ensure that foundations are using their resources effectively to improve the quality of life for our communities’ newest arrivals.MartinRogers, Evans, and MattessichSECTOR The Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8: Special Issue 49staffing, funding, and other critical activities. Grantee evaluation and reporting should include tracking and reporting data for specific cultural communities and disaggregating data to a degree that is useful and meaningful for the communi-ties directly affected. Ultimately, what funders don’t know about immigrant and refugee communities can hurt them and the communities they are trying to help, resulting in failed initiatives that have no impact – or worse, negative impact. Learning more about immigration trends in communi-ties, building capacity to work effectively with immigrants and refugees, and learning about the impacts of these efforts will ensure that foun-dations are using their resources effectively to improve the quality of life for our communities’ newest arrivals.Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank Peter Mathison, Kerry Walsh, MayKao Y. Hang, Allison Liuzzi, Nancy Hartzler, Marilyn Conrad, and Heather Johnson for their help in preparing and review-ing this article. We would also like to thank our colleagues, advisors, funders, partners, and study participants who made this work possible, espe-cially those who were involved with the Speaking for Ourselves study and Minnesota Compass.ReferencesBernal, G., Bonilla, J., & Bellido, C. (1995). Ecological validity and cultural sensitivity for outcome research: Issues for the cultural adaptation and development of psychosocial treatments with Hispanics. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 23(1), 67-82.Corrie, B., & Radosevich, S. (2013). The economic con-tributions of immigrants in Minnesota. Saint Paul, MN: Minnesota Chamber of Commerce.Esipova, N., & Ray, J. (2009, November 2). 700 million worldwide desire to migrate permanently. Washington: Gallup. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/124028/700-million-worldwide-desire-mi-grate-permanently.aspx\Fairlie, R., Morelix, A., Reedy, E., & Russell, J. (2015). The Kauffman index. Kansas City, MO: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.MartinRogers, N. (2015). Speaking for ourselves: A study with immigrant and refugee communities in the Twin Cities – data book. Saint Paul, MN: Amherst H. Wilder Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.wilder.org/studies/Speaking%20for%20Ourselves/1518 Mattessich, P. (2000). Speaking for themselves: A survey of Hispanic, Hmong, Russian, and Somali immigrants in Minneapolis-Saint Paul. Saint Paul, MN: Amherst H. Wilder Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.wilder.org/redirects/SpeakingforThemselves.htmlMattessich, P., Murray-Close, M., & Monsey, B. (2001). Collaboration: What makes it work. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research.Minnesota Compass. (n.d. a). Percent foreign born, rank of state, 2014. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research. Re-trieved from http://www.mncompass.org/immigra-tion/population-trends#1-5510-g Minnesota Compass. (n.d. b). Foreign born population by birthplace, Minnesota, 1870-2012. Saint Paul, MN: Wild-er Research. Retrieved from http://www.mncompass.org/immigration/population-trends#1-5581-g Minnesota Compass. (n.d. c). Population by nativity, Twin Cities 7-county region, Greater MN, and MN, 1970-2014. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research. Retrieved from http://www.mncompass.org/immigration/popula-tion-trends#1-10781-dMinnesota Compass. (n.d. d). Proportion of adults (age 16-64) working by race, Minnesota, 2008-2014. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research. Retrieved from http://www.mncompass.org/workforce/proportion-of-adults-working#1-6025-gMinnesota Compass. (n.d. e). High school students graduating on time by race, Minnesota, 2003-2015. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research. Retrieved from http://www.mncompass.org/education/high-school-gradua-tion#1-6083-gFoundation Support of Immigrant CommunitiesSECTOR50 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgMinnesota Compass. (n.d. f ). 3rd grade students achieving reading standards by race, Minnesota, 2015. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research. Retrieved from http://www.mncompass.org/disparities/race#1-9515-gMinnesota Compass. (n.d. g). Residents under 65 without health insurance by race, Minnesota, 2009-2014. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Research. Retrieved from http://www.mncompass.org/health/health-care-coverage#1-5366-gMinnesota State Demographic Center. (2013, De-cember). In the shadow of boomers: Minnesota’s labor force outlook. Saint Paul, MN: Author. Retrieved from http://mn.gov/admin/images/in-the-shadow-of-the-boomers-labor-force-outlook-msdc-dec2013.pdf Pew Research Center. (2012, June 20). Mexicans back military campaign against cartels. Washington: Author. Retrieved from http://www.pewglobal.org/2012/06/20/mexicans-back-military-cam-paign-against-cartels/ Piguet, E., & Frank, L. (Eds.). (2014). People on the move in a changing climate: The regional impact of environmental change on migration. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2015, June 18). Worldwide displacement hits all-time high as war and persecution increase. Geneva, Swit-zerland: Author. Retrieved from http://www.unhcr.org/558193896.html U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Office of Refugee Resettlement. (2015). Refugee arrival data. Washington: Author. Retrieved from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr/resource/refugee-arrival-dataWorld Bank. (2011). Migration and remittances factbook 2011 (2nd ed.). Washington: Author. Retrieved from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/Re-sources/Factbook2011-Ebook.pdf Yoshikawa, H., Weiland, C., Brooks-Gunn, J., Burchi-nal, M. R., Espinosa, L. M., Gormley, W., et al. (2013, October). Investing in our future: The evidence base on preschool education. New York: Foundation for Child Development. Retrieved from http://fcd-us.org/sites/default/files/Evidence%20Base%20on%20Pre-school%20Education%20FINAL.pdfNicole MartinRogers, Ph.D., is senior research manager at Wilder Research, a division of the Amherst H. Wilder Foundation. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Nicole MartinRogers, Wilder Research, 451 Lexington Parkway North, Saint Paul, MN 55104 (email: nicole.martinrogers@wilder.org). Ryan Evans, B.A., is a research associate at Wilder Research. Paul Mattessich, Ph.D., is executive director of Wilder Research.MartinRogers, Evans, and Mattessich