ABSTRACT: 
Using critical discourse analysis, this twelve-country study addresses a key lacuna by examining civil society perspectives on the implementation of the Participative Democratic Model (PDM) of gender mainstreaming in post-conflict states. The findings reveal specific data, transitional justice, and governance challenges in war-affected states as policy actors press for heightened attention to issues such as the effects on women of war-induced poverty, human rights violations, and women’s empowerment in state reconstruction and peace-building. The analysis shows the aftermath of war accentuates frame misalignment between civil society and governing elites. In order to address this a Transformative Model (TM) of Participative Mainstreaming in Post-conflict States is proposed. Building on conflict theory it argues for the engendering of “transitional justice” in order to secure equality in public policy and law-making. In particular, it details how future attempts to apply the PDM need to be adapted across four Transformational Domains: actors, issues, rules, and structures. Each is populated by “post-conflict issues/actions”. When CSOs successfully advance claims for modifying policy and practice “frame-alignment” occurs and the implementation of PDM may be adapted to the specificities of war-affected states. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Taking a process-oriented approach means that post- conflict” countries should be seen as lying along a transition continuum (in which they sometimes move backward), rather than placed in more or less arbitrary boxes, of being in conflict” or at peace.” Examples of the ‘‘milestones” in the post-conflict transition alluded to include: cessation of hostilities and violence; signing of political/peace agreements; demobilization, disarmament and reintegration; refugee repatriation; establishing a func- tioning state; achieving reconciliation and societal integration; and, economic recovery. 2006 East Timorese crisis—a conflict between sections of the military, expanded to a coup attempt and general violence throughout country (1,400 died) (Huang & Harris, 2006) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Pe rc en ta ge o f a ll qu as i-s en te nc es Post-conflict Non-conflict Figure 1. Ranking of lead frames in post-conflict State and CSO discourse State CSO Frame 6 1 Participation/equal representation of women in decision making 1 2 Rights 3 3 Gender-based violence 4 4 Education 5 5 Economic inequality/poverty - 6 Widows 2 7 Generic—gender equality 8 8 Training needs – 9 Displacement/refugees 7 – Data Table 2. Regional differences in issue-salience of policy frames in State Beijing +20 reports (N = 2,498) Africa Asia Europe Rights 13.7 17.3 8.1 Generic—equality 6.2 25.5 30.9 18.4 Education 26.3 10.9 4.8 Economic inequality/poverty 15.1 8.1 3.4 Participation 3.8 9.2 21.4 Data 0.5 2.8 4.4 Empowerment 7.5 5.9 2.4 Changing attitudes/discriminatory norms 1.2 3.9 3.4 Training/skills 7.3 3.0 2.8 286 WORLD DEVELOPMENTweakened civil society networking and mobilization—and undermined CSOs’ general ability to engage with, and make its ‘‘voice” heard by state elites in fulfillment of the BDPfA. Examples of this include: ‘‘Firstly, threats and attacks 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 ﬂict States is proposed. Building on conﬂict theory it argues for the engendering of ‘‘transitional justice” in order to secure equality in public policy and law-making. In par- ticular, it details how future attempts to apply the PDM need to be adapted across four Transformational Domains: actors, issues, rules, and structures. Each is populated by ‘‘post-conﬂict issues/actions”. When CSOs successfully advance claims for modifying policy and practice ‘‘frame-alignment” occurs and the implementation of PDM may be adapted to the speciﬁcities of war-aﬀected states.  2016 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CCBY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by/4.0/). Key words — women, gender mainstreaming, civil society, post-conﬂict, discourse, theory*The author acknowledges the helpful and constructive comments of three anonymous referees when revising an earlier draft of this paper. Funding for this research was provided by the Economic and Social Research Council under Award No. ES/L009099/1. Final revision1. INTRODUCTION Post-conﬂict states present a challenging yet under-theorized context for the implementation of gender mainstreaming, a pro-active and holistic approach to promoting gender equality in policy and law. In particular, insuﬃcient scholarly attention has been paid to how mainstreaming interacts with transi- tional justice during state reconstruction. In social theory- terms the post-conﬂict phase can be viewed as a ‘‘policy win- dow”—or what neo-institutionalism refers to as a ‘‘critical juncture”. It is the point when the restoration of the rule of law (‘‘transitional justice”) presents an opportunity to redraft structures and processes of governance to embed gender equality in ways consistent with the mainstreaming ethos. Yet for this to be done eﬀectively ﬁrst requires understanding of the speciﬁc issues related to the implementation of the Par- ticipative Democratic Model of gender mainstreaming (PDM) in war-aﬀected states. Originally developed in work by Nott (2000), the PDM requires governments to engage with civil society and promote gender equality in all aspects of policymaking (see also Barnett Donaghy, 2003; Sen, 2000). It is an imperative originating from the UN Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (BDPfA), a landmark conference on women’s rights held in 1995 (Bunch & Fried, 1996). 1 The Beijing Declaration also requires civil society organisations’ (CSO) perspectives to be taken into account in the UN’s monitoring of the 180 signatory-states’ progress in realizing the BDPfA’s goals. Thus this study’s original contribution is to use the rich dataset comprising CSO reports to the UN in order to advance under- standing of the challenges of the PDM in post-conﬂict coun- tries. The ﬁndings show that in war-aﬀected states the PDM has speciﬁc data, transitional justice, and governance requirements as policy actors press for heightened attention to issues such as the eﬀects on women of war-induced poverty and human rights violations—as well as the need to promote women’s280empowerment in state reconstruction and peace-building. In addition, the ensuing discussion suggests that, in the twelve post-conﬂict states studied, the legacy of war impedes the PDM by disrupting and weakening civil society networks and engagement, thereby adding to a disjuncture between the discourse of CSOs and governing policy elites. In turn, the present empirical analysis forms the basis for a Transfor- mative Model of Participative Mainstreaming in Post- Conﬂict States. It is a heuristic that draws on the transitional justice literature in order to build a conceptual analytical framework that captures the challenges of mainstreaming in post conﬂict environments. Rather than being a universal, unvarying schema, the Model is adaptive to the speciﬁcities of individual countries. Its purpose is to inform future practice and pave the way for further empirical investigation via single- country or comparative regional studies. The overall focus of this study is apposite because, since its launch in 1995, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action has been applied to a global context in which there has been over 100 episodes of major armed conﬂict (Derouen, Heo, & Heo, 2007). 2 However, notwithstanding the ubiquity of war and the PDM’s status as the leading inter- national approach to gender equality, there has been a dearth of cross-national analysis of its implementation in post- con- ﬂict societies. Ni Aolain, Haynes, and Cahn’s seminal work (2011, p. 11) concurs, noting: ‘‘further concrete research on the successes and shortcomings of gender mainstreaming in development and post-conﬂict settings is needed before a more thorough evaluation can emerge”. Moreover, as Omona and Aduo (2013, p. 119) cogently note, ‘‘stakeholders need to eﬀec- tively consider analysis of need by gender in their programmesaccepted: January 10, 2016. CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 281if sustainable post-conﬂict, peace, participation and prosperity is to be realised”. Accordingly, 20-years on from Beijing Dec- laration, this paper addresses these lacunae. As noted, atten- tion to civil society views is appropriate because the Participative Democratic Model of mainstreaming is predi- cated on Article 20 of the BDPfA. This asserts ‘‘civil society cooperation with Governments [is] important to the eﬀective implementation and follow-up of the Platform for Action”. Governments should secure, ‘‘the participation and contribu- tion of all actors of civil society, particularly women’s groups and networks and other non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, with full respect for their autonomy” (UN, 1995). Thus, far from being a top-down, imposed political ‘‘project”—progress depends upon eﬀective engagement and co-working between the state and civil soci- ety. The current use of critical discourse analysis is underpinned by diverse strands of social theory including the interpretive school of policy analysis (Yanow, 1999) and the literature on social constructivism (Kukla, 2000). Both place emphasis on language—speciﬁcally, policy discourse—in order to reveal policy actors’ ‘‘cognitive maps”. In other words, their beliefs, values, interpretations, and knowledge relevant to addressing a given policy issue (Eden & Ackermann, 2004). The analysis explores ‘‘issue salience” or the level of attention to areas or topics of concern. Reference to the literature on qualitative analysis using framing shows how this matters. As Snow et al. (1986, p. 464) note it ‘‘render[s] events or occurrences meaningful. . . [it] function[s] to organize experience and guide action, whether individual or collective” (emphasis added). Thus, the level of attention to a frame—or ‘‘issue areas of con- cern”—is central to understanding policy intervention. Partic- ularly, as in the present case, it tells us whether implementation is attuned to the needs of a given social and political context—such as societies adapting from earlier epi- sodes of conﬂict. ‘‘Issue-salience” here is a technique borrowed from electoral studies (cf. Volkens, 2001); it focuses on the level of attention to a given topic among competing issues and agendas in political discourse. The underlying rationale is grounded in the literature of political agenda setting (Cf. Cobb & Ross, 1997) and states that the greater the focus and prioritization of an issue, probabilistically, the greater likelihood it will ultimately translate into eﬀective policy out- comes. Overall, framing and issue-salience come together in the underlying logic that policy actors with shared understand- ings, priorities for action are better placed to achieve strategic policy goals. On deﬁnitional matters, for the present purposes ‘‘armed conﬂict” signiﬁes ‘‘a contested incompatibility which concerns government and/or territory where the use of armed force between two parties, of which at least one is the government of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths” (UCDP, 2014, p. 7). Whereas ‘‘civil society” refers to associa- tional activities involving the family, non-governmental orga- nizations, pressure groups, charities, community groups, social movements and campaigning organizations (Cohen & Arato, 1994; Keane, 1988). The key data sources in this study are: 1. A stratiﬁed ran- dom sample of 120 reports submitted to the United Nations by women’s CSO operating in post-conﬂict countries 2005– 15 3; and 2. national Beijing +20 reports (circa 2014–15) from a dozen post-conﬂict UN member states, along with a second ‘‘control group” from 12 non-conﬂict countries. These data- sets allow an assessment of the issues, progress, and challenges related to the implementation of mainstreaming as required by the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.The remainder of the paper is structured thus: following an overview of the literature on mainstreaming, civil society and conﬂict, the methodology is summarized. Next, analysis of state discourse is presented. It is followed by an exploration of civil society organisations’ discourse on the implementation of mainstreaming in war-aﬀected states. The empirical data are then used to build theory and a Transformative Model of Participative Mainstreaming in post-conﬂict states is out- lined. The concluding section reﬂects on the way that PDM is aﬀected by post-conﬂict contexts and the implications for future policy and practice.2. PARTICIPATIVE DEMOCRATIC MAINSTREAM- ING, CIVIL SOCIETY AND CONFLICT The international spread of gender mainstreaming over the past quarter century has been promoted by the United Nations. Its uptake also owes much to its holistic and pro- active nature (notably, through the application of key princi- ples, tools, and techniques to all stages of the policy process, see Ghodsee, Stan, & Weiner, 2010)—as well as its democratic credentials (Luciak, 2001). A full discussion of its development is beyond the present purposes (for a discussion see for exam- ple Rees, 2005). The UN (2002, p. v) deﬁnes it as follows: the process of assessing the implications for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programmes, in all areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making women’s as well as men’s concerns and experiences an integral dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and pro- grammes in all political, economic, and societal spheres so that women and men beneﬁt equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ulti- mate goal is to achieve gender equality. Despite the rapid spread of mainstreaming this has not been a uniform process. Thus, Hafner-Burton and Pollack (2002, p. 339, emphasis added) allude to the varied impact that main- streaming has had in a global context: ‘‘we suggest, however, that the rhetorical acceptance of mainstreaming by various international organizations obscures considerable diversity in both the timing and the nature of mainstreaming processes within and among organizations. This variation, we argue, can be explained in terms of the categories of political oppor- tunity, mobilizing structures and strategic framing put forward by social movement theorists”. Accordingly, this study responds to the latter call and examines these aspects in post-conﬂict countries. As a burgeoning literature reveals, gender mainstreaming is more successful if it is informed and advanced by women’s movements as well as wider civil society engagement (see for example Carney, 2002; Chaney, 2013, 2016; Madsen, 2012; True, 2003). In contrast to technical and bureaucratic approaches, this has been dubbed the ‘‘participative demo- cratic model” of mainstreaming, for it places emphasis on involving those targeted by mainstreaming initiatives in both the design and delivery of policy (Barnett Donaghy, 2003; Nott, 2000). As noted, it has wide international ‘‘reach”. It has received particular attention in the UK, notably in the wake of devolution in 1998–99 (Beveridge, Nott, & Stephen, 2000; Chaney, 2012). Other prominent examples include Ire- land, the United States, and Italy—where it has been used by governments and CSOs alike in order to boost the uptake and ‘‘ownership” of attempts to embed gender equality in pol- icy making (see Mackay & Bilton, 2003, p. 6). As Debusscher and Van der Vleuten (2012, p. 326) observe, participative ‘‘mainstreaming is constructed, articulated, and transformed through discourse. Policy-makers carry the 282 WORLD DEVELOPMENTresponsibility to push [. . .] equality further by involving civil society and individual activists promoting [. . .] equality”. In turn, ‘‘participation” and ‘‘engagement” here can be deﬁned as the full range of formal and informal means employed by individuals and groups to inﬂuence the aims, scope, design, and implementation of public policy (Hogwood & Gunn, 1984). These include networking, protest, boycott, lobbying, and campaigning. Notwithstanding the centrality of civil soci- ety to the PDM a recent survey of the strategic plans of lead- ing international development organizations found that under a half acknowledged capacity building and civil society engagement as a prerequisite for successful mainstreaming outcomes (Moser & Moser, 2005, p. 14; see also Tiessen, 2007). As noted, the term civil society refers to the realm of dialog and human relations that is connected to, but distinct from, the state, markets, and personal or familial sphere (Cohen & Arato, 1994; Keane, 1988). It is a social arena that is of pivotal signiﬁcance to understanding contemporary gender relations because of its potential to challenge the largely male- dominated character of state institutions, act as a source of pluralism and solidarity around norms of equality (Alexander, 1998), and be a locus for rights and recognition (Fraser, 1998; Honneth, 2005). It thus constitutes a key social and political nexus with the state where CSOs may advocate, politicize, and provide services for women through representa- tion and gendered claims-making cognizant of a history of marginalization and oppression (Pascall & Lewis, 2004). From an international perspective there have been over 300 episodes 4 of major armed conﬂict since 1945 (Derouen et al., 2007). 5 In consequence, post-conﬂict countries are subject to a burgeoning literature (for a discussion see Downs & Stedman, 2002). Here they are deﬁned here by adopting Brown, Langer, and Stewart’s deﬁnition (2011, p. 4): Rather than pick one or other condition to deﬁne the beginning and end of ``post-conﬂict,” a more productive approach to conceptualizing the post- conﬂict scenario is to see it not as a period bounded by a single speciﬁc event, but as a process that involves the achievement of a range of peace milestones. Taking a process-oriented approach means that ``post- conﬂict” countries should be seen as lying along a transition continuum (in which they sometimes move backward), rather than placed in more or less arbitrary boxes, of being ``in conﬂict” or ``at peace.” Examples of the ‘‘milestones” in the post-conﬂict transition alluded to include: cessation of hostilities and violence; signing of political/peace agreements; demobilization, disarmament and reintegration; refugee repatriation; establishing a func- tioning state; achieving reconciliation and societal integration; and, economic recovery. Recent work has called for increased attention to gender equality in the aftermath of war. For example, Mckay (2000, p. 561) has questioned ‘‘whether justice can be achieved when judicial and reconciliation processes enable and give power to a select group”? In response, she proposed analytical emphasis on gender justice or ‘‘legal processes which are equitable, not privileged by and for men, and which distinguish the nefarious forms of injustice women experience during and after armed conﬂict”. Notwithstanding this call, the literatures of main- streaming, civil society and conﬂict have largely traveled on parallel tracks. Noted exceptions include Nı´ Aola´in et al.’s (2011, pp. 231–232) work. Here the conclusion was that: Governance programs, even those now required to ``mainstream gender” trend toward securing formal political rights within ofﬁcial political struc- tures and institutions. Existing programs in general try to slot women into new or reformed institutions and secure women's de jure political and civil rights, reﬂecting our general critique of gender mainstreaming as being grafted on, rather than initiated from an organic assessment of what women want and need.Against this backdrop it is germane to underline why gender mainstreaming is so important in post-conﬂict contexts. It is because state rebuilding in war-aﬀected states constitutes a unique opportunity to embed gender equality when the struc- tures, institutions and processes of governance are being re- modeled. This resonates with no less than three strands of social theory. It is an example of Kingdon’s theoretical notion of a ‘‘policy window” (Kingdon, 1995). Furthermore, it is what neo-institutionalist theory dubs a ‘‘critical juncture” (Collier & Collier, 1991). Alternatively, as noted, expressed in terms of social movements theory (McAdam, McCarthy, & Zald, 1996), the post-conﬂict state possesses singular ‘‘polit- ical opportunity structures”—as resources, mobilization, and framings seek to rebuild eﬀective governance. In order to see whether theory is borne out in practice the following method- ology is employed.3. METHODOLOGY This study combines qualitative and quantitative critical dis- course analysis of policy ‘‘framing”. As Creed, Langstraat, and Scully (2002, p. 37) explain; frames can be viewed as ‘‘a necessary property of a text—where text is broadly conceived to include discourses, patterned behavior, and systems of meaning, policy, logics, constitutional principles, and deep cultural narratives”. The aspect examined here is the level of attention to diﬀerent ‘‘issue areas”, in other words the way that states and CSOs frame their discourse in the UN reports in terms of diﬀerent policy topics. To operationalize this a deductive coding schemata (Boyatzis, 1998; Joﬀe & Yardley, 2003) was used to identify key topics—or issue areas—in state and CSO discourse. For example, equality, human rights, rec- onciliation, economic inequality, education, and gender-based violence (see Figure 1—for a full listing). In addition, a num- ber of tropes are associated with the issue-areas in the dis- course. These are themes associated with the issue-areas (see Fischer & Forester, 1993). For example, under the ‘‘rights” issue-area a reoccurring trope was the need to embed rights in new governance/constitutional frameworks. In the case of the gender-based violence issue-area a common trope was ret- rospective pursuit of rights violations that occurred during conﬂict. The current methodology involves measuring ‘‘issue-sal ience”—or the level of attention to a given topic among com- peting issues and agendas in the discourse. It is determined by content analysis (Krippendorﬀ & Bock, 2008)—or the fre- quency of key words, ideas or meanings in policy documents. This was done by adapting a procedure derived from electoral studies, whereby texts are divided into ‘‘quasi-sentences” (or, ‘‘an argument which is the verbal expression of one political idea or issue,” Volkens, 2001, p. 96). Dividing sentences in this manner controls for long sentences that contain multiple pol- icy ideas. To operationalize the methodology electronic ver- sions of the policy documents were analyzed using appropriate software. Oﬃcial UN translations were used when the original document was in a language other than English. A purposive sample of twelve states drawn from Africa, Asia, and Europe was selected. In each there had been signif- icant conﬂict in the past two decades (see Table 1). Three con- tinents formed the basis of the sample in order to present manageable dataset while at the same time oﬀering an interna- tional perspective and a range of development contexts. The research design was constructed in order to identify particular issues in the implementation of mainstreaming related to war- aﬀected countries. The ﬁrst phase in this process was aggregate Table 1. The post-conﬂict states: a summary State Principal years of conﬂict Overview Afghanistan 1996–2014 Afghan Civil Wars 1996–2001; followed by US wars in Afghanistan oﬃcially ended on December 28, 2014. US-led NATO troops remain training & advising Afghan govt. forces. 90,000+ direct war- related deaths (Cramer & Goodhand, 2012; Zenkevicius, 2007) Bosnia 1992–95 Bosnian War—an international armed conﬂict in Bosnia and Herzegovina 1992–95. Part of the break- up of Yugoslavia. 100,000 people were killed (Jeﬀery, 2006) Croatia 1991–95 Croatian War of Independence—conﬂict between Croat forces loyal to Govt. Croatia—which had declared independence from Republic of Yugoslavia —and the Serb-controlled Yugoslav Army/local Serb forces. 20,000 fatalities (Clark, 2013) Ethiopia 1961–91, 1998–2000 1961–1991, Eritrea fought war of independence against Ethiopia. Ethiopian Civil War began September 1974. Eritrean–Ethiopian War 1998–2000 between. Estimates 100–300,000 casualties (Clapham, 2009) Georgia 2008 Russo-Georgian War—conﬂict between Georgia, Russia, and the Russian-backed self-proclaimed republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Est. 1000 causalities (Lynch, 2002) Liberia 1989–96, 1999–2003 First Liberian Civil War—1989–96 Samuel Doe led coup d’e´tat overthrew the elected government in 1980 (100,000–220,000 killed). Second Liberian Civil War—1999–2003 Liberian dissidents ‘‘Organization of Displaced Liberians” invaded from Guinea (150,000–300,000 killed) (Reisinger, 2009) Namibia 1966–90 Namibian War of Independence—nationalist SW Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) and allies fought against the apartheid government of South Africa/ intertwined with the S. African Border War (11,500 casualties) (Kabia, 2010) Nepal 1996–2006 Armed conﬂict between government forces and Maoist rebels. 18,000 killed (Siitonen, 2011) Sierra Leone 1991–2002 Began when Revolutionary United Front & National Patriotic Front of Liberia attempted to overthrow govt. of Joseph Momoh (over 50,000 dead) (Kabia, 2010) Sudan 1955–72, 1983–2005, 2013–15 Complex civil conﬂict between the central Sudanese government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army combined with factionalism and inter-ethnic tensions. February 2015, agreement signed in Addis Ababa, for future transitional government of national unity (Baker & Scheye, 2009) Rwanda 1990–94 Conﬂict between the government of President Juve´nal Habyarimana and the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front—sparked genocidal mass ethnic slaughter of Tutsi and Hutus (estimated 500,000–1,000,000 killed) (Uvin, 2001) Timor 1999–2000 1999 civil conﬂict after majority of eligible voters in the population of East Timor chose independence from Indonesia. 2006 East Timorese crisis—a conﬂict between sections of the military, expanded to a coup attempt and general violence throughout country (1,400 died) (Huang & Harris, 2006) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Pe rc en ta ge o f a ll qu as i-s en te nc es Post-conﬂict Non-conﬂict Figure 1. State framing on the implementation of the BDPfA: post- and non-conﬂict states compared (N = 16,815). CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 283 284 WORLD DEVELOPMENTcomparison of the framing in post conﬂict and non-conﬂict countries. 6 Subsequently, the issues identiﬁed were further explored by analyzing civil society organisations’ discourse in a stratiﬁed random sample of 120 CSO annual reports sub- mitted to the UN Commission on the Status of Women follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women. 7 Twelve reports were selected from each of the post-conﬂict countries 2005–15. To increase reliability both phases of cod- ing (i.e., frames and policy areas) were repeated by a research assistant. This revealed a limited number of discrepancies. In total seven incidences were identiﬁed (under 1%) these were resolved through discussion between coders. Attention now turns to the study ﬁndings—ﬁrst in relation to state discourse on mainstreaming in post-conﬂict societies, followed by ﬁnd- ings from civil society discourse.4. RESEARCH FINDINGS (a) State discourse on the implementation of the Beijing declaration and platform for action Comparative analysis of state discourse on gender main- streaming in the 12 post-conﬂict states’ and a ‘‘control” group of twelve non-conﬂict states shows statistically signiﬁcant dif- ferences framing (p = <0.001) (Figure 1). 8 This matters because, as the following discussion outlines, it reveals the way post-conﬂict contexts shape the implementation of PDM—and, compared to other states, it points to the speciﬁc requirements or demands of war-aﬀected societies. Accordingly, in the post-conﬂict states the ﬁrst-ranked frame in the state discourse was ‘‘rights/ justice” (15.9% of all quasi-sentences); whereas in the ‘‘control” set of non- conﬂict states this was fourth-ranked (8.7%) (p = <0.001). 9 In the former case the discourse was dominated by the legacy of conﬂict. In part, the prominence of the frame reﬂects the ﬁndings of earlier work (Adelman & Peterman, 2014) under- lining how the absence of rights in post-conﬂict contexts can perpetuate the threat of civil violence. Allied to this the dis- course centered on transitional justice matters, principally rebuilding institutions to uphold rights. For example, the need for ‘‘the establishment of many of the structures, mechanisms, and oﬃcial supporting institutions for the advancement of women. . . and mechanisms for deployment of international conventions, and women’s rights, human rights, the dissemi- nation of legal culture” (Sudan, 2015, p. 33). A further aspect was embedding rights in new constitutional frameworks. For example, ‘‘legal reforms have been adopted by the government on the basis of the foundation document—the constitution which guarantees fundamental human rights and principles of equality and non-discrimination” (Ethiopia, 2015, p. 17). Another key trope was the pursuit of rights violations during conﬂict. For example, ‘‘the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission. . . in the event that government authori- ties do not pursue human rights violation cases or violation occurs in relation to this, individuals can visit the Human Rights Commission and request it to pursue the case” (Afgha- nistan, 2015, p. 12). The present ﬁndings showing the emphasis on rights in post conﬂict states’ discourse aligns with recent work (Bell & O’Rourke, 2007, p. 43) calling for a (re-)appraisal of the ‘‘how transitional justice debates help or hinder broader pro- jects of securing material gains for women through transi- tion”. Speciﬁcally, rather than solely focusing on judicial and non-judicial measures implemented to redress the legacies of human rights abuses, it is argued that ‘‘transitional justice”may usefully be seen as a broader concept that resonates with attempts to apply the Participative Democratic Model of mainstreaming in war-aﬀected states. This viewpoint encom- passes ‘‘the normative proposition that various legal responses should be evaluated on: 1. the basis of their prospects for democracy” (Teitel, 2000, p. 7; 2003) and; 2. They should be informed by the idea of ‘‘gender justice”—or, ‘‘legal processes that are equitable, not privileged by and for men, and which acknowledge ways in which women uniquely experience harm” (Mckay, 2000, p. 24). Accordingly, as the following dis- cussion of study ﬁndings from post-conﬂict societies suggests, ‘‘transitional justice” needs to be seen in the context of legal processes and women’s ‘‘voice” in shaping policy and law- making through their societal position and the extent to which they are included in the representative structures of the state (cf. Menkel-Meadow, 1988; Tomlinson, 2011). In turn, these empirical data inform the theoretical framework proposed at the end of the paper. Generic references to ‘‘gender equality” constituted the second-ranked frame in post-conﬂict states, constituting 14% of quasi-sentences; whereas it was ﬁrst-ranked in non- conﬂict states (27.1%, p = <0.001). 10 For example, the eﬀects of ‘‘armed conﬂict. . . [means Nepal] continues to suﬀer from political transition and instability. Although the political chaos has hampered the promotion of gender equality. . . it is recognized that disparity still remains and much eﬀort is needed to achieve gender equality” (Nepal, 2015, p. 5). This resonates with earlier work by Moser (2005, p. 588) who notes that, ‘‘in the [global] north equality may be more of a priority than empowerment; gender mainstreaming may be seen more as the responsibility of government than other institutions (such as donors or civil society)”. The third-ranked frame in post-conﬂict states was gender- based violence (GBV) (12.3% of quasi-sentences), in non- conﬂict states it was second-ranked (19.3%), (p = <0.001). 11 In the former case it is principally concerned with the interplay of war and GBV. The dominant theme was securing justice for victims of GBV during conﬂict. Examples include: ‘‘in Afgha- nistan, women. . . face an even more complicated matter, namely the diverse forms of violence rooted in war and insecu- rity. Other factors go hand in hand and create this dire phe- nomenon, the most signiﬁcant of which are: the lack of law enforcement” (Afghanistan, 2015, p. 5); and: ‘‘the Program for Victims of War-related Rape, Sexual Abuse and Torture in Bosnia and Herzegovina 2013–16 was developed with the aim of ensuring full protection and support to victims of war-related rape, sexual abuse, and torture, and their families, through the improvement of their access to justice, better reha- bilitation, re-socialization, and compensation programs, with active participation of all stakeholders” (Bosnia Herzegovina, 2015, p. 27). The discourse also alludes to the lingering cul- tural and attitudinal eﬀects of war: ‘‘unfavourable social norms which take violence as part of culture and norm of soci- ety hinder the adequate implementation of the [GBV] laws” (Ethiopia, 2015, p. 26). The fourth-ranked frame in post-conﬂict states is ‘‘educa- tion” (11.4% of quasi-sentences), whereas in non-conﬂict states it was sixth-ranked, 7.1%) (p = <0.001). 12 Not only are there signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the attention to this frame, there are also marked contrasts in its use. In the former case there is repeated emphasis on the gendered impact of war. For example, ‘‘unfortunately, one of the areas that has been most aﬀected by war in Afghanistan is the education sec- tor. . .The women have suﬀered the most and that is why edu- cation authorities pay more attention to this matter. . .Therefore, women’s promotion in education lays CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 285the foundation for possibilities of economy, social, cultural, political, social and nurturing development” (Afghanistan, 2015, p. 13). Textual analysis of the education frame reveals a hybridization between mainstreaming and positive action. It is illustrated by the case of Liberia: ‘‘The Education Reform Act of 2011. . . continues to further build on the Girls” Educa- tion Policy of 2006 and addresses. . .Recruitment and training of more female teachers; providing counseling in schools for girls. . .Oﬀering life skills in school to raise the self-esteem of girls so they can say no to sexual abuse; and increasing the availability of school scholarships for girls” (Liberia, 2015, p. 5). In post-conﬂict states the ﬁfth-ranked frame was gender and economic inequality/poverty (10.1% of quasi-sentences), whereas it was third-ranked (9.2% in non-conﬂict states). Again, there is a qualitative diﬀerence in the frame’s usage. In post-conﬂict environments the key issue is the gendered impact of war on poverty. For example, ‘‘emerging issues beyond the year 2015 . . .women in conﬂict areas and refugee camps: [war-related factors] threaten women in development as the most vulnerable as they face displacement, homeless- ness, poverty, and the burden of household. . .” (Sudan, 2015, p. 48). Further to earlier work underlining the scale of the challenges facing post conﬂict states (Hill, 2001), the pre- sent ﬁndings show how gender and poverty are articulated in the context of nation-building. For example, ‘‘women and poverty. . . since independence in 2002, Timor-Leste’s social and economic policies have focused on alleviating poverty to address the immediate needs of our people, consolidating secu- rity and stability, and providing a foundation for nationhood through building institutions of State” (Timor-Leste, 2015, p. 15). Women’s participation in decision-making was the sixth- ranked frame in post-conﬂict states (8.7% of quasi- sentences); it was ﬁfth in non-conﬂict states (7.3%, p = <0.001). 13 The low ranking of this frame is striking given the centrality of state-civil society engagement to participative mainstreaming. It is all the more surprising given govern- ments’ repeated acknowledgment of how war has often set back women’s participation in representative structures. Yet it is also the case that this may reﬂect the fact that these issues have already been addressed to a greater extent that other issues, since post-conﬂict countries are more likely to adopt quotas for women’s representation than non-post-conﬂict states. Examples of the discourse include: ‘‘greatest challenges in achieving gender equality. . . it will be necessary to increase participation of women in decision-making processes in polit- ical, economic, and ﬁnancial areas, as well as in all other areas of life” (Bosnia–Herzegovina, 2015, p. 7); and ‘‘A strategic plan covering the period 2011–30 was approved by the Coun- cil of Ministers in 2012. . .gender equity in participation is one of the priorities” (Timor-Leste, 2015, p. 38). The post-conﬂict discourse under the ‘‘participation” frame places particular emphasis on the transition to democracy. Thus, for example, the Rwandan discourse alludes to, ‘‘eﬀec- tive civil society engagement is a key feature of good gover- nance as an important framework for citizens to voice their needs. [This is] Key to making accountability systems work” (Rwanda, 2015, p. 51). A further noteworthy aspect is how civil society participation is largely unproblematized in state discourse. This aligns with research by Pouligny (2005, p. 495) that questions the way that oﬃcial discourse often homogenizes ‘‘civil society” in post-conﬂict peacebuilding and ‘‘tend[s] to forget the large diversity of local civil societies, creating many counter-eﬀects in the way international pro- grammes purport to support or empower local peopleand. . .may contribute to post-conﬂict peacebuilding” (see also Cornwall, 2003, p. 1325). Overall, as the data in Table Two reveal, the prioritization of issues in post conﬂict countries varies signiﬁcantly between regions (p = <0.001). 14 Key diﬀerences are apparent in the issue-salience of topics. For example, state discourse in Afri- can countries places signiﬁcantly more emphasis on education (26.3%) and skills and training (7.3%), compared to Asia (10.9% and 3.0%, respectively) and Europe (4.8% and 2.8%, respectively) where provision is, generally, more extensive. Whereas greater attention is placed on ‘‘participation” in European states (21.4%), compared to Africa and Asia (3.8% and 9.2%, respectively). The same is true of ‘‘data” (i.e., the availability of gender equality indicators) (4.4% com- pared to 0.5 and 2.8). While African and Asian states place signiﬁcantly more emphasis on rights (13.7 and 17.3—com- pared to 8.1%) (see Table 2). Notwithstanding the existence of statistically-signiﬁcant dif- ferences between issue-areas, the proﬁle of issue salience for post conﬂict and non-conﬂict states is broadly similar. As noted, principal diﬀerences relate to the key frames ‘‘rights”, ‘‘equality”, and GBV. The explanation for this lies in the rub- ric of the UN reporting requirements. It is problematic and may help to explain past under-recognition of the speciﬁc chal- lenges of mainstreaming in war aﬀected states. The reason is the prescriptive nature of the reports (that are structured around a series of questions). This exaggerates the degree of concordance; thereby masking the speciﬁc issues that apply to war aﬀected states. To address this and gain fuller cog- nizance of the particular demands of mainstreaming in post conﬂict countries the following section of this study analyses the discourse in civil society organisations’ reports to the UN. They provide a rich account of the demands and chal- lenges of mainstreaming in war-aﬀected states. In theoretical terms, in contrast to the state texts, CSO reports draw on ‘‘si- tuated knowledge” (Stoetzler & Yuval-Davis, 2002)—or ﬁrst- hand accounts from civil society organizations located in post- conﬂict communities. They aﬃrm that in war-aﬀected states participative mainstreaming has speciﬁc data, transitional jus- tice, and governance requirements as policy actors press for heightened attention to issues such as the eﬀects on women of war-induced poverty and human rights violations—as well as the need to promote women’s empowerment in state recon- struction and peace-building. (b) Civil society organisations’ discourse Two key aspects standout in the following analysis. First, the distinctive needs and challenges of mainstreaming in post-conﬂict contexts. Second, and crucially from the perspec- tive of social theory on ‘‘frame alignment” (see below), there are key contrasts in issue-salience (or ranking of issue-areas of concern) when state and civil society organizations are com- pared (Table 3). This is signiﬁcant in a number of important respects. It underlines the distinctive requirements and issues attached to mainstreaming in war-aﬀected societies. It also conﬁrms a global ‘‘one-size-ﬁts-all” approach to PDM that spans post- and non-conﬂict states is inappropriate. Thus it points to the need for adaptive practice in post-conﬂict envi- ronments. Furthermore, the contrasting issue-salience or pri- oritization that CSOs attach to frames compared to governments is evidence of a ‘‘governance disjuncture” (p = <0.001). 15 It may be seen as symptomatic of a failure to fully embed participative practices so that in-depth idea- tional exchange and dialog between CSOs and state elites is weak or absent. It is exacerbated by war and the way it has Table 3. Ranking of lead frames in post-conﬂict State and CSO discourse State CSO Frame 6 1 Participation/equal representation of women in decision making 1 2 Rights 3 3 Gender-based violence 4 4 Education 5 5 Economic inequality/poverty - 6 Widows 2 7 Generic—gender equality 8 8 Training needs – 9 Displacement/refugees 7 – Data Table 2. Regional diﬀerences in issue-salience of policy frames in State Beijing +20 reports (N = 2,498) Africa Asia Europe Rights 13.7 17.3 8.1 Generic—equality 6.2 25.5 30.9 GBV 18.4 13.5 18.4 Education 26.3 10.9 4.8 Economic inequality/poverty 15.1 8.1 3.4 Participation 3.8 9.2 21.4 Data 0.5 2.8 4.4 Empowerment 7.5 5.9 2.4 Changing attitudes/discriminatory norms 1.2 3.9 3.4 Training/skills 7.3 3.0 2.8 286 WORLD DEVELOPMENTweakened civil society networking and mobilization—and undermined CSOs’ general ability to engage with, and make its ‘‘voice” heard by state elites in fulﬁllment of the BDPfA. While post conﬂict contexts may present civil society organi- zations with more room to mobilize freely and allow forms of mobilization to become more national (not just local, as dur- ing conﬂict), a burgeoning literature describes the manifold arresting eﬀects that conﬂict may have on CSOs’ participation. For example, as Brinkerhoﬀ (2010, p. 69) observes: some fragile states, especially those in the deteriorating and post-conﬂict categories, mobilize public opinion and put a media spotlight on interven- tion efforts. These factors often exacerbate organizational wrangles and uncoordinated cross-purposes among donors and their partners on the ground as they respond to their constituencies, and pursue their mandates and individual interests. Donors do not act as a uniﬁed decision-maker; turf battles, and bureaucratic inﬁghting result. In a similar vein, Anand (2005, p. 27) notes a further range of issues including how: ‘‘conﬂict may exacerbate ethnic riv- alry or weaken trust, and diminish possibilities for collective action”, with further challenges arising from ‘‘diminished human resource capacity of institutions in the post-conﬂict phase due to displacement and migration”. Moreover, Evans-Kent and Bleiker (2003, p. 103) paint a picture of the particular challenges of post-conﬂict settings for participation: ‘‘NGOs remain severely limited by ad hoc and project-speciﬁc funding sources, as well as by the overall policy environment in which they operate. Unless these underlying issues are addressed, NGOs will ultimately become little more than extensions of prevalent multilateral and state-based approaches to post-conﬂict reconstruction”. In addition, Wessells (2007, p. 264, chap. 15) also alludes to the psycho-social damage of conﬂict on civil society. This means ‘‘mobilization approaches [to boost NGO participation] face numerous practical and conceptual obstacles. In some situations, organi- zational cultures provide signiﬁcant challenges. . . the provision of direct services can become a surrogate for consultation,partnership, and empowerment. It can also become a mind-set and part of organizational culture that is diﬃcult to change”. Moreover, Kandiyoti (2006, chap. 15) observes how years of gender oppression during conﬂict undermines women’s social capital and negatively impacts on both skills and propensity to engage in policy and politics, a pathology compounded by the bureaucratization of aid programmes in the aftermath of war. This resonates with the work of Fitzduﬀ and Church (2004, p. 3, chap. 1) who note that ‘‘many NGOs, perhaps the majority, do not feel as yet they have the experience, skills, conﬁdence, time or resources to step away from their daily activities and engage in the policy arena. For some this has led to a sense of powerlessness where oﬃcial actors and the policy process are concerned which inhibits their ability to strategize and engage eﬀectively”. Lastly, Antlo¨v, Brinkerhoﬀ and Rapp’s (2010, p. 417) account points to diﬃculties stemming from ‘‘overreliance on confrontational advocacy strategies, shallow organizational capacity, inability to cooperate to leverage impact, limited outreach to indige- nous constituencies and sustainability problems”. In the present study the foregoing challenges facing civil society organizations manifest themselves in a dissonance; state and civil society are shown to be pursuing diﬀerent actions and priorities. Taken together, they point to the dis- tinctiveness of the post-conﬂict environment for the applica- tion of mainstreaming. Importantly, they underline that mainstreaming needs to be adapted to the needs of post- conﬂict states through state-civil society dialog in order that it is supported and ‘‘owned” by citizens as well as elites. The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action is explicit on the foregoing point. As noted, Article 20 highlights the need for civil society engagement in the implementation of gender mainstreaming. A strong indication that current prac- tice falls short of this is the fact that the lead frame in the civil society organisations’ discourse is increasing women’s partici- pation in decision-making. It accounted for almost a third of 05 10 15 20 25 30 35 Pe rc en ta ge o f q ua si -s en te nc es CSO PC State Figure 2. Civil society organisations’ and state framing on the implementation of the BDPfA in post-conﬂict countries (N = 15,428). CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 287all quasi-sentences (31.1%), whereas it was a lowly sixth- ranked in the state discourse (Figure 2). The current ﬁndings show civil society organizations repeatedly calling on govern- ing elites to increase opportunities for women to participate in matters like peace-building and reconstruction. As noted, the CSO discourse also underlines how the legacy of war disrupts and diminishes civil society organizations’ networks and capacity to engage in policy work. Examples of this include: ‘‘Firstly, threats and attacks on the right to life by the various combatants force women to move, for the most part, away from the rural areas, where they are conducting productive projects that empower other women and strengthen society, which causes a disruption of organizational processes” 16; and Along with the deepening violence women experience during war, the long- term effects of conﬂict and militarization create a culture of violence that renders women especially vulnerable after war, because institutions of gov- ernance and law are weakened and social fragmentation is pro- nounced. . .We reafﬁrm the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conﬂicts and in peace-building, and to stress the impor- tance of their equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security, and the need to in- crease their role in decision-making with regard to conﬂict prevention and resolution'. 17 This is a troubling ﬁnding because, as a burgeoning litera- ture attests, post-conﬂict contexts may present propitious political opportunity structures for feminist activism (Handrahan, 2004; Kandiyoti, 2006, chap. 15; Smet, 2009). As noted, the ‘‘policy window” (Kingdon, 1995) following the cessation of conﬂict creates opportunities to challenge pre- vailing attitudes, establish new norms, propose new rules, select and empower new leaders, and embed gender equality in new institutions (Goetz & Hassim, 2003). In the parlance of (neo-)institutionalist theory (Collier & Collier, 1991; Ertman, 1997) post-conﬂict societies present a ‘‘critical juncture” and avail opportunities to disrupt the ‘‘pathdependency” (Pierson & Skocpol, 2002, p. 6) of male-oriented norms and practices that have hitherto characterized contem- porary culture. The analysis also reveals that framing in relation to partici- pation frequently invokes the UN policy framework as a rai- son d’etre for revised practice by government—emphasizing the need to embed women’s participation in peace treaties and the policies of reconstruction. For example, ‘‘We call on the United Nations and its Member States to implement and expand the provisions of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), by . . . integrating the role of women into decision- making in post-conﬂict reconstruction and in peace- making” 18; ‘‘women continue to be left out of formal peace processes. The continued marginalization of women in formal peace processes is a huge impediment to sustainable develop- ment, democracy, and lasting peace” 19; and ‘‘main goal is to guarantee that gender equality and women full participa- tion in post-conﬂict society is eﬀectively included as one of the goals of peace agreements and women full participation in post-conﬂict society”. 20 The prominence of the ‘‘participa- tion” frame is both a reﬂection of an apparent strong demand on the part of CSOs to engage and an indication that women remain under-represented and marginalized in the process of reconstruction. The signal message emerging from the data is that implementation of the PDM in post-conﬂict states requires speciﬁc adaptive measures to overcome this; it is an issue that is returned to in the penultimate section of the paper. The second-ranked frame was ‘‘justice/rights” (10.7%). As in the case of the state discourse, this underlines the interplay, (often overlooked in the mainstreaming literature), between ‘‘transitional justice”, gender justice and post-conﬂict recon- struction (cf. Mckay, 2000; Tomlinson, 2011). However, in contrast to the earlier state discourse, CSOs placed particular emphasis on the enforcement of rights. The distinction here is that government discourse can be characterized by an over- 288 WORLD DEVELOPMENTriding concern with public administration whereas CSOs’ emphasis is on citizen protection and empowerment. Examples of the civil society discourse include: ‘‘to defend fundamental human rights, including freedom of thought, expression and assembly or organization. . .promotes the growth and develop- ment of free and vigorous civil societies”, 21 and ‘‘Women’s rights as human rights are indeed fundamental to societal growth and well-being”. 22 True to the normative vision of mainstreaming the discourse demands that human rights be embedded in all aspects of governance and policy. For exam- ple, we ‘‘call on all donor countries to place women’s human rights at the core of funding policies for reconstruction and development by ensuring that women avail of funds directly” 23; and ‘‘We urge [government] to endorse the idea of integrating peace/human rights education into all systems of education as a positive means of preventing violent con- ﬂict”. 24 A further prominent concern in the CSO discourse related to damaged and dysfunctional justice systems in post-conﬂict states. In particular, attention centered on the diminished capacity to uphold laws promoting gender equality. For exam- ple, ‘‘discrimination in the justice system may result in a num- ber of ways, including from laws that do not at ﬁrst glance appear to be discriminatory, or from a lack of enforcement of laws”. 25 Allied to the foregoing, the data also show CSOs calling for incorporation of UN obligations into domestic law. For example, ‘‘Since international mandates are often not implemented, even within signatory countries, national laws that promote women’s rights need to be adopted and enforced”. 26 Within the frame a reoccurring trope was gender and access to justice. A burgeoning literature attests to wide- spread and deep-set problems in ensuring that prevailing legal structures and processes are accessible and promoted gender equality (cf. Askin, 2002; Manjoo & McRaith, 2011; Meertens & Zambrano, 2010). Examples of the present discourse include: ‘‘discrimination in the justice system may result in a number of ways, including. . . from a failure to institute special measures to redress the historically unequal opportunities provided to men and women or from women’s lack of access to justice. . . they symbolize the clear disrespect of Governments for the fundamental right of women to equality” 27; and there is a continuing need ‘‘to remove the obstacles to access to justice by women and girl survivors of violence. . . [and] to empower organizations ﬁghting violence against women and girls so they can intervene as civil plaintiﬀs by 2015”. 28 Raising awareness of gender rights is a further key theme under this frame. For example: ‘‘Women and girls should have access to justice. While all people are entitled to justice, women and girls are often unaware of their rights and signif- icant barriers are put in their way in seeking to exercise those rights. Cultural as well as institutional barriers must be traversed so that women’s human rights are not trampled upon. Gender-friendly police and courts are important”. 29 The discourse also underlines the need for the descriptive representation of women in the institutions of justice, in other words, as a burgeoning literature attests (cf. Razavi, 1997) gender balance in oﬃcial positions—such as the parlia- ment and the judiciary. For example, ‘‘it is only through the participation of women in peace-making, and protection in their role as vital witnesses in post-conﬂict war crimes tribunals, that other women will feel safe enough to confront their oppressors”. 30 Moreover, analysis of the CSO discourse underlines the need to secure gender equality inleadership roles in civil society organizations. For example, ‘‘to place women’s human rights at the core of funding policies for reconstruction and development by ensuring that women. . .participate and take leadership in reconstructing community life and to participate in decision-making at local, regional and national levels”. 31 Gender-based violence was the third-ranked frame (9.8%). As Chrispus Okello and Hovil (2007, p. 433) note, over recent years ‘‘gender-related crimes have been pervasive [yet] the nas- cent ﬁeld of transitional justice is only just beginning to grap- ple with these issues or design appropriate measures of redress”. This is reﬂected in the CSO discourse. For example, we ‘‘urge national governments and the international commu- nity to ensure full implementation of international humanitar- ian and human rights law that protects the rights of women and children during and after conﬂicts [and] Address the roots of conﬂicts such as ‘gender-related’ violations including rape”. 32 Greater attention to the health implications of GBV was a further prominent trope. For example, ‘‘In Rwanda, widows who were victims of rape during the geno- cide, continue, nearly a decade later, to face abuse and stigma, and without the most rudimentary health care for lack of funds”. 33 The fourth-ranked frame was education (9.2% of quasi- sentences). Two main tropes characterized this frame. Educa- tion as a means of empowerment—and embedding peace, respect, and tolerance in the school curriculum. In the former case Sorensen (1998, p. 25) observes, ‘‘eﬀorts to create demo- cratic institutions and recognize basic human rights are man- ifold in most post-conﬂict countries. From a gender perspective, these eﬀorts are often welcomed as a step to creat- ing greater gender equality and women have been active in try- ing to protect this new space by organizing civic education”. This is reﬂected in the CSO discourse. For example, ‘‘Strengthening women’s capacities to act through systems and in public forums can be accomplished by well-developed ‘popular education’ at the community level as well as through academic higher education, which, though valuable and neces- sary, is not available to many women”. 34 The discourse on community-based initiatives is complemented by that on state schooling. For example, ‘‘there is a need for curriculum reform and teacher training for higher quality schools to provide a more robust and relevant educational opportunities for girls”. 35 Fifth-ranked, ‘‘economic equality/poverty” was a frame that accounted for 8.6% of quasi-sentences in the CSO discourse. For example, ‘‘gender equality is absolutely essential both for the progressive realization of women’s rights and for any successful development strategy. Women continue to bear the brunt of poverty. It is estimated that 70% of the poor are women, and their lack of power and assets is a major obstacle to poverty eradication”. 36 Notably, the discourse places particular attention on the negative social consequences of poverty. For example, ‘‘poverty is taking new shapes, such as human traﬃcking, and is increasing. . . those who fall prey to human traﬃckers are those in extreme poverty. . .Without addressing the root cause of poverty, its consequences, such as human traﬃcking, child marriage, prostitution, and other social evils, cannot be prevented”. 37 Underlining the distinctiveness of the post-conﬂict environ- ment for mainstreaming practices, meeting the policy needs of war widows was the next ranked frame (5.9%). Diverse tropes made up the frame including attention to participation and human rights. CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 289Armed conﬂict creates millions of widows and wives of the ``disappear ed”. . . In the reconstruction process these women are so often neglected, their voices are not heard. They have no legal rights. Neither their immedi- ate nor their long-term needs are adequately addressed. These abandoned women should be crucial players in the reconstruction process. . .They are the very backbone of society and we should empower them. 38 In addition, attention centered on greater attention to ‘‘the link between the poverty of children and the lack of widows’ human rights” 39; as well as the need for more accurate data to underpin policy: ‘‘there is a lack of reliable data on, among others, numbers, ages, needs, roles, lifestyles, experiences of violence, coping strategies, support systems and aspirations of widows”. 40 Moreover, CSOs called for more measures to prevent the exploitation and end the vulnerability of widows. For example, ‘‘in Afghanistan and Iraq young widows and the daughters of widows have been sold into forced marriages, exploited labor, prostitution, and traﬃcking. Widows, because they have no longer the protection of a male partner, are exposed to rape and other violence. Traditional customs may deny them rights of inheritance or land ownership so that there is no possible escape from their poverty”. 41 It is also notable that CSOs generally eschew speciﬁc refer- ence to ‘‘mainstreaming”. The latter accounted for under 1% of quasi-sentences overall. This is striking and suggests that CSOs generally lack both knowledge and awareness of the concept. Such a ‘‘disconnect” is deeply problematic for, as Walby (2005, p. 332) explains, ‘‘the level of sophistication of the gender equality awareness within the political environment aﬀects whether state functionaries can eﬀectively implement gender mainstreaming”. Thus the present ﬁndings resonate with earlier work on African states by Wendoh and Wallace (2005, p. 75). This concluded that: ‘‘gender mainstreaming is largely an external concept. It has been adopted by govern- ments and by some local NGOs, usually those headed by women and urban based. Gender mainstreaming is often per- ceived by other NGOs to be for the beneﬁt of donors, rather than the beneﬁt of communities’. Furthermore, the ﬁndings reveal how gender mainstreaming in post-conﬂict contexts requires attention to women’s train- ing and skills. It is an issue outlined by Das (2014, p. 206) who notes, ‘‘understanding of the gap between women’s moti- vation to participate and their ability or agency to do so. . .highlights how bridging this gap could be pivotal in strengthening women’s role in. . . governance”. Examples of the discourse include, ‘‘Enabling Environment. . .Needed are more mentoring and training programs so that women will be ready to step into such roles” 42; ‘‘the priorities in justice for these widows are for security, protection from violence, enjoyment of the right to education and training for paid work” 43; and ‘‘the gender sensitizing training of peacekeeping forces has not progressed suﬃciently nor has there been ade- quate publication of monitoring or evaluation”. 44 A further key aspect of the CSO discourse was the way that post-conﬂict states present the need for adaptive implementa- tion of the PDM in order to address gendered patterns of care. Examples include: ‘‘Many young women are carers of adults disabled by conﬂict. They themselves experience long-term physical and psychological eﬀects of conﬂict. Furthermore there has been little focus on how they can be more eﬀectively involved in peace building processes”; and ‘‘Many young women are carers of adults disabled by conﬂict. They them- selves experience long-term physical and psychological eﬀects of conﬂict. Furthermore there has been little focus on how they can be more eﬀectively involved in peace-building pro- cesses. Young women are crucial stakeholders in post conﬂict reconstruction yet in many countries there has been little or noattempt to engage girls in constructing future peaceful soci- eties, and in doing so to tackle the domination of political are- nas by men”. 45 Lastly, ‘‘gender budgeting” refers to a gender-based assess- ment of budgets, incorporating a gender perspective at all levels of the budgetary process and restructuring revenues and expenditures in order to promote gender equality” (Quinn, 2009). It is a further frame in the discourse where CSOs emphasize the need for adaptive practice in post- conﬂict contexts. Examples of the discourse include: ‘‘the par- ticipation of women in creating gender-responsive budgets is critical to enhancing this process [of promoting gender equal- ity]. However, the lack of adequate resources has been one fac- tor at the national level that has hindered progress toward the fulﬁllment of commitments made by governments on ﬁnancing for gender equality and the empowerment of women”. 465. A TRANSFORMATIVE MODEL OF PARTICIPATIVE MAINSTREAMING IN POST-CONFLICT STATES The foregoing empirical analysis is the basis for theory- building. Speciﬁcally, based on government and civil society discourse, the data identify the ways in which the implementa- tion of PDM needs to be adapted in war-aﬀected countries. The resulting Transformative Model of Participative Main- streaming proposed here is based on Vayrynen’s (1991) work on conﬂict theory and transformation (Figure 3). However, in contrast to the original, it is not directly concerned with conﬂict, but rather its aftermath—and gender mainstreaming in war-aﬀected states across diverse aspects including peace- building, reconstruction and democratization. As Figure 3 reveals, four Transformational Domains apply to the applica- tion of PDM: actor (internal changes in civil and civic society); issue (altering the agenda of gender relations); rule (changes in the norms or rules governing gender relations); and structural (revising the structure of gender relations and power distribu- tion in the post-conﬂict society). Based upon the foregoing empirical analysis, each of the domains is populated by ‘‘Post-conﬂict issues/Actions”. They represent the issues emerging from the discourse analysis needing speciﬁc attention in post-conﬂict states. In other words, in contrast to practice elsewhere, they are areas where the implementation of participative mainstreaming needs to be adapted to the speciﬁties of the war-aﬀected states. The following examples provide illustration using the CSO discourse:  Actor Transformations (meaning: internal changes in civil and civic society)—Training for gender-equality in labor- market, public-life etc. denied through conﬂict. For example a SudaneseCSOcalls for action to: ‘‘developwomen’s capac- ities and impart skills to women with the aim of improving their economic situation. . . Improve women’s leadership abilities on the basis of project implementation and provide a database for the purpose of forecasting women’s needs in the diﬀerent core areas of development”. 47  Issue Transformations (meaning: altering the agenda of gender relations)—Embed peace/tolerance and gender equal- ity in school curriculum. For example: ‘‘Recommendations for Governments, international actors, and civil society organizations. There are several barriers that prevent girls from going to school. . .There is a need for curriculum reform and teacher training for higher quality schools to provide a more robust and relevant educational opportuni- ties for girls”. 48 Transformaon Domain Post-conﬂict issues/ Acons Actor transformaons – internal changes in civil and civic society; Redress - pursuing rights violaons/ GBV that occurred during conﬂict Increase women’s access to educaon – disrupted/ denied through conﬂict Promote women’s health and well-being negavely impacted by war Training – for gender-equality in labour-market, public-life etc. denied through conﬂict Improve women’s access to jusce to address rights violaons during war Measure to develop women’s social capital/ associave life to promote parcipave democracy/ policy engagement – and seize post-conﬂict polical opportunity structures Secure gender equality in leadership roles in civil society organisaons Issue transformaons – altering the agenda of gender relaons; Data-gathering – address general absence of social data-gathering during war/ retrospecve data-gathering during peaceme to inform understanding of gendered impact of conﬂict Policy intervenon to meet welfare needs of war widows Embed peace/ tolerance and gender equality in school curriculum Address gendered impact of war-induced poverty Promote women’s rights as fundamental to state reconstrucon/ societal growth Address the gendered impact of war-related people-displacement/ refugees Implement policies designed to address interseconal issues linked to conﬂict (e.g. gender, poverty and age; gender and ethnicity/ faith) Social care policies need to be adapted to meet and address the speciﬁc issues related to war survivors/ veteran and their carers Rule transformaons – changes in the norms or rules governing gender relaons; Embed gender rights in new post-conﬂict governance Enshrine women’s rights/ gender equality in revised/ post-conﬂict constuonal frameworks Promong cultural / atudinal change in peaceme – end associaon between androcencism and bellicosity Promote societal awareness of women’s rights/ gender equality in context of rights violaons during war Adopon of mainstreaming tools/ techniques as fundamental tenet of government policy-making to address legacy of war Structural / instuonal transformaons – changing the structure of gender relaons and power distribuon in the post-conﬂict society. Transional jusce - rebuilding of state instuons to uphold women’s rights (e.g. equality and human rights commissions) Women’s parcipaon in post-conﬂict decision-making/ women’s role in peace- building and reconstrucon Address discriminaon in the jusce system – repeal laws that are discriminatory/ address under-enforcement of equality and HR laws Ensure gender-equal (re-)distribuon of wealth (gender budgeng) as part of move away from a war economy Rebuild state-civil society nexus set-back/ weakened by episodes of conﬂict Figure 3. A Transformative Model of Participative Mainstreaming in Post-conﬂict States. 290 WORLD DEVELOPMENT Rule Transformations (meaning: changes in the norms or rules governing gender relations)—Enshrine women’s rights/gender equality in revised/post-conﬂict constitutional frameworks. For example: ‘‘voices must be heard. . .They must be involved in decision-making at every level, from the national to the village. Reforms in the law and new con- stitutions must reﬂect the rights they have under interna- tional conventions, in keeping with the Beijing Platform for Action”. 49  Structural/Institutional Transformations (meaning: changing the structure of gender relations and power distri- bution in the post-conﬂict society)—Women’s participation in post-conﬂict decision-making/ women’s role in peace- building and reconstruction. For example: ‘‘Participate in peacebuilding. . .women continue to suﬀer from marginal- ization [. . .we advocate action] to facilitate the direct engagement of women in decision-making and in public life. . .building a better means of participation for women during peace processes”. 50 The model underlines the discursive underpinnings of political and policy intervention to promote gender equality. In doingthis it draws on Snow and Benford’s (1988) seminal work on social movements and the notion of ‘‘frame-alignment”. As noted, this is an important element in social mobilization. Speciﬁcally, it identiﬁes the issue areas where the frames of key policy actors—such as government and civil society—need to be aligned (‘‘frame resonance”). When this occurs actors ‘ ‘mobilise”—in other words, they successfully advance claims on government, in turn leading to revised policy and practice (Snow et al., 1986). Such frame alignment may occur in any and each of the four domains of the Model. The underlying premise of the model is that eﬀective mainstreaming is contin- gent on alignment between CSOs’ and governing elites’ fram- ing of gender mainstreaming in relation to the Post-conﬂict issues/Actions. There needs to be cooperation, collaboration, and dialog between government and civil society founded on state recognition and appropriate response to CSO claims across the four domains—such that both sides are following shared cognitive maps for action. This is necessary for when CSOs’ and governing elites’ framing of mainstreaming diﬀers progress is likely to be diminished—or even prevented— though a range of factors. The latter include: conscious or unconscious resistance, the over-extension of available CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 291resources (for they are not targeted in a strategic manner), and uncoordinated (and possibly conﬂicting) actions as govern- ment and CSOs pursue contrasting aims and priorities.6. CONCLUSION This study makes an original contribution to contemporary understanding of the promotion of gender equality. When post-conﬂict states are compared to non-conﬂict states, the analysis shows that distinctive policy framing and issue sal- ience applies to war-aﬀected counties. This is important to pol- icy and practice because it underlines that it is inappropriate to apply a universal approach to implementing the Participative Democratic Model of gender mainstreaming across all 180+ states that are signatories to the United Nations Beijing Dec- laration and Platform for Action. Instead, as the foregoing critical analysis of government and civil society discourse reveals, post-conﬂict societies present speciﬁc issues and challenges. These extend across four domains: actor transformations (internal changes in civil and civic society), issue transformations (altering the agenda of gender relations), rule transformations (changes in the norms or rules governing gender relations) and structural/institu- tional transformations (changing the structure of gender rela- tions and power distribution in the post-conﬂict society). They include data, transitional justice and governance requirements that are speciﬁc to post-conﬂict societies as policy actors press for heightened attention to issues such as the eﬀects on women of war-induced poverty and human rights violations—as well as the need to promote women’s empowerment in state recon- struction and peace-building. The contrasting issue-salience and prioritization that CSOs attach to frames compared to governments identiﬁed in this study can be seen as evidence of a ‘‘governance disjuncture”. A primary reason is the failure to fully embed participative practices so that in-depth ideational exchange and dialog can take place between CSOs and state elites. The present analysis shows governments have failed to give suﬃcientattention to the issue-areas of concern emphasized by CSOs. This ‘‘disconnect” is exacerbated by war and the way it has weakened civil society networking and mobilization—and thus undermined CSOs’ general ability to engage with, and make its ‘‘voice” heard by state elites in fulﬁllment of the BDPfA. The way that the aftermath of war may accentuate a dis- juncture between the discourse of civil society organizations and governing policy elites (frame misalignment—or disso- nance) is captured by the Model of Transformative Main- streaming outlined in the foregoing discussion. It shows how such a situation may hamper progress toward gender equality because a necessary pre-condition for eﬀective mainstreaming is absent; namely alignment in the policy framing of govern- ment and civil society organizations—such that both parties have shared understandings, priorities, and ‘‘cognitive maps” for action. The current study also suggests a number of ave- nues for future research including: analysis of the changing issue-salience of policy frames over time following the cessa- tion of war; study of how attempts to implement the participa- tive democratic model of mainstreaming are shaped by past- governing traditions in the polity (including electoral politics, dominant political ideologies, voting systems, and the power of the military); and examination of the inter-connections between political communication, citizen education and the promotion of mainstreaming. In summary, the present analysis underlines that where there is dissonance between state and civil society policy framing eﬀective implementation of gender mainstreaming may falter. This is because of factors like conscious or unconscious resis- tance to reform, failure to target ﬁnite resources in a strategic manner, and uncoordinated (and possibly conﬂicting) actions—as government and CSOs pursue contrasting policy aims and priorities. To ward against such pathologies, the cur- rent study emphasizes the need for adaptive practice utilizing the Transformative Model of Participative Mainstreaming in order that the implementation of mainstreaming is tailored to the speciﬁcities of war-aﬀected states and founded on eﬀective participation and co-working between state and civil society.NOTES1. http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/BDPfA%20E.pdf.2. See for example, http://www.pcr.uu.se and http://www.systemicpeace. org/warlist/warlist.htm [accessed 25.01.2015].3. As part of the follow-up to the Fourth UN World Conference on Women and the 23rd special session of the General Assembly.4. See Uppsala Conﬂict Data Program (2010) http://www.pcr.uu.se/ research/UCDP/data_and_publications/deﬁnition_of_armed_conﬂict.htm [accessed 25.01.2015]. 5. See for example, http://www.pcr.uu.se and http://www.systemicpeace. org/warlist/warlist.htm [accessed 25.01.2015]. 6. Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Japan, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Sweden and the UK. 7. Out of a population of 600. 8. v2 = 795.176, df = 9.9. v2 = 113.006, df = 1. 10. v2 = 239.67, df = 1. 11. v2 = 15.131, df = 1. 12. v2 = 142.2, df = 1. 13. v2 = 33.292, df = 1. 14. v2 = 477.276, df = 18. 15. v2 = 1681.654, df = 9. 16. Colombian Commission of Jurists, a nongovernmental Organization; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/40. 17. 3HO Foundation, Asian Women in Cooperative Development Forum, Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University, Canadian Federa- tion of University Women et al.; E/CN.6/2008/NGO/26. 18. Soroptimist International, E/CN.6/2003/NGO/12. 292 WORLD DEVELOPMENT19. Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd, International Volunteerism Organization for Women, Education, and Development, Istituto Internazionale Maria Ausiliatrice delle Salesiane di Don Bosco and Salesian Missions; E/CN.6/2014/NGO/84. Fifty-third session 2–13 March, 2009. 20. Africa Muslims Agency and Muslim World League; Federation of Muslim Women’s Associations in Nigeria, International Islamic Commit- tee for Woman and Child, et al., E/CN.6/2004/NGO/36. 21. Human Rights League of the Horn of Africa; E/CN.6/2013/ NGO/115. 22. Integrated Development Services; E/CN.6/2014/NGO/105. 23. European Women’s Lobby; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/12. 24. Canadian Voice of Women for Peace; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/33. 25. Equality Now, E/CN.6/2010/NGO/3. 26. International Federation of Social Workers; E/CN.6/2012/NGO/12. 27. Equality Now, E/CN.6/2010/NGO/3. 28. ABANTU for Development, Association of African Women for Research and Development, Coalition nationale de Guine´e pour les droits et la citoyennete´ des femmes, E/CN.6/2013/NGO/73. 29. Zonta International; E/CN.6/2014/NGO/170. 30. National Alliance of Women’s Organizations; E/CN.6/2004/ NGO/30. 31. European Women’s Lobby; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/12. 32. World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts; E/CN.6/2008/ NGO/5. 33. Empowering Widows in Development; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/7. 34. Grail; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/26.35. Femmes Afrique Solidarite´, International Association of Lawyers Against Nuclear Arms and Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom; E/CN.6/2011/NGO/49. 36. Christian Aid, E/CN.6/2014/NGO/25. 37. Society of Catholic Medical Missionaries, E/CN.6/2014/NGO/126. 38. Empowering Widows in Development; E/CN.6/2005/NGO/7. 39. Widows Rights International; E/CN.6/2006/NGO/7. 40. Guild of Service, E/CN.6/2014/NGO/43. 41. Empowering Widows in Development, E/CN.6/2005/NGO/7. 42. World Veterans Federation; E/CN.6/2006/NGO/21. 43. Empowering Widows in Development; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/7. 44. Women’s National Commission; E/CN.6/2004/NGO/28. 45. Northern Ireland Women’s European Platform; E/CN.6/2007/ NGO/31. 46. International Council of Women, International Federation of Business and Professional Women, International Federation of University Women, Soroptimist International and Zonta International; E/CN.6/2008/NGO/1. 47. Sudanese Women General Union, E/CN.6/2011/NGO/31. 48. Femmes Afrique Solidarite´ et al. E/CN.6/2011/NGO/49. 49. Empowering Widows in Development E/CN.6/2004/NGO/7. 50. South Sudanese Women Christian Mission for Peace, E/CN.6/2014/ NGO/72.REFERENCESAdelman, S., & Peterman, A. (2014). Resettlement and gender dimensions of land rights in post-conﬂict northern Uganda. World Development, 64, 583–596. Alexander, J. (1998). Real civil societies, dilemmas of institutionalisation. London: Sage. Anand, P. (2005). Getting infrastructure priorities right in post-conﬂict reconstruction, Research paper, UNU-WIDER, United Nations University (UNU), No. 2005/42. . Antlo¨v, H., Brinkerhoﬀ, D., & Rapp, E. (2010). Civil society capacity building for democratic reform: Experience and lessons from Indone- sia. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonproﬁt Organizations, 21(3), 417–439. Askin, K. (2002). Quest for post-conﬂict gender justice. Journal of Transnational Law, 41, 509–521. Baker, B., & Scheye, E. (2009). Access to justice in a post-conﬂict state: Donor-supported multidimensional peacekeeping in southern Sudan. International Peacekeeping, 16(2), 171–185. Barnett Donaghy, T. (2003). Mainstreaming: Northern Ireland’s participative democratic approach. Policy and Politics, 32(1), 49–62.Bell, C., & O’Rourke, C. (2007). Does feminism need a theory of transitional justice? An introductory essay. The International Journal of Transitional Justice, 1, 23–44. Beveridge, F., Nott, S., & Stephen, K. (2000). Mainstreaming the engendering of policy making: A means to an end? Journal of European Public Policy, 7(3), 385–405. Boyatzis, R. (1998). Transforming qualitative information. London: Sage. Brinkerhoﬀ, D. (2010). Developing capacity in fragile states. Public Administration and Development, 30, 66–78. Brown, G., Langer, A., & Stewart, F. (2011). A typology of post-conﬂict environments. Centre for Research on Peace and Development (CRPD), University of Leuven, Working paper no.53. Bunch, C., & Fried, S. (1996). Beijing ‘95: Moving women’s human rights from margin to center. Signs, 22(1), 200–204. Carney, G. (2002). Feminism, the women’s movement and the interna- tionalisation of gender equality policy: The case of ‘gender main- streaming’. Irish Political Studies, 17(2), 17–34. Chaney, P. (2012). Mainstreaming intersectional equality for older people? Exploring the impact of quasi-federalism in the UK. Public Policy and Administration, 28(1), 21–42. CIVIL SOCIETY AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING 293Chaney, P. (2013). New legislative settings and the application of the participative-democratic model of mainstreaming equality in public policy making: Evidence from the UK’s devolution programme. Policy Studies, 33(5), 455–476. Chaney, P. (2016). How does single party dominance inﬂuence civil society organisations’ engagement strategies? Exploratory analysis of partic- ipative mainstreaming in a ‘regional’ European polity. Public Policy and Administration. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0952076715581876 (in press). Chrispus Okello, M., & Hovil, L. (2007). Confronting the reality of gender-based violence in northern Uganda. International Journal of Transitional Justice, 1(3), 433–443. Clapham, C. (2009). Post-war Ethiopia: The trajectories of crisis. Review of African Political Economy, 36(120), 181–192. Clark, J. (2013). Normalisation through (re)integration: Returnees and settlers in post-conﬂict Croatia. The International Journal of Human Rights, 17(7–8), 707–722. Cobb, R., & Ross, M. (1997). Agenda setting and the denial of agenda access: Key concepts. In R. W. Cobb, & M. H. Ross (Eds.), Cultural strategies of agenda denial (pp. 3–24). Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. Cohen, J., & Arato, A. (1994). Civil society and political theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Collier, R., & Collier, D. (1991). Shaping the political arena. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Cornwall, A. (2003). Whose voices? Whose choices? Reﬂections on gender and participatory development. World Development, 31(8), 1325–1342. Cramer, C., & Goodhand, J. (2012). Try again, fail again, fail better? War, the state, and the ‘post-conﬂict’ challenge in Afghanistan. Development & Change, 33(5), 885–909. Creed, W., Langstraat, J., & Scully, M. (2002). Picture of the frame: Frame analysis as technique and as politics. Organizational Research Methods, 5(1), 34–55. Das, P. (2014). Women’s participation in community-level water gover- nance in urban India: The gap between motivation and ability. World Development, 64, 206–218. Debusscher, P., & Van der Vleuten, A. (2012). Mainstreaming gender in European Union development cooperation with sub-Saharan Africa. International Development Planning Review, 34(3), 319–338. Derouen, K., Heo, U., & Heo, U. (2007). Civil wars of the world: Major conﬂicts since World War Ii. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Downs, G., & Stedman, S. (2002). Evaluation issues in peace implemen- tation. In S. J. Stedman, D. Rothchild, & E. M. Cousens (Eds.), Ending civil wars: The implementation of peace agreements. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner. Eden, C., & Ackermann, F. (2004). Cognitive mapping expert views for policy analysis in the public sector. European Journal of Operational Research, 152, 615–630. Ertman, T. (1997). Birth of the Leviathan. New York: Cambridge University Press. Evans-Kent, B., & Bleiker, D. (2003). NGOs and reconstructing civil society in Bosnia and Herzegovina. International Peacekeeping, 10(1), 103–119. Fischer, F., & Forester, J. (1993). The argumentative turn in policy analysis and planning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Fitzduﬀ, M., & Church, C. (2004). Stepping up to the table: NGO strategies for inﬂuencing policy on conﬂict issues. In M. Fitzduﬀ, & C. Church (Eds.), NGOs at the table: Strategies for inﬂuencing policy in areas of conﬂict (pp. 3–29). NY: Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers. Fraser, N. (1998). Social justice in the age of identity politics: Redistribution, recognition, participation, WZB discussion paper, no. FS I 98-108. Ghodsee, K., Stan, L., & Weiner, E. (2010). Compliance without commitment: The EU’s gender equality agenda in Central and Eastern European States. Women’s Studies International Forum, 33, 1–2. Goetz, A., & Hassim, S. (Eds.) (2003). No shortcuts to power: African women in politics and policy making – democratic transition in conﬂict- torn societies. London and NY: Zed Books. Hafner-Burton, E., & Pollack, M. (2002). Mainstreaming gender in global governance. European Journal of International Relations, 8(3), 339–373. Handrahan, L. (2004). Conﬂict, gender, ethnicity and post-conﬂict reconstruction. Security Dialogue, 35(4), 429–445. Hill, H. (2001). Tiny, poor and war-torn: Development policy challenges for east Timor. World Development, 29(7), 1137–1156.Hogwood, B., & Gunn, L. (1984). Policy analysis for the real world. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Huang, R., & Harris, J. (2006). The nuts and bolts of post-conﬂict capacity building: Practicable lessons from East Timor. Journal of Peacebuilding & Development, 2(3), 78–92. Honneth, A. (2005). Struggles for recognition: The moral grammar of social conﬂicts. Oxford: Polity Press. Jeﬀery (2006). Building state capacity in post-conﬂict Bosnia and Herzegovina: The case of Brcko District. Political Geography, 25, 203–227. Joﬀe, D., & Yardley, H. (2003). Content and thematic analysis. In D. Marks, & H. Yardley (Eds.), Research methods for clinical and health psychology (pp. 86–98). London: Sage. Kabia, J. (2010). Peacebuilding in Liberia and Sierra Leone: A compar- ative perspective. Post Conﬂict Reconstruction, 1, 133–150. Kandiyoti, D. (2006). Political ﬁction meets gender myth: Post-conﬂict reconstruction, ‘democratization’, and women’s right’. In A. Cornwall, & E. Harrison (Eds.), Feminisms in development: Contradictions, contestations and challenges (pp. 191–203). London andNY: ZedBooks. Keane, J. (Ed.) (1988). Civil society and the state: New European perspectives. London: University of Westminster Press. Kingdon, J. (1995). Agendas, alternatives, and public politics (2nd ed.). New York: Harper Collins. Krippendorﬀ, K., & Bock, M. (2008). The content analysis reader. Thousand Oaks: Sage. Kukla, A. (2000). Social constructivism and the philosophy of science. London: Routledge. Luciak, I. (2001). After the revolution: Gender and democracy in El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Guatemala. Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkins University Press. Lynch, D. (2002). Separatist states and post-Soviet conﬂicts. International Aﬀairs, 78(4), 831–848. Mackay, F., & Bilton, K. (2003). Learning from experience: Lessons in mainstreaming equal opportunities. Edinburgh: Scottish Executive. Madsen, D. (2012). Mainstreaming from Beijing to Ghana – The role of the women’smovement in Ghana.Gender and Development, 20(3), 573–584. Manjoo, R., & McRaith, C. (2011). Gender-based violence and justice in conﬂict and post-conﬂict areas. Cornell International Law Journal, 11–31. McAdam, D., McCarthy, J., & Zald, M. (Eds.) (1996). Comparative perspectives on social movements. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Mckay, S. (2000). Gender justice and reconciliation. Women’s Studies International Forum, 23(5), 561–570. Meertens, D., & Zambrano,M. (2010). Citizenship deferred: The politics of victimhood, land restitution and gender justice in the Colombian (post?) conﬂict. International Journal of Transitional Justice, 4(2), 189–206. Menkel-Meadow, C. (1988). Feminist legal theory, critical legal studies, and legal education or the fem-crits go to law school. Journal of Legal Education, 61, 56–73. Moser, C. (2005). Has gender mainstreaming failed? International Feminist Journal of Politics, 7(4), 576–590. Moser, C., & Moser, A. (2005). Gender mainstreaming since Beijing: A review of success and limitations in international institutions. Gender and Development, 13(2), 11–22. Nı´ Aola´in, F., Haynes, D., & Cahn, N. (2011). On the frontlines: Gender, war, and the post-conﬂict process. NY: Oxford University Press. Nott, S. (2000). Accentuating the positive: Alternative strategies for promoting gender equality. In F. Beveridge, S. Nott, & K. Stephen (Eds.), Making women count: Integrating gender into law and policy- making (pp. 247–276). Aldershot: Ashgate. Omona, J., & Aduo, J. (2013). Gender issues during post-conﬂict recovery: The case of Nwoya district, northern Uganda. Journal of Gender Studies, 22(2), 119–136. Pascall, G., & Lewis, J. (2004). Emerging gender regimes and policies for gender equality in a wider Europe. Journal of Social Policy, 33(3), 373–394. Pierson, P., & Skocpol, T. (2002). Historical institutionalism in contempo- rary political science, Working paper. Harvard University. Pouligny, B. (2005). Civil Society and post-conﬂict peacebuilding: Ambiguities of international programmes aimed at building ‘new’ societies. Security Dialogue, 36(4), 495–510. Quinn, S. (2009). Gender budgeting: Practical implementation – A handbook. Strasbourg: Council of Europe. 294 WORLD DEVELOPMENTRazavi, S. (1997). Fitting gender into development institutions. World Development, 25(7), 1111–1125. Rees, T. (2005). Reﬂections on the uneven development of gender mainstreaming in Europe. International Feminist Journal of Politics, 7(4), 555–574. Reisinger, C. (2009). A framework for the analysis of post-conﬂict situations: Liberia and Mozambique reconsidered. International Peacekeeping, 16(4), 483–498. Sen, G. (2000). Gender mainstreaming in ﬁnance ministries. World Development, 28(7), 1379–1390. Siitonen, L. (2011). Human security and state rebuilding in post-conﬂict Nepal: Peace at the cost of justice? Regions & Cohesion, 1(1), 54–77. Smet, S. (2009). A window of opportunity – Improving gender relations in post-conﬂict societies: The Sierra Leonean experience. Journal of Gender Studies, 18(2), 147–163. Snow, D., & Benford, R. (1988). Ideology, frame resonance, and participant mobilization. International Social Movement Research, 1, 197–217. Snow, D., Rochford, E., Worden, S., & Benford, R. (1986). Frame alignment processes, micromobilization, and movement participation. American Sociological Review, 51(4), 464–481. Sorensen, B. (1998). Women and post-conﬂict reconstruction: Issues and sources. Collingdale, PA: Diane Publishing Co. Stoetzler, M., & Yuval-Davis, N. (2002). Standpoint theory, situated knowledge & the situated imagination. Feminist Theory, 3(3), 315–333. Teitel, R. (2000). Transitional justice. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Teitel, R. (2003). Transitional justice genealogy. Harvard Human Rights Journal, 16, 69–94. Tiessen, R. (2007). Everywhere/nowhere: Gender mainstreaming in devel- opment agencies. Bloomﬁeld, CT: Kumarian Press. Tomlinson, J. (2011). Gender equality and the state: A review of objectives, policies and progress in the European Union. The Interna- tional Journal of Human Resource Management, 22(18), 3755–3774. True, J. (2003). Mainstreaming gender in global public policy. Interna- tional Feminist Journal of Politics, 5(3), 368–396. United Nations (1995). Beijing declaration and platform for action of the fourth world conference on women, adopted at the UN Council 16thplenary meeting, on 15 September 1995. NY: UN, <http://www.un. org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/BDPfA%20E.pdf> [Last accessed 20.02.2015]. United Nations (2002). Gender mainstreaming: An overview. New York: UN. Uppsala Conﬂict Data Program. (2010). <http://www.pcr.uu.se/research/ UCDP/data_and_publications/deﬁnition_of_armed_conﬂict.htm> [accessed 25.01.2015]. Uppsala Conﬂict Data Program. (2014). UCDP Conﬂict Encyclopaedia, UCDP, Uppsala. Uvin, P. (2001). Diﬃcult choices in the new post-conﬂict agenda: The international community in Rwanda after the genocide. Third World Quarterly, 22(2), 177–189. Vayrynen, R. (Ed.) (1991). To settle or to transform? Perspectives on the resolution of national and international conﬂicts. New directions in conﬂict theory: Conﬂict resolution and conﬂict transformation (pp. 1–25). London: Sage. Volkens, A. (2001). Manifesto research since 1979: From reliability to validity. In M. Laver (Ed.), Estimating the policy positions of political actors. London: Routledge. Walby, S. (2005). Gender mainstreaming: Productive tensions in theory and practice. Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society, 12(3), 321–343. Wendoh, S., & Wallace, T. (2005). Re-thinking gender mainstreaming in AfricanNGOs and communities.Gender andDevelopment, 13(2), 70–79. Wessells, M. (2007). Post-conﬂict healing and reconstruction for peace: The power of social mobilization. In: J. White & A. Marsella (Eds.), Fear of persecution: Global human rights, international law and human well-being (pp. 257-278). New York, Lexington. Yanow, D. (1999). Conducting interpretive policy analysis. Thousand Oaks, Ca: SAGE. Zenkevicius, G. (2007). Post-conﬂict reconstruction: Rebuilding Afghani- stan. Baltic Security & Defence Review, 9(1), 28–56.ScienceDirect Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 