ABSTRACT: 
This article provides a brief overview of current debates in Russia on nuclear weapons before examining several factors that suggest that Moscow's interest in arms control arrangements affecting its NSNF is likely to be limited. Indeed, while Moscow has maintained its demands since the 1950s that all US nuclear forces in Europe be removed, its willingness to retain existing arms control limits such as the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty and less formal obligations such as the 1991-2 unilaterial commitments on NSNF may be in decline. Moreover, Russia's implementation of the latter commitments remains unclear. The prospects for Moscow's endorsing new negotiated constraints on Russian NSNF therefore appears doubtful. 
 
PREDICTION: 
AsAlexei Arbatov, the vice chairman of the defence committee of the Duma, putit in a July 2000 paper,During the next 10 years, in addition to holding a conventional superiority in Europe ofapproximately 2:1, or even 3:1, NATO will also possess a substantial nuclear super-iority...However, due to the failures of Russian military reform from 1992–1997 andthe chronic underfunding of Russian defence from 1997–1999 (in constant prices,during these 3 years, the military budget has fallen by 50 per cent), qualitative factors(training, combat readiness, command and control, troop morale, and technical sophis-tication of weapons and equipment, etc.) are presently even more favorable to NATOthan pure numerical ratios might indicate.3The third reason looks beyond NATO’s capabilities to its perceived inten-tions. In January 2000 the NationalSecurity Concept indicated that ‘The Russian Federation envisages the possi-bility of employing military force to ensure its national security based on thefollowing principles:—use of all available forces and assets, including nuclearweapons, in the event of need to repulse armed aggression, if all other measuresof resolving the crisis situation have been exhausted and have proven inef-fective.’5 In April 2000 the new Military Doctrine stated that ‘The RussianFederation reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to the use ofnuclear and other types of weapons of mass destruction against it and (or) itsallies, as well as in response to large-scale aggression utilizing conventionalweapons in situations critical to the national security of the Russian Federation.’6Nine functions attributed to Russia’s nuclear forcesVarious Russian commentators have in recent years attributed nine functions tothe country’s nuclear forces. With Russia’sdevelopment of 3,000 km range Kh-101 and Kh-102 air-launched cruisemissiles (ALCMs), the Backfire’s potential as a strategic-range bomber has beenenhanced.21 With regard to ‘so-called non-strategic nuclear weapons and theconcern over long-range sea-launched cruise missiles’, Russian PresidentVladimir Putin has said, ‘the  
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Calhoun: The NPS Institutional ArchiveFaculty and Researcher Publications Faculty and Researcher Publications Collection2001Russia's non-strategic nuclear forcesYost, David S.International Affairs, v.77, #3, 2001, pp. 531-551.http://hdl.handle.net/10945/38791531International Affairs 77,  () ‒ºRussia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesDAVID S. YOST*Russia has to a large extent maintained the arsenal of non-strategic nuclearforces (NSNF) it inherited from the Soviet Union, despite drastic reductions inUS NSNF. The numbers of Russian NSNF, the variety of their means ofdelivery, and the levels of readiness and training apparently far exceed those ofthe United States and its NATO allies. For many of Russia’s neighbours inEurope and Asia, certain types of Russian NSNF are seen as ‘strategic’, in thatMoscow could employ them against their national territories. Most RussianNSNF are carried by shorter-range missiles, aircraft and other delivery systems,and are of serious concern to countries in Russia’s immediate vicinity. Therange and yield of Russian NSNF mounted on air- and sea-launched cruisemissiles, however, could in some circumstances give them ‘strategic’ signifi-cance for more distant countries, including the United States.Through their declarations and actions Russian authorities have revealed thatthey attach great and possibly increasing importance to their NSNF. Russianviews and policies could therefore present obstacles to arms control in additionto the significant numerical asymmetry with US NSNF and the intrinsicdifficulties facing any effort to negotiate effective constraints on such forces.This article provides a brief overview of current debates in Russia on nuclearweapons before examining several factors that suggest that Moscow’s interest inarms control arrangements affecting its NSNF is likely to be limited. Indeed,while Moscow has maintained its demands since the 1950s that all US nuclearforces in Europe be removed, its willingness to retain existing arms control* The views expressed are the author’s alone and do not represent those of the Department of the Navy orany US government agency. An earlier version of this article was published as a chapter in Jeffrey A.Larsen and Kurt J. Klingenberger, eds, Controlling non-strategic nuclear weapons: obstacles and opportunities(Colorado Springs, CO: US Air Force Institute for National Security Studies, 2001). The book chapterversion has more extensive documentation than the present article. Special thanks are owed to those whocommented on earlier drafts of this article, though they naturally bear no responsibility for the viewsexpressed: Anne Aldis, Frank Arena, Pieter Cobelens, Jerome Conley, John Culclasure, Frank Dellermann,Thérèse Delpech, Will Dixon, Isabelle Facon, Kevin Farrell, William C. Green, Bruce Ianacone, RobIrvine, Kerry Kartchner, Roland Krüger, Stephen Lambert, Jeff Larsen, Willy Meuws, Joseph Pilat, MichaelQuinlan, Michael Rühle, Jacques Sapir, Mark Schneider, Paul Schulte, David Shilling, Bill Siegert,Nikolai Sokov, Bruno Tertrais, Françoise Thom, Mikhail Tsypkin, Ted Whiteside and Roberto Zadra.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am531532David S. Yostlimits such as the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty and lessformal obligations such as the 1991–2 unilateral commitments on NSNF maybe in decline. Moreover, Russia’s implementation of the latter commitmentsremains unclear. The prospects for Moscow’s endorsing new negotiated con-straints on Russian NSNF therefore appear doubtful.Current debates on nuclear weapons in RussiaAt least three debates appear to be under way in Russia today about how muchimportance—and what roles—to assign to nuclear weapons. The first concernsthe revolution in military affairs (RMA). The Russians generally agree that anRMA based on information systems and non-nuclear precision-strike weaponsis in progress. Marshal Igor Sergeyev, the defence minister until March 2001and now an adviser to President Putin, and others have warned that Russia mayfall irretrievably behind in this competition. Part of the debate concerns to whatextent nuclear weapons allow Russia to buy time, to hold its own while waitingfor an economic recovery that would enable it to compete effectively.The second debate centres on the Kvashnin–Sergeyev struggle over militarypolicy, begun in 1997 and increasingly exposed to public view since July 2000.The Chief of the General Staff, General Anatoly Kvashnin, has been arguing forfairly radical cutbacks in strategic nuclear forces to support conventional forcemodernization in conjunction with continued reliance on NSNF. Kvashnin’srecommendations have been opposed by Marshal Sergeyev, a champion ofstrategic nuclear forces. While Sergey Ivanov, an intelligence official who pre-viously served as secretary of the Security Council, replaced Sergeyev as defenceminister in March 2001, this debate over priorities has not yet been concluded.The third debate has been characterized as the ‘maximalist–minimalist’argument. Nikolai Sokov, one of the leading experts on Russia and nuclearweapons, has used these terms to characterize a divide between the currentlypredominant support in Russia for high reliance on nuclear weapons, includingnon-strategic or operational–tactical nuclear weapons, and the minority thatappears unenthusiastic about them. In Sokov’s words, ‘the “minimalists”…seem to avoid public statements on this subject and rarely offer ideas on howexactly they could be used…Caution is easy to explain by the domestic politicalsituation in Russia, as well as the uncertainty in its international situation; theenlargement of NATO has significantly increased the perceived value of tacticalnuclear weapons, and arguing against them is “politically incorrect,” to use apopular American expression.’1Why is arguing against non-strategic nuclear weapons ‘politically incorrect’in Russia today? What explains the high level of support for NSNF and thecorrespondingly limited interest in NSNF arms control?1 Nikolai Sokov, Russian strategic modernization: the past and future (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield,2000), p. 180.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am532533Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesFour reasons for limited interest in NSNF arms controlAt least four factors explain why Russian interest in arms control for NSNF maybe limited in the foreseeable future. The first is Russia’s conventional militaryweakness. This weakness is largely a function of the country’s economic prob-lems, which are unlikely to be overcome for many years. Russian authoritieshave asserted that the military is in a ‘transitional’ period of high reliance onnuclear forces, pending an economic turnaround that will enable Russia to com-pete in non-nuclear military capabilities, particularly advanced RMA systems.The second factor is NATO’s conventional military superiority. WhileRussian analysts include China and other potential non-Western adversaries intheir assessments of NSNF requirements,2 in Russian eyes the Atlantic alliance’smilitary posture currently towers above other external security threats. AsAlexei Arbatov, the vice chairman of the defence committee of the Duma, putit in a July 2000 paper,During the next 10 years, in addition to holding a conventional superiority in Europe ofapproximately 2:1, or even 3:1, NATO will also possess a substantial nuclear super-iority…However, due to the failures of Russian military reform from 1992–1997 andthe chronic underfunding of Russian defence from 1997–1999 (in constant prices,during these 3 years, the military budget has fallen by 50 per cent), qualitative factors(training, combat readiness, command and control, troop morale, and technical sophis-tication of weapons and equipment, etc.) are presently even more favorable to NATOthan pure numerical ratios might indicate.3The third reason looks beyond NATO’s capabilities to its perceived inten-tions. Russian officials have asserted that their country has grounds to fearNATO. As defence minister Sergeyev put it in December 1999,The fullest and most graphic significance of these threats to Russia’s national securitymanifested itself in the course of NATO’s expansion to the East and their aggressionagainst Yugoslavia…From a military–political point of view, this war signified, in essence,the beginning of a new era of not just military, but also general history. An era of theopen, military-force dictate of the US in relation to other countries, to include its allies.4The fourth reason for a low level of interest in NSNF arms control is thatRussian military doctrine and policy assign several important functions to2 According to Dmitri Trenin, in the event of conflict with China, ‘Moscow will have to rely on itsnuclear weapons—both strategic and tactical (mostly air-based)’, as well as transcontinental forceredeployments. Dimitri Trenin, Russia’s China problem (Washington DC: Carnegie Endowment forInternational Peace, 1999), pp. 41–2.3 Alexei G. Arbatov, The transformation of Russian military doctrine: lessons learned from Kosovo and Chechnya,Marshall Center Paper no. 2 (Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany: George C. Marshall Center, July2000), pp. 5–6.4 Igor Sergeyev, ‘The main factors which determine Russia’s military–technical policy on the eve of the21st century’, Krasnaya Zvezda, 9 Dec. 1999, in Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS),CEP19991208000053.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am533534David S. YostRussia’s nuclear weapons and to NSNF in particular. Indeed, depending on howthey are counted, as many as nine functions for Russia’s nuclear forces, includ-ing NSNF, have been discussed in the professional Russian military literature inrecent years, and these discussions seem to have become more intense sinceNATO’s intervention in the Kosovo crisis. The next section briefly discussesthese nine functions.The general functions for nuclear weapons in Russian military doctrine areto deter aggression and, if that fails, to repel it. In January 2000 the NationalSecurity Concept indicated that ‘The Russian Federation envisages the possi-bility of employing military force to ensure its national security based on thefollowing principles:—use of all available forces and assets, including nuclearweapons, in the event of need to repulse armed aggression, if all other measuresof resolving the crisis situation have been exhausted and have proven inef-fective.’5 In April 2000 the new Military Doctrine stated that ‘The RussianFederation reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to the use ofnuclear and other types of weapons of mass destruction against it and (or) itsallies, as well as in response to large-scale aggression utilizing conventionalweapons in situations critical to the national security of the Russian Federation.’6Nine functions attributed to Russia’s nuclear forcesVarious Russian commentators have in recent years attributed nine functions tothe country’s nuclear forces. Some discussions refer to nuclear weapons ingeneral, while others allude specifically to NSNF. Some of the Russianconcepts seem to have no clear analogy to those employed in the West, withnuclear arms assigned merits that are not obvious to Western observers. Certainfunctions and operational concepts are closely interrelated and overlap withothers, but they all specify some type of utility.The first is to deter external aggression. NATO has been explicitly named asa potential threat with nuclear relevance. ‘The presence and high level ofcombat readiness of nuclear weapons is the best guarantee that the US andNATO will not try to establish their “order” in our country as well, like theway it was done in Yugoslavia.’7 Russia is also concerned about deterring coun-tries armed with non-nuclear weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Accordingto Sergey Rogov, Director of the USA and Canada Institute, ‘Nuclear weaponsalso can deter the use of other weapons of mass destruction [WMD], includingby nonnuclear-weapon countries.’85 Russia’s National Security Concept, Nezavisimoye Voennoye Obozreniye, 14 Jan. 2000, in FBIS,FTS20000116000515.6 Russian Federation Military Doctrine, approved by Russian Federation Presidential Edict of 21 April2000, published in Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 22 April 2000, in FBIS, CEP20000424000171, sec. I, para. 8.7 Major General Vladimir Grigoryev, Colonel Nikolay Radayev and Lieutenant Colonel Yuri Protasov,‘An “umbrella” instead of a “shield”—do nuclear weapons have a future?’ Armeyskiy Sbornik, 1 Feb.2000, in FBIS, CEP 20000503000116.8 Sergey Rogov, ‘How much do lost illusions cost? Russia must not reject nuclear deterrence’, Vek, 28July 2000, in FBIS, CEP 20000727000425.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am534535Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesThe second function is to serve as an ‘equalizer’ or ‘counterbalance’ to theconventional force superiority of potential adversaries. That is, NSNF mightcompensate for Russia’s shortcomings in conventional military capability andthereby enable the country’s armed forces to avoid defeat in combat. ‘Thepresence of nonstrategic nuclear means of destruction in the RF [RussianFederation] Armed Forces permits restoring the disturbed balance of general-purpose forces under present conditions.’9Some Russian analysts have acknowledged, however, that the utility ofRussia’s NSNF could be limited in contests with NATO or China. With regardto NATO, some Russian military experts have concluded that the alliance’sconventional military superiority might prove to be insurmountable. With regardto China, Beijing’s ability to tolerate losses might neutralize a Russian strategyrelying on NSNF: ‘If we look at a potential Russian–Chinese conflict from thisaspect, we will have to give up the illusion that the threat of employing tacticalnuclear weapons definitely is capable of deterring the opponent. A highreadiness for sacrifices will allow the Chinese side to raise the stakes in thisnuclear poker game.’10The third function is to help maintain the ‘combat stability’ of forces engagedin an operation. According to some Russian military commentators, ‘combatstability’ enables forces to continue to conduct operations despite enemyactions: ‘Combat stability of troops (forces) is usually understood as their abilityto accomplish the assigned missions under conditions of the enemy’scounteraction.’11 This rather vague concept seems at first glance to be similar towhat Americans called ‘intra-war deterrence’ during the Cold War—that is,relying on nuclear capabilities to deter the enemy from ‘escalating’ to higherlevels of violence in the conduct of military operations. It should be noted,however, that Russian proponents of the concept see nuclear forces as onlycontributing to ‘combat stability’, not furnishing it outright, and assign an evengreater role in ‘combat stability’ to conventional forces.The fourth function of NSNF is to make possible the ‘de-escalation’ ofconventional conflicts. Rather than describing the use of nuclear weapons as aform of ‘escalation’, the customary metaphor in NATO countries, Russianmilitary theorists suggest that Moscow’s use of NSNF could bring about ‘de-escalation’—that is, that limited use of nuclear weapons would convince theadversary that he should reconsider his plans and accept an end to the conflictwithout further combat. ‘It is advisable to execute this mission using nonstra-tegic (above all operational–tactical) nuclear weapons, which can preclude an“avalanching” escalation of the use of nuclear weapons right up to an exchange9 Vladimir Sivolob and Mikhail Sosnovskiy, ‘A reality of deterrence: algorithms for nuclear weapon useshould become a component part of military doctrine’, Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 22 Oct.1999, in FBIS, CEP 19991029000006.10 Andrey Piontkovskiy and Vitaliy Tsygichko, ‘A holey nuclear umbrella’, Segodnya, 31 May 2000, inFBIS, CEP 20000531000257.11 Colonel S. V. Kreydin, ‘Problems of nuclear deterrence: the nuclear potential’s combat stability’,Voyennaya Mysl, July–Aug. 2000, in FBIS, CEP20000816000366.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am535536David S. Yostof massed nuclear strikes delivered by strategic assets. It seems to us thatcessation of military operations will be the most acceptable thing for the enemyin this case.’12 The uncertainties regarding escalation control and crisis manage-ment that were so prominent in NATO thinking about limited use of nuclearweapons for war-termination during the Cold War are, however, sometimesacknowledged by Russian military authorities.13The closely related fifth function of NSNF is to make it possible for Russia toconduct limited nuclear strikes in a regional (or theatre) war while avoiding anescalation to intercontinental nuclear operations or any other geographicalextension of the conflict. Russian analysts have suggested, for example, thatNSNF could be used ‘in the course of military operations…to compensate forenemy superiority on individual strategic (operational) axes without crossingthe “threshold of activation” of strategic nuclear weapons, the massive use ofwhich is fraught with mutual destruction of opposing sides and even with thedisappearance of mankind.’14The sixth function of Russia’s nuclear forces, including NSNF, is to inhibitthe intervention of outside powers (such as the United States or NATO) inregional conflicts involving Russia. In a sense, this function amounts to a restate-ment of the first (deterrence of external aggression). Some Russians have none-theless highlighted the imperative of ruling out any NATO intervention in theChechnya conflict analogous to the alliance’s actions in the Kosovo conflict:‘Russia would make it clear that no one would be allowed to intervene in Russiandomestic affairs. The West would be taught that Russia is not Yugoslavia.’15The seventh function of NSNF is to substitute for advanced long-range non-nuclear precision strike systems that, Russian authorities hold, ‘have begun toapproach the role of nuclear weapons’ in their significance.16 This function canbe seen as an RMA-specific extension of the second—offsetting the conven-tional military superiority of adversaries.The eighth function of NSNF is to constitute a set of assets for the highcommand to enable it to change the correlation of forces in specific theatres orsectors of military operations. This also evidently overlaps with the function ofcompensating for conventional military inferiority. ‘The presence of non-strategic nuclear weapons in Russia’s Armed Forces provides an offset for thedisruption of the balance of general-purpose forces, and their use in the courseof military operations will nullify enemy superiority in particular strategic oroperational sectors.’1712 Major General V. I. Levshin, Colonel A. V. Nedelin and Colonel M. Ye. Sosnovskiy, ‘Use of nuclearweapons to de-escalate military operations’, Voyennaya Mysl, May–June 1999, in FBIS,FTS19990602001557.13 For background, see David S. Yost, ‘The history of NATO theater nuclear force policy: key findingsfrom the Sandia conference’, Journal of Strategic Studies 15, June 1992.14 Sivolob and Sosnovskiy, ‘A reality of deterrence’.15 Arbatov, The transformation of Russian military doctrine, p. 21.16 Sergeyev, ‘The main factors which determine Russia’s military–technical policy’.17 Colonel C. A. Ivasik, Colonel A. S. Pisyaukov and Colonel A. L. Khryapin, ‘Nuclear weapons andRussian military security’, Voyennoye Mysl, July–Aug. 1999, UKTRANS 00594.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am536537Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesThe ninth function of NSNF is to compensate, at least to some extent, forreductions in Russia’s strategic nuclear forces. ‘Against the background ofcontinuing reductions in strategic nuclear weapons, the role of forces equippedwith operational–tactical and tactical nuclear weapons is increasing.’18 Russiansevidently see an overlap between NSNF and strategic nuclear forces for severalfunctions. NSNF reductions could therefore be perceived as diminishing thecountry’s overall strategic posture.For the United States, the large Russian advantage in NSNF numbersappears increasingly significant with projected lower limits on intercontinentalforces under the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) treaties, partlybecause certain types of Russian NSNF ‘have relatively long ranges’ and capa-bilities ‘identical or similar’ to weapons encompassed by START agreements.19Russian officials have referred to the possible reconfiguration of NSNF—particularly cruise missiles—as a means to overcome any missile defencesdeployed by the United States to protect North America.20 The Backfirebomber, for example, is not constrained by START I, except for a politicalcommitment by Moscow, in a declaration accompanying the treaty, to main-tain no more than 500 of these aircraft and not to give them an intercontinentalrange potential—despite their in-flight refuelling capability. With Russia’sdevelopment of 3,000 km range Kh-101 and Kh-102 air-launched cruisemissiles (ALCMs), the Backfire’s potential as a strategic-range bomber has beenenhanced.21 With regard to ‘so-called non-strategic nuclear weapons and theconcern over long-range sea-launched cruise missiles’, Russian PresidentVladimir Putin has said, ‘the alleged US superiority in this sphere is certainly notobvious’, in view of Russia’s achievements and potential in this domain.22While the deterrence of external aggression stands out as the primaryfunction of Russia’s nuclear forces, including NSNF, with ‘de-escalation’ andother functions gaining greater relevance in war, various political roles have alsobeen apparent. Moscow has relied on nuclear arms to uphold Russia’s status ininternational politics, to draw attention to Russia’s continuing importance inEurasia, and to serve as instruments for diplomatic gesticulation in crises.Russians have at times, for instance, sought to influence the decisions of otherpowers by pointing out that Moscow could withdraw from legal or political18 Ibid.19 Admiral Richard Mies, USN, Commander-in-Chief, US Strategic Command, testimony at the hearingof the Senate Armed Services Committee on US strategic nuclear force requirements, 23 May 2000,Federal News Service transcript, pp. 18–19.20 General Vladimir Yakovlev, Commander-in-Chief, Strategic Missile Troops, interview in KrasnayaZvezda, 5 July 2000, in FBIS, CEP20000705000396.21 The Tu-22M3 Backfire is being upgraded (mainly via improved avionics) into the Tu-22M5 modelcapable of carrying the new long-range ALCMs. Nikolai Sokov, ‘Developments in Russian nuclearweapons policy’, presentation to US Senate Armed Services Committee, 26 Jan. 2001, p. 15. No meansof distinguishing the non-nuclear Kh-101 from the nuclear-armed Kh-102 has been identified.Equipping the Backfire with a nuclear-armed long-range ALCM would render it accountable as a heavybomber under START.22 Vladimir Putin, President-elect of the Russian Federation, speech at the State Duma, 14 April 2000, inKommersant, 15 April 2000, in FBIS, CEP20000417000148.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am537538David S. Yostcommitments affecting nuclear forces, and/or redeploy or reconfigure NSNFand other nuclear forces, or even threaten nuclear strikes.Other indications of utility for NSNF in RussiaThe relevance of published military doctrine and the professional militaryliterature may be limited and scenario-dependent, but there are at least five otherforms of evidence that the Russians attach great importance to NSNF.NATO–Russia Founding Act negotiationsThe first resides in the Russian preoccupations during the 1996–7 negotiationsover the NATO–Russia Founding Act, which included the alliance’scommitments with regard to military arrangements affecting the new allies. TheRussians insisted that NATO’s December 1996 ‘three noes’ commitment aboutnuclear weapon deployments on the territory of new allies (‘no intention, noplan, and no reason’ for such deployments) be supplemented in the May 1997NATO–Russia Founding Act by a ‘fourth no’ excluding any NATO use of theformer Warsaw Pact nuclear storage sites or any construction of new nuclearweapons storage facilities.23The Russian foreign minister during the Founding Act negotiations, YevgenyPrimakov, made clear in his memoirs that these were important points forMoscow. Primakov praised Malcolm Rifkind, the British foreign secretary, forunderstanding during the negotiations ‘that Russia had a right to be concernedabout the prospect of nuclear weapons being located closer to its borders’.24 Inother words, despite the complete absence of any discernible interest withinNATO in deploying nuclear weapons on the territory of the new allies, Russiaconsidered such NSNF deployments a genuine threat.Military exercisesThe second form of evidence consists of exercises. The Zapad 99 exercise inJune 1999 assumed that NATO had attacked the Kaliningrad oblast using forcesand operational concepts similar to those employed in Operation Allied Forceagainst Yugoslavia. The Russian troops could not withstand NATO’s offensivethrust with conventional means, so they simulated the employment of nuclear-armed ALCMs on Tu-95 Bear and Tu-160 Blackjack heavy bombers againstPoland and the United States.2523 Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security between the North Atlantic TreatyOrganization and the Russian Federation, signed at Paris, 27 May 1997, p. 7.24 Yevgeny Primakov, Years in big politics, trans. and abbr. by J. B. K. Lough, report F70 (Camberley: RoyalMilitary Academy Sandhurst, Conflict Studies Research Centre, June 2000), pp. 4, 13.25 Sokov, Russian strategic modernization, p. 171.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am538539Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesSubsequent exercises have reportedly also simulated the use of nuclearweapons in the form of nuclear-armed missiles launched from heavy and mediumbombers. This circumstance underscores how artificial and arbitrary distinctionsbetween strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons can be. Although the pro-fessional military literature includes elaborate terminological discussions, withsome authorities favouring the terms ‘theatre’ or ‘non-strategic’ or ‘operational–tactical’ instead of ‘tactical’ nuclear weapons, the Russians evidently perceive nodoctrinal obstacle to employing a nominally strategic weapon for a non-strategic (or theatre or regional) mission.26NSNF modernizationThe third form of evidence consists of laws and policy decisions relating tonuclear weapons in general and NSNF in particular. As Alexei Arbatov haspointed out, the March 1999 law on financing nuclear forces ‘emphasizes tacticalnuclear forces as the prime candidate for first use against a large conventionalattack. The Iskander, a new, tactical ballistic missile…and a new, naval tacticalnuclear weapons system were specifically discussed as nuclear options.’27 Thenext month, on 29 April 1999, the Security Council, chaired by Vladimir Putin,‘decided to extend the service life of nuclear warheads for tactical deliveryvehicles and, according to Putin’s briefing, discussed the concept for their use.A number of reports indicated that the Security Council decided to develop anew, low-yield nuclear warhead.’28 According to Pavel Felgengauer, a well-informed journalist,the new nuclear weapons’ main ‘appeal’ will be their ability to explode with an excep-tionally low yield—from several tens of tonnes to 100 tonnes of TNT equivalent…It isbeing proposed to create up to 10,000 new low- and super-low-yield tactical nuclearweapons ‘to counter NATO expansion in Europe’…There is every indication thatNATO’s strikes on Yugoslavia have helped the Ministry of Atomic Energy finally winofficial authorization to begin the practical implementation of its plans.29Russian military analyses during and since NATO’s air campaign in theKosovo conflict (March–June 1999) nonetheless reveal a certain shift in pre-occupations. Prior to NATO’s air campaign, as during the negotiation of the26 For that matter, Western nuclear powers evidently also perceive few doctrinal obstacles in the nominaldesignations of particular weapons. Britain has assigned ‘strategic’ and ‘sub-strategic’ roles to its Tridentsubmarine-launched ballistic missiles. France has since 1991 placed all its nuclear-armed aircraftpreviously given ‘prestrategic’ designations under the command of the Strategic Air Forces (ForcesAériennes Stratégiques). US B-61 bomb types have been considered both ‘strategic’ and ‘nonstrategic’,depending on their mission and configuration.27 Arbatov, The transformation of Russian military doctrine, pp. 17–18.28 Nikolai Sokov, ‘Overview: the April 1999 Russian Federation Security Council meeting on nuclearweapons’ (Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey Institute of International Studies NIS NuclearProfiles Database, 29 June 1999).29 Pavel Felgengauer, ‘Limited nuclear war? Why not! Russia’s new defence concept could includeprecision use of nuclear weapons’, Segodnya, 6 May 1999, in FBIS, FTS19990506000851.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am539540David S. YostNATO–Russia Founding Act in 1996–7, the Russians displayed a relativelyhigh level of concern about the hypothetical (and in fact non-existent) prospectof NATO NSNF being deployed on the soil of new NATO allies. SinceNATO’s air campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, concernabout US and allied long-range non-nuclear precision-strike capabilities has tosome extent displaced concern about NATO’s NSNF.Implementation of NSNF commitmentsThe fourth form of evidence consists of Russia’s lack of transparency about theimplementation of Moscow’s 1991–2 commitments to withdraw and eliminatecertain types of NSNF. At the official level, the Russians avoid specifics aboutnumbers and related issues. In April 2000, for example, Igor Ivanov, theRussian foreign minister, said,Russia also continues to consistently implement its unilateral initiatives related totactical nuclear weapons. Such weapons have been completely removed from surfaceships and multipurpose submarines, as well as from the land-based naval aircraft, and arestored at centralized storage facilities. One third of all nuclear munitions for the sea-based tactical missiles and naval aircraft has been eliminated. We are about to completethe destruction of nuclear warheads from tactical missiles, artillery shells and nuclearmines. We have destroyed half of the nuclear warheads for anti-aircraft missiles and fornuclear gravity bombs.30This statement, made at the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) reviewconference in New York, was apparently no more informative than officialRussian statements in the NATO–Russia Permanent Joint Council (PJC) andother forums. In May 1998 it was reported that ‘At a recent meeting toexchange information on tactical nuclear weapons, the Russian delegation’spresentation was “extremely fuzzy” and failed to provide any illumination onthe fate of some 10,000 to 12,000 of its tactical nuclear weapons, according toNATO participants.’31 While the NATO–Russia PJC meeting in October2000 involved ‘exchanges on nuclear weapons issues, including doctrine andstrategy’,32 there are no indications that the Russian delegation was moreforthcoming about Russia’s NSNF posture than the country’s foreign ministerhad been at the United Nations in April 2000.The estimates of numbers of Russian NSNF vary widely in both Russian andWestern published sources. In 1998 experts associated with the NaturalResources Defense Council, a non-governmental organization, estimated thatRussia had 4,000 deployed NSNF warheads, plus perhaps 12,000 in reserve or30 Igor Ivanov, Russian foreign minister, statement at NPT review conference, New York, 25 April 2000,text available at <http://www.basicint.org/nuclear/revcon2000/nuk_00revcon_gen_russia.htm>.31 William Drozdiak, ‘The next step for NATO: handling Russia’, Washington Post National Weekly, 11May 1998, p. 15.32 Press statement, PJC ambassadorial meeting, 30 Oct. 2000, available at <www.nato.int>.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am540541Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesawaiting dismantlement.33 According to a July 2000 paper by Alexei Arbatov,in ‘the early 1980s’ the Soviet Union had ‘10,000 strategic and 30,000 tacticalnuclear weapons’, while currently Russia’s ‘Nuclear forces consist of 5,000strategic and approximately 2,000 tactical warheads (which due to serial obso-lescence will be reduced to around 1,000–1,500 in the next 10 years).’34 InJanuary 2001 Nikolai Sokov estimated that Russia had 8,000–8,500 NSNFwarheads.35Russia is believed to have made much less headway than the United States indismantling NSNF in accordance with the 1991–2 commitments, owing in partto resource limitations and probably also in part to convictions about thepotential utility of NSNF for Russia. In February 1997 Walter Slocombe, thenthe US Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, testified as follows: ‘WhileRussia pledged in 1991 to make significant cuts in its non-strategic nuclearforces and has reduced its operational NSNF substantially, it has made far lessprogress thus far than the US, and the Russian non-strategic arsenal (deployedand stockpiled) is probably about ten times as large as ours.’36 In March 1998Edward Warner, then US Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy and ThreatReduction, repeated this estimate, adding that ‘Russian officials recently statedthat the 1991–1992 NSNF pledges would be fully implemented by the year2000, which would reduce the Russian advantage to about three or four toone.’37 In February 1998 Alain Richard, the French minister of defence, saidthat Russia’s ‘stockpile of so-called tactical [nuclear] weapons…is estimated tobe between 10,000 and 30,000 warheads, and we have only fragmentaryinformation on their control’.38As Richard’s statement suggests, there is little firm evidence about whatRussia has done to implement the 1991–2 commitments. According to a 1997report by the Congressional Research Service,Russian officials contend that they have begun to dismantle warheads removed fromthese nonstrategic nuclear weapons and that they can do so at a rate of 2,000 warheadseach year. The United States has little direct evidence to support Russia’s claims becauseUS officials have not observed the dismantlement process. Nevertheless, some have33 W. M. Arkin, R. S. Norris and J. Handler, Taking stock: world-wide nuclear deployments 1998 (WashingtonDC: Natural Resources Defence Council, 1998), p. 27, cited in Harald Müller and Annette Schaper,‘Appendix: types, delivery systems and locations of TNWs’, in William C. Potter, Nikolai Sokov, HaraldMüller and Annette Schaper, Tactical nuclear weapons: options for control (Geneva: United Nations Institutefor Disarmament Research, Dec. 2000), p. 58.34 Arbatov, The transformation of Russian military doctrine, pp. 4–5.35 Nikolai Sokov, ‘Developments in Russian nuclear weapons policy’, presentation to US Senate ArmedServices Committee, 26 Jan. 2001, p. 9.36 Walter B. Slocombe, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, statement before the Senate GovernmentalAffairs Subcommittee on International Security, Proliferation and Federal Services, hearing on nuclearweapons and deterrence, 12 Feb. 1997, p. 4 of text furnished by the US Department of Defense.37 Edward L. Warner III, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Strategy and Threat Reduction), statement beforethe Strategic Forces Subcommittee, Senate Armed Services Committee, hearing on nuclear deterrence,31 March 1998, p. 4 of the text furnished by the US Department of Defense.38 Alain Richard, minister of defence, speech at the Institut des Hautes Etudes de Défense Nationale, 10Feb. 1998, p. 5 of text furnished by the French ministry of defence.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am541542David S. Yoststated that Russia’s force of nonstrategic nuclear weapons may have declined by morethan 25% from its peak of around 25,000 warheads in the late 1980s.39The wide span in the estimates of Russian NSNF holdings (even allowing fordistinctions among warheads deployed, stored, and/or awaiting dismantlement)suggests the difficulties in verification and establishing confidence. While theUnited States has not disclosed official numbers for US NSNF, unconfirmedpublished reports have put the number of remaining weapons at between 150and 700 gravity bombs for US and allied aircraft in Europe.40What do the Russian commitments amount to? In October 1991 SovietPresident Mikhail Gorbachev declared thatAll nuclear artillery munitions and nuclear warheads for tactical missiles shall be elimin-ated. Nuclear warheads for air defence missiles shall be withdrawn from the troops andconcentrated in central bases, and a portion of them shall be eliminated. All nuclearmines shall be eliminated. All tactical nuclear weapons shall be removed from surfaceships and multi-purpose submarines. These weapons, as well as nuclear weapons onland-based naval aviation, shall be stored in central storage sites and a portion shall beeliminated.41In January 1992 Russian President Boris Yeltsin restated and slightly modifiedGorbachev’s commitment:During the recent period, production has been stopped of nuclear warheads for land-based tactical missiles, and also production of nuclear artillery shells and nuclear mines.Stocks of such nuclear devices will be eliminated. Russia is eliminating one-third of sea-based tactical nuclear weapons and one-half of nuclear warheads for anti-aircraft missiles.Measures in this direction have already been taken. We also intend to halve stocks ofair-launched tactical nuclear munitions.42Gorbachev and Yeltsin made similar commitments in that both promised toeliminate all nuclear artillery warheads, all warheads for land-based tacticalmissiles and all nuclear mines. However, whereas Gorbachev said that ‘a por-tion’ of the warheads for anti-aircraft missiles would be eliminated, Yeltsin saidthat ‘one-half’ of them would be. Whereas Gorbachev said ‘a portion’ of the39 Amy F. Woolf and Kara Wilson, Russia’s nuclear forces: doctrine and force structure issues (Washington DC:Congressional Research Service, 23 May 1997), p. 9.40 For the lower number (150), see Arkin et al., Taking stock, p. 14, cited in Müller and Schaper,‘Appendix’, in Potter et al., Tactical nuclear weapons, pp. 51–2. For the higher number (700), see AlanRiding, ‘NATO will cut atom weapons for aircraft use’, New York Times, 18 Oct. 1991, p. A1. The USnuclear warheads for artillery, short-range missiles and other NSNF systems were dismantled after theirwithdrawal in the early 1990s.41 Televised announcement by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, 5 Oct. 1991, US State Departmenttranslation in SIPRI yearbook 1992: world armaments and disarmament (London: Oxford University Press forthe Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, 1992), p. 87.42 Televised statement by Russian Federation President Boris N. Yeltsin, 29 Jan. 1992, FBIS translation inSIPRI yearbook 1992, p. 90.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am542543Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forceswarheads ‘from surface ships and multi-purpose submarines…as well as nuclearweapons on land-based naval aviation’ would be eliminated, Yeltsin said ‘one-third of sea-based tactical nuclear weapons’ would be eliminated. As well asintroducing some imprecise quantification into the reductions promised byGorbachev in certain weapons categories (‘one-half’ or ‘one-third’ instead of ‘aportion’), Yeltsin offered an additional commitment that Gorbachev had notmade: ‘to halve stocks of air-launched tactical nuclear munitions’.Gorbachev had proposed that ‘on the basis of reciprocity, it would be possibleto withdraw from combat units on frontal (tactical) aviation, all nuclear weapons(gravity bombs and air-launched missiles) and place them in centralized storagebases’.43 In Yeltsin’s version of this proposal, ‘The remaining tactical air-launched nuclear armaments could, on a reciprocal basis with the United States,be removed from combat units of the frontline tactical air force and placed incentralized storage bases.’44 Both versions of the proposal implied theelimination of the entire remaining US nuclear weapons presence in Europe—that is, the fulfilment of one of Moscow’s goals since the 1950s. The UnitedStates had ruled out such an arrangement from the outset. In his September1991 speech that preceded the Soviet and Russian commitments, US PresidentGeorge Bush said, ‘We will, of course, ensure that we preserve an effective air-delivered nuclear capability in Europe. That is essential to NATO’s security.’45Ivanov’s April 2000 statement amounts to an assertion that the commitments,as formulated by Yeltsin, have been almost completely fulfilled. Bruno Tertraisof the French ministry of defence has, however, raised an intriguing questionwith regard to Ivanov’s failure to refer to the status of efforts to fulfil Yeltsin’sJanuary 1992 commitment ‘to halve stocks of air-launched tactical nuclear muni-tions’. Ivanov’s allusion solely to ‘nuclear gravity bombs’ implicitly excludes air-to-ground missiles. Was Ivanov’s wording in this regard careless or careful? Hiswording appears consistent with the simulated employment of nuclear-armedair-launched missiles in recent Russian exercises.46The publicly articulated commitments do not, at any rate, include anyinformation exchanges, verification measures, baseline numbers or legallybinding deadlines. The deadlines or goals for the completion of the NSNFreductions reside not in the public statements made by Gorbachev and Yeltsinin 1991 and 1992, but in clarifications furnished by Moscow in high-levelbilateral and multilateral meetings. This circumstance explains the wording ofthe communiqué issued in December 2000 by NATO’s Defence PlanningCommittee and Nuclear Planning Group: ‘We also recalled the drastic reduc-tions of NATO’s nuclear forces in the new security environment, and renewedour call on Russia to complete the reductions in its non-strategic nuclear43 Televised announcement by Gorbachev, 5 Oct. 1991.44 Televised statement by Yeltsin, 29 Jan. 1992.45 George Bush, ‘Address to the nation on reducing United States and Soviet nuclear weapons’, 27 Sept.1991, in Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents 27: 39, 30 Sept. 1991, pp. 1349–50.46 Author’s interview with Bruno Tertrais in Paris, 12 April 2001.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am543544David S. Yostweapons stockpile, as pledged in 1991 and 1992 for implementation by the endof the year 2000.’47 Russia’s NSNF commitments (like those of the UnitedStates) remain simply political declarations of intentions, not legally bindingtreaty commitments.Arms control agreementsThis brings us to the fifth form of evidence: recurrent discussions in Russia aboutpossibly abandoning the 1991–2 commitments, the INF Treaty and START I,because they may conflict with Russia’s national security requirements.Several published examples can be found of Russians suggesting that, undercertain threatening international circumstances, Russia might have to abandon,modify or renegotiate the 1991–2 commitments; these include statements byIgor Rodionov when he was defence minister in 1996,48 and by AdmiralVladimir Kuroedov, chief of the navy, in 1998.49 According to Nikolai Sokov,‘Russia may want to revise the 1991–92 regime by allowing naval tacticalnuclear weapons, possibly at the expense of gravity bombs, although no formalproposal to that effect has been made.’50 Russian interview sources suggest thatthere has been a fair amount of unofficial talk behind the scenes about aban-doning the 1991–2 commitments, because gravity bombs are considered lessuseful than ground- and sea-launched missiles, among other non-strategicdelivery systems.51The Russian armed forces have evidently continued to train, exercise andevaluate units to maintain their readiness to employ NSNF, even when thewarheads have been placed in central storage facilities.52 According to a Russiannaval official interviewed by Rose Gottemoeller, ‘Our captains are still judged47 Final communiqué, ministerial meeting of the Defence Planning Committee and the Nuclear PlanningGroup, 5 Dec. 2000, para. 10.48 ‘Rodionov declared that in the face of NATO enlargement, Russia “might objectively face the task ofincreasing the number of tactical nuclear weapons at [its] borders” ’: Sokov, Russian strategic modernization,p. 180. It is, of course, possible that Rodionov had in mind a geographical redistribution (hence anincrease in deployments near certain borders) in NSNF covered by the 1991–2 commitments rather thanany deviation from the rather vaguely worded commitments.49 Kuroedov, quoted in Russki Telegraph, 11 June 1998, cited in Nikolai Sokov, ‘The fate of Russiannuclear weapons: an anticlimax on August 11’, 14 Aug. 2000, available at <http://www.cns.miis.edu/pubs/reports/denuke2.htm>.50 Nikolai Sokov, ‘The tactical nuclear weapons controversy’, Jane’s Defence Weekly, 31 Jan. 2001.51 Other examples of Russians talking about possibly abandoning the 1991–2 commitments share twocharacteristics: the context concerns developments deemed threatening to Russia, such as NATOenlargement or US security cooperation with the Baltic states; and the abandonment of thecommitments is usually implicit in the call for a build-up and/or more extensive deployment of NSNF.52 It was reported in January 2001 that Russian NSNF were recently moved to Kaliningrad (see, amongother sources, Bill Gertz, ‘Russia transfers nuclear arms to Baltics’, Washington Times, 3 Jan. 2001, p. 1).The Russian government has disputed the accuracy of such reports. However, in March 2001 SergeyIvanov, then Secretary of the Security Council, stated that Russia ‘has not made an agreement with theinternational community not to deploy tactical [nuclear] weapons in the Kaliningrad region’. In anearlier statement, foreign minister Igor Ivanov said that there was no reason Russia should not deploynuclear weapons in Kaliningrad (Agence France-Presse dispatch, ‘Russian official says Moscow entitledto deploy nuclear weapons in Kaliningrad’, in FBIS, 25 March 2001, EUP20010325000124).INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am544545Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesby how well their sailors are trained to handle nuclear weapons, even thoughnuclear weapons are no longer carried day to day.’53Rather than assuming that the 1991–2 commitments are a binding constrainton Russia’s military options, Russian military analysts seem to ignore them. Thispattern applies not only to NSNF nominally cut by ‘one-half’ or ‘one-third’,but also to the nuclear mines, artillery and tactical missiles that have ostensiblybeen almost entirely eliminated. According to a 1999 article in Military Thought,‘These operations will include nuclear strikes by missile troops, artillery andaviation and the use of nuclear landmines.’54Some Russians have advocated that Russia withdraw from the INF Treaty,or seek its renegotiation, because of Russia’s changed geostrategic situation,including NATO enlargement. The INF Treaty, some Russian experts note,‘closes an opportunity for us to have such continental-class nuclear weaponswhich would reliably perform functions of ensuring Russia’s security for theentire Eurasian spectrum of hypothetical continental TVD’s [theatres of militaryoperations] (including Japan)’.55 It is reasonable to infer that ‘the entire Eurasianspectrum’ also includes NATO and China. As for START I, this treatyprohibits the deployment of long-range nuclear-armed ALCMs on medium-range bombers.56 Some Russian military analysts find this an unwelcome con-straint on Russia’s operational flexibility, because—to quote Nikolai Sokov’sanalysis of the Russian military literature on this point—‘aircraft are versatile,being able to use both conventional and nuclear short-range missiles and air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs). Even more important, even in a nuclear rolethey can be employed for substrategic missions, in line with the latest MilitaryDoctrine, unlike the SRF [Strategic Rocket Forces] and the Navy.’57In short, in the current context some Russians—particularly in militarycircles—find existing nuclear arms control constraints irksome. It nonethelessseems unlikely that Russia will withdraw from these constraints in the foresee-able future. In the short term at least, Russia is likely to wait to see what decisionsthe United States makes about the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and otherarms control agreements. Partly because of Russia’s limited capacity to pursuenew military programmes, owing to its economic weakness, and partly becauseof the perceived advantages of letting the United States bear the political onusof withdrawing from (or seeking modifications in) the ABM Treaty and/or53 Rose Gottemoeller, ‘Lopsided arms control’, Washington Post, 7 Dec. 2000, p. 37. In April 2001 GrigoriTomchin, a member of the Russian government’s investigating commission, was quoted as having saidthat the Kursk, an Oscar II-class nuclear-powered cruise-missile submarine (SSGN), was carrying NSNFwhen it sank in August 2000. Such statements have been denied by Russian authorities. See, amongother sources, the brief reports in the International Herald Tribune, 5 and 6 April 2001.54 Levshin et al., ‘Use of nuclear weapons to de-escalate military operations’.55 Sergey T. Brezkun, ‘Pioners must be revived: Russia needs a new “European” nuclear weapon’,Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 13–19 Aug. 1999, in FBIS, 18 Aug. 1999, FTS19990818001156.‘Pioner’ is a Russian designation for a certain type of intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM).56 Under START I a medium-range bomber becomes accountable as a heavy bomber when it is equippedwith a long-range nuclear-armed ALCM. For START purposes, a long-range nuclear-armed ALCM hasa range in excess of 600 km.57 Nikolai Sokov, ‘A new old direction in Russia’s nuclear policy’, Disarmament Diplomacy 50 (Sept. 2000).INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am545546David S. Yostother arms control accords, Russia may be influenced to some extent by USchoices. In Sokov’s judgement, some Russians would nonetheless appreciateUS decisions that would enable Moscow to cease compliance with existingarms control constraints: ‘From the point of view of the military, expectedwithdrawal of the United States from the ABM Treaty can provide a welcomepretext, and this is part of the reason why some figures in the military leadershipresist a possible deal on ABM amendments.’58In the meantime, the Russians have evidently become cautious aboutaccepting new arms control obligations that could further constrain their NSNFoptions. Moscow now holds that its obligation to defend its allies under the1992 Tashkent Treaty of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)entails a potential requirement to deploy nuclear weapons on their soil incertain circumstances. According to William Potter, ‘This policy shift, evidentafter April 1999, is apparent in quiet but effective Russian diplomacy to weakenthe Central Asian Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zone Treaty that is currently undernegotiation.’59Aside from the 1987 INF Treaty, which concerns ground-based missiles withranges between 500 and 5,500 km, Moscow and Washington have never placedconstraints on their NSNF in treaties. Moscow attempted to include US NSNF(and to exclude its own NSNF) in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT)and START treaties, an approach that the United States and its allies rejected.60However, at the March 1997 US–Russian summit in Helsinki, President Clintonand President Yeltsin ‘agreed that in the context of START III negotiationstheir experts will explore, as separate issues, possible measures relating to nuclearlong-range sea-launched cruise missiles and tactical nuclear systems, to includeappropriate confidence-building and transparency measures’.61Several aspects of this wording are noteworthy. The ‘possible measuresrelating to nuclear long-range sea-launched cruise missiles and tactical nuclearsystems’ are ‘separate issues’—that is, they are evidently separate from eachother and possibly also separate from START III. Indeed, it is ‘in the context ofSTART III negotiations’ that ‘experts will explore…possible measures.’ Thecommitment to ‘explore’ may mean no more than to ‘discuss’. The fact that the‘possible measures…include appropriate confidence-building and transparencymeasures’ implies that either Russia or the United States (or both) may not beprepared to accept an intrusive verification regime for such systems.Whether and how START III negotiations will be pursued remains unclearat present. In April–May 2000 Russia ratified the START II Treaty, butattached conditions to its entry into force relating to US ratification of the 199758 Sokov, ‘Developments in Russian nuclear weapons policy’, p. 20.59 William C. Potter, ‘Reducing the threat of tactical nuclear weapons’, paper presented to the internationalworkshop on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, Tokyo, 27–9 Aug. 2000, p. 5.60 Moscow called the US NSNF in Europe ‘forward based systems’.61 US–Russian Joint Statement on Parameters on Future Reductions in Nuclear Forces, Helsinki, 21 March1997.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am546547Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesABM Treaty demarcation and succession agreements that may well be unac-ceptable to the US Senate.62 Owing in part to the long delays in START IIratification and entry into force and the prospects of stalemate in the STARTprocess, the new US administration under President George W. Bush has raisedthe idea of making unilateral reductions in US nuclear forces and pursuing lessformal means of arms control. The implications for NSNF of such newapproaches to nuclear arms control have yet to be defined.Russia and NATO’s NSNFIt is not clear that the United States and its allies will find a negotiation withRussia on NSNF in their interests. If such a negotiation took place, however,the remaining US nuclear weapons presence in Europe would constitute one ofAmerica’s most important means of leverage in bargaining for NSNF reductionswith Moscow. If the US nuclear presence were withdrawn from Europe uni-laterally, the Russians would have fewer incentives to accept any arms controlmeasures, including any verification and transparency regime.63Proposals for a unilateral withdrawal of the US nuclear forces in Europe aresometimes associated with questionable assumptions. In December 2000, forexample, William Potter and Nikolai Sokov argued thatit may be desirable for the United States to declare its intention unilaterally to return toUnited States territory all of its air-based TNWs [tactical nuclear weapons] currentlydeployed in Europe. This pronouncement, which would lead to the elimination of allUnited States TNWs in Europe, could go a long way towards dispelling Russian fearsabout NATO and could help to revive the spirit of the parallel 1991 initiatives.64The extent to which this initiative would ‘go a long way towards dispellingRussian fears about NATO’ might be limited, however, for Russia’s greatestmisgivings about the Western alliance concern its enduring political cohesion;its demographic, economic, and military potential, including the large US andstill significant British and French strategic nuclear arsenals; its policies, such asan ‘open door’ regarding further enlargement; and its advanced non-nuclear62 The US Senate gave its advice and consent to START II ratification in January 1996, but the USPresident has not yet submitted to the Senate the START II protocols and ABM Treaty agreementsconcluded with Russia in September 1997. Russia has made START II’s entry into force conditional onUS ratification of the September 1997 START II protocols and ABM Treaty agreements.63 This article is focused on Russian attitudes and policies, rather than the intrinsic problems of defining anarms control regime for NSNF, such as the baseline or initialization problem (determining the numbersand locations of Russian NSNF) and the difficulties of verification and geographical scope. Nor does thisarticle examine the considerable damage to US and NATO interests, including with respect to non-proliferation, that could be caused by a unilateral withdrawal of the remaining US nuclear presence inEurope. For discussions of these issues, see David S. Yost, The US and nuclear deterrence in Europe, AdelphiPaper no. 326 (London: Oxford University Press for the International Institute for Strategic Studies,March 1999), pp. 25–33, 49–52, 57–61.64 William C. Potter and Nikolai Sokov, ‘The nature of the problem’, in William C. Potter, NikolaiSokov, Harald Müller and Annette Schaper, Tactical nuclear weapons: options for control (Geneva: UnitedNations Institute for Disarmament Research, Dec. 2000), p. 14.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am547548David S. Yoststrike capabilities and demonstrated effectiveness in employing them. Indeed, inan effort to infer a rational basis for such an initiative on NATO’s part, Russiananalysts might well deem their hypothesis that US and allied non-nuclear pre-cision strike systems are approaching (or exceeding) the effectiveness of nuclearweapons vindicated by US withdrawal of the remaining NSNF in Europe.Russian fears about NATO might, in other words, remain virtually unchangedor perhaps even be deepened.It is nonetheless plausible that the Russians would be pleased if the UnitedStates unilaterally withdrew its remaining NSNF from Europe if they inter-preted the move as reflecting a lessening of US will and commitment, a decreasein NATO’s political–military capabilities, and the elimination of the ‘coupling’,‘transatlantic link’ and other political–military functions of US NSNF inEurope. The Russians—and key observers in NATO Europe—might considerthe withdrawal of the US nuclear presence evidence of America’s decreasedwillingness to defend its allies with nuclear means. Moscow might then expectits European neighbours to become more deferential to Russia, in view of theperceived change in the balance of power and commitments, with unpredict-able consequences. The withdrawal of US NSNF could thus have counter-productive and even dangerous geopolitical consequences, because of theconclusions that could well be drawn in Russia and Europe about US securitycommitments.The risks and costs associated with a unilateral withdrawal of US NSNF fromEurope would therefore outweigh the putative gain of assuaging Russiananxieties and suspicions about NATO. Moscow’s expressed fears are at any rategenerally based on misperceptions and misrepresentations about NATO.65 Thewithdrawal of the remaining US NSNF could create an unstable situation inEurope by sending a message of US disengagement and encouraging greatpower aspirations and behaviour on the part of Russia. Unilateral withdrawal ofUS NSNF would imply that Russian NSNF do not need to be balanced witheven a minimum amount of comparable capabilities. This would be a huge mis-statement about NATO’s security interests and requirements. The alliance wouldin effect be accepting Russian arguments that (despite NATO’s conciliatorypolicies, non-aggressive record towards Russia and structural need for labori-ously achieved unanimity among its 19 members for any operation other thanself-defence) NATO is so inherently powerful via other means that it couldreadily give up the US NSNF in Europe—as if Russian perceptions of NATOas interventionist and hegemonic could be diminished only by this sacrifice ofUS and alliance capability and the severing of this transatlantic link.Comparable problems burden other proposals for a withdrawal of USNSNF. Lewis Dunn and Victor Alessi recently proposed that the United Stateswithdraw its remaining NSNF from Europe in return for Moscow’s agreement65 Some European experts on Russia judge that Moscow at times overstates its concerns about NATO toadvance domestic political purposes and to seek concessions from European and NATO nations.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am548549Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesto ‘corral’ its NSNF at central storage sites (thereby, it is argued, reducing therisk of diversion and narrowing Russian deployment and use options). Dunnand Alessi called for ‘coordinated unilateral actions’ by Russia and the UnitedStates, rather than the purely unilateral US action proposed by Potter andSokov. However, one of the results would be the same: the elimination of theUS nuclear presence in Europe. Like the Potter–Sokov proposal, the Dunn–Alessi proposal is grounded in hopes that a US NSNF withdrawal would elicitRussian restraint and transparency.66 In practical terms, however, the asym-metry in numbers between US and Russian NSNF would probably bemagnified; reliable verification of the numbers of Russian NSNF inside (andoutside) the ‘corrals’ might well be impossible, especially when it would matterin a crisis; and NATO would have lost the political–military ‘coupling’ andother security functions of US NSNF in Europe. These alliance security func-tions are so significant that the allies have concluded that a minimum level ofUS nuclear presence must be retained in Europe in the foreseeable future, evenin a context of reciprocal reductions.67Nor is it clear that a unilateral withdrawal of the remaining US NSNF inEurope would, in the words of Potter and Sokov, ‘help to revive the spirit ofthe parallel 1991 initiatives’. The spirit of the 1991–2 initiatives was hopefulimprovisation during a period of uncertainty and perceived urgency, in view ofevents in the Soviet Union and the difficulties in devising a formal NSNF armscontrol regime. In retrospect, Russians generally dismiss the hopefulness of theearly 1990s regarding Russian cooperation with the United States and the Westas a whole as ‘romantic’ and ‘naïve’. In the intervening period, Russian con-ventional forces have drastically deteriorated, and the utility of NSNF inRussian eyes has correspondingly mounted. It is therefore doubtful whether aunilateral removal of the remaining US NSNF in Europe would somehow‘jump-start’ negotiations with Russia about its NSNF.Since the 1950s it has been argued in various quarters that Moscow would bemore cooperative in dealings with the West if it were granted its wish that USnuclear weapons in Europe be entirely removed. It is far more likely, however,that the Russians would simply ‘pocket’ a unilateral withdrawal of the USNSNF as something they had always demanded. Under both Soviet and Russianrule, Moscow has considered the US nuclear presence in Europe not simplythreatening to its security, but politically illegitimate, a symbol of US intrusion66 Lewis A. Dunn and Victor Alessi, ‘Arms control by other means’, Survival 42: 4, Winter 2000–01, p. 136.67 ‘A credible Alliance nuclear posture and the demonstration of Alliance solidarity and commoncommitment to war prevention continue to require widespread participation by European Alliesinvolved in collective defence planning in nuclear roles, in peacetime basing of nuclear forces on theirterritory and in command, control and consultation arrangements. Nuclear forces based in Europe andcommitted to NATO provide an essential political and military link between the European and theNorth American members of the Alliance. The Alliance will therefore maintain adequate nuclear forcesin Europe’: North Atlantic Council, Strategic Concept, 24 April 1999, para. 63. The formula ‘EuropeanAllies involved in collective defence planning’ excludes France, which has chosen not to participate inthe Alliance’s Nuclear Planning Group since its establishment in 1966–7.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am549550David S. Yostinto Moscow’s rightful sphere of influence.68 From a Russian perspective, aunilateral withdrawal of the US nuclear presence in Europe would be rectifyingan old injustice and imposition, rather than offering a signal for Russian NSNFdisarmament. For the alliance, even if Russian NSNF numbers could therebybe numerically reduced, there would be little or no strategic gain. Russia wouldhold a monopoly on NSNF from the Atlantic to the Chinese border. Moscow’sNSNF holdings would be unverifiable, but would probably remain in thethousands. If drastic reductions in NATO NSNF since 1991 have not ledMoscow to resolve the massive uncertainties in the West about Russia’s NSNF,why should it be expected that complete withdrawal (entirely removing thealliance’s leverage) would bring about a response that NATO could regard assatisfactory?In other words, while the remaining US NSNF in Europe constitute some ofAmerica’s most important means of bargaining leverage, their value in thisregard is inescapably limited by Russia’s overriding national security priorities.To a significant extent, as indicated earlier, the Russians attribute utility to theirNSNF for reasons other than NATO’s NSNF.69 Russians may in fact attachincreased value to their NSNF in the years to come, owing to the country’seconomic and demographic decline and its inability to invest much inconventional military modernization. Russian interests in using NSNF to deterpowers other than NATO (such as China), to substitute for advanced non-nuclear precision-strike systems and to ‘de-escalate’ regional conflicts (amongother functions attributed to NSNF) would not be modified by a unilateralwithdrawal of US NSNF from Europe.ConclusionAt the current juncture, at least in the NSNF domain, the Russians appear todiscount the usual theoretical advantages of arms control—transparency,predictability, stability, confidence-building, and so on. The chief Russianmotivation for continued interest in arms control for non-strategic nuclearforces nonetheless remains one of the main goals of Moscow’s foreign policysince the 1950s—to get US nuclear weapons out of Europe. Under both Soviet68 In this respect the attitudes of many Russians in the country’s political elite remain as a renowned Britishscholar characterized them during the Soviet period: ‘The Russians feel themselves to be not only themost numerous but also the greatest of all European peoples. They believe, on these grounds and onideological grounds, that the Soviet Union has the right to greater influence in all European affairs thanshe has now’: Malcolm Mackintosh, ‘Moscow’s view of the balance of power’, The World Today 29,March 1973, p. 111.69 As Nikolai Sokov himself has pointed out, ‘The persistence with which Russia continues to adhere tothe view that tactical nuclear weapons are important for its security in spite of several years of insistenceof the West that these weapons should be reduced, testifies to the relative independence of the country’spolicy in the area of nuclear weapons’: Sokov, Russian strategic modernization, p. 200. Indeed, Sokov hascommented as follows on proposals to convert the 1991–2 commitments into a formal treaty regime,with verification provisions: ‘The task is not easy. Russia values tactical nuclear weapons more than theSoviet Union did in 1991 and its requirements for such a treaty are stiffer’: Sokov, ‘The tactical nuclearweapons controversy’.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am550551Russia’s non-strategic nuclear forcesand Russian rule, Moscow has made it clear in various negotiations—SALT,START, INF, etc.—that it regards the US nuclear weapons presence ascontrary to its interests. Russia has continued the Soviet tradition of arguing fora unilateral withdrawal of the US non-strategic nuclear force presence inEurope. In November 2000 Yuriy Kapralov, the head of the Russian foreignministry’s department for security and disarmament, told a news conference that‘The Russian initiative to radically reduce nuclear arsenals also stipulatesnegotiations on a pullout of US non-strategic nuclear weapons from Europe.’70Russian officials have restated Moscow’s preference in this regard in variousways (e.g. by demanding the repatriation of all nuclear weapons to nationalterritories). However, some Russian analysts have suggested that, owing in partto the verification problems associated with dual-capable aircraft and other deliverysystems, the most attractive solution might be a new formulation of declaratoryarrangements, this time with specified numerical ceilings, in contrast with the1991–2 statements by Moscow and Washington. According to Sergey Rogov,considering the colossal difficulties of verifying dual-purpose systems, it can be assumedthat we will succeed in avoiding the adoption of treaty commitments on tactical nuclearweapons and in retaining a certain quantitative superiority here. In place of this, it ispermissible to adopt parallel political statements (of the type of Bush–Gorbachevstatements of 1991) about voluntary restrictions on all types of ‘nonstrategic’ nuclearwarheads to a level of 1,500–2,000.71The point of this article is not that the Russians have no incentives to pursuearms control for non-strategic nuclear forces, but that they have countervailingincentives to retain and improve weapons in this category. It may therefore bedifficult to engage them in successful negotiations affecting their NSNF—whether the goal is formalizing the 1991–2 commitments in a treaty and addinga verification regime,72 or seeking further reductions in and/or the eliminationof specific types of NSNF. NATO has adopted the most practical objective cur-rently available: pursuing greater transparency regarding NSNF in the NATO–Russia Permanent Joint Council.7370 Kapralov statement of 14 Nov. 2000, quoted in Itar-Tass dispatch, 14 Nov. 2000, in FBIS,CEP20001114000223.71 Sergey Mikhaylovich Rogov, ‘Reliance on nuclear shield: not unilateral reduction, but a search forcompromise solutions with the United States will ensure Russia’s national security’, NezavisimoyeVoyennoye Obozreniye, 4–10 Aug. 2000, in FBIS, CEP20000810000216.72 In December 2000 the North Atlantic Council called for ‘an early conclusion of a START IIIagreement’ and stated that, ‘Given the need to reduce the uncertainties surrounding substrategic nuclearweapons in Russia, we believe that a reaffirmation—and perhaps codification—of the 1991/92Presidential Initiatives might be a first, but not exhaustive, step in this direction’: final communiqué,ministerial meeting of the North Atlantic Council, Brussels, 15 Dec. 2000, para. 63.73 The North Atlantic Council in December 2000 approved a proposal for ‘a reciprocal data exchange withRussia’ in the NATO–Russia Permanent Joint Council ‘to enhance transparency and knowledge of thesize of the US and Russian stockpiles’ of ‘sub-strategic nuclear forces’. See the ‘Report on Options forConfidence and Security Building Measures (CSBMs), Verification, Non-Proliferation, Arms Controland Disarmament’, press communiqué M-NAC-2 (2000) 121 (Brussels, 14 Dec. 2000), para. 95.INTA77_3_03/Yost 18/6/01, 8:45 am551