ABSTRACT: 
Argument: Glass vessels such as flasks and test tubes play an ambiguous role in the historiography of modern laboratory research. In spite of the strong focus on the role of materiality in the last decades, the scientific glass vessel – while being symbolically omnipresent – has remained curiously neglected in regard to its materiality. The popular image ortoposof the transparent, neutral, and quasi-immaterial glass container obstructs the view of the physico-chemical functionality of this constitutive inner boundary in modern laboratory environments and its material historicity. In order to understand how glass vessels were able to provide a stable epistemic containment of spatially enclosed experimental phenomena in the new laboratory ecologies emerging in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, I will focus on the history of thematerialstandardization of laboratory glassware. I will follow the rise of a new awareness for measurement errors due to the chemical agency of experimental glass vessels, then I will sketch the emergence of a whole techno-scientific infrastructure for the improvement of glass container quality in late nineteenth-century Germany. In the last part of my argument, I will return to the laboratory by looking at the implementation of this glass reform that created a newoikosfor the inner experimental milieus of modern laboratory research. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we consider the emergence of the scientific infrastructure in the nineteenth century as the result of the standardization of glass containers .<n> such a standardization was an ambiguous process in the early twentieth century as it involved the construction of individual glass containers and the separation of their contents .<n> the emergence of the scientific infrastructure in the nineteenth century is the result of the concomitant construction of individual glass containers and the separation of their contents .<n> such a standardization was an ambiguous process in the early twentieth century as it involved the construction of individual glass containers and the separation of their contents .<n> we consider the emergence of the scientific infrastructure in the nineteenth century as the result of the construction of individual glass containers and the separation of their contents .<n> we consider the relation between the emergence of the scientific infrastructure in the nineteenth century as the result of the construction of individual glass containers and the development of the infrastructure in the twentieth century as the result of the concomitant construction of individual glass containers and the separation of their contents .<n> we consider the relation between the emergence of the scientific infrastructure in the nineteenth century as the result of the construction of individual glass containers and the development of the infrastructure in the twentieth century as the result of the concomitant construction of individual glass containers and the separation of their contents .<n> 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 <jats:italic>material</jats:italic>standardization of laboratory glassware. I will follow the rise of a new awareness for measurement errors due to the chem- ical agency of experimental glass vessels, then I will sketch the emergence of a whole techno-scientific infrastructure for the improvement of glass container quality in late nineteenth-century Germany. In the last part of my argument, I will return to the laboratory by looking at the implementation of this glass reform that created a new<jats:italic>oikos</jats:italic>for the inner experimental milieus of modern laboratory research. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/s0269889715000137 Posted at the Zurich Open Repository and Archive, University of Zurich ZORA URL: https://doi.org/10.5167/uzh-155318 Journal Article Published Version Originally published at: Espahangizi, Kijan Malte (2015). From topos to oikos: the standardization of glass containers as epistemic boundaries in modern laboratory research (1850–1900). Science in Context, 28(3):397-425. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/s0269889715000137 Science in Context 28(3), 397–425 (2015). C© Cambridge University Press 2015 doi:10.1017/S0269889715000137 From Topos to Oikos: The Standardization of Glass Containers as Epistemic Boundaries in Modern Laboratory Research (1850–1900) Kijan Espahangizi ETH Zurich and the University of Zurich E-mail: kespahangizi@ethz.ch Argument Glass vessels such as flasks and test tubes play an ambiguous role in the historiography of modern laboratory research. In spite of the strong focus on the role of materiality in the last decades, the scientific glass vessel – while being symbolically omnipresent – has remained curiously neglected in regard to its materiality. The popular image or topos of the transparent, neutral, and quasi-immaterial glass container obstructs the view of the physico-chemical functionality of this constitutive inner boundary in modern laboratory environments and its material historicity. In order to understand how glass vessels were able to provide a stable epistemic containment of spatially enclosed experimental phenomena in the new laboratory ecologies emerging in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, I will focus on the history of the material standardization of laboratory glassware. I will follow the rise of a new awareness for measurement errors due to the chemical agency of experimental glass vessels, then I will sketch the emergence of a whole techno-scientific infrastructure for the improvement of glass container quality in late nineteenth-century Germany. In the last part of my argument, I will return to the laboratory by looking at the implementation of this glass reform that created a new oikos for the inner experimental milieus of modern laboratory research. The scene is familiar to all of us: a scientist, brooding over a research object contained in laboratory glassware. This motif has become omnipresent in heroic representations of science since the late nineteenth century.1 1 It can be found in the well-known portrait of Louis Pasteur, painted by Albert Edelfelt in 1885. See also the complementary description of the painting in Loslalot 1886, 459-460. For the historical development of glass vessel iconography, see also Schummer 2008; Schummer and Spector 2007. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 398 Kijan Espahangizi Fig. 1. Portrait de M. Pasteur (Photography, 1886). Source: Archives nationales, Paris. But such iconic prominence of scientific glass containers has a dark side. As a matter of fact, they play at best an ambiguous role in the history of science: Although recent historical epistemology has convincingly emphasized the significance of materiality in the dynamics of experimental research, the scientific glass vessel, though symbolically established, has remained curiously invisible.2 The glittering iconography of laboratory glassware has obstructed from view the material historicity and functionality of these objects in experimental research.3 Based on the above, I will re-materialize 2 There are, however, exceptions, such as for instance Müller 2004; Jackson 2006. Cf. also the chapter on glassware revolution in Jackson 2008. 3 There are, though, numerous historiographical works on optical glass. See for instance Schaffer 1989; Jackson 2000; Hentschel 2002. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 399 scientific glassware, which means making visible the materiality that turned glass into a constitutive inner boundary in laboratory environments. The notion of the boundary and material boundary work suggested in this paper does not aim at a discursive, disciplinary, or institutional level,4 but quite literally at the physical space of the modern research laboratory. I will focus on the early history of the standardization of laboratory glassware in the second half of the nineteenth century, more precisely on the standardization of the material and not the form of experimental glass containers such as flasks, test tubes, and petri dishes. The material standardization of glassware will not be addressed as a technical solution to a practical problem nor will it be addressed from the viewpoint of history of technology, but rather as a process of epistemic and material reconfiguration of spatial boundaries in emerging research laboratory environments, i.e. from the viewpoint of a historical material epistemology. This means that on a conceptual level, I approach the history of modern laboratory research from an environmental perspective, focusing on the genealogies not of the epistemic objects but of those enclosed ecologies, architectures, and infrastructures, in which experimental inquiry into nature has settled. Seen from this perspective, the history of glass vessels turns out to be a challenging case study.5 The paper starts with an outlook on the development of the container glass industry and technical glass chemistry in mid-nineteenth century. In a second step, I will follow the rise of a new awareness for measurement errors due to the chemical agency of experimental glass vessels in the context of precision research. Third, I will outline the emergence of a whole techno-scientific infrastructure for the improvement of glass container quality in late nineteeth-century Germany that equally involved the needs of glassware consumers, the rise of special glass industry, the establishment of state institutions for material standards, as well as new forms of glass research and development. In the last part of the paper, I will return to the laboratory environment focusing on the implementation of this glass reform especially the reconfiguration of glass boundaries in research. In the history of modern laboratory research glass containers are typically perceived as ahistorical, quasi-immaterial material objects the properties of which are limited to form, transparency, neutrality, and sometimes annoying fragility. These are without 4 Not to be confused with the notion of “boundary work” proposed by Thomas Gieryn 1983, nor with Susan Star’s “boundary object” (Star and Griesemer 1989). 5 I have developed this approach in the introduction to my dissertation thesis. In a nutshell, the main difference of such a historical ecology of modern laboratory research compared to, for example, the history of epistemic things, proposed by Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, can be described as a shift or rather an inversion of the focus of interest: The experimental system (or more generally, the laboratory context of discovery) is usually seen as the the explanans for the becoming of an epistemic thing, the explanandum. The ecological approach inverts this direction of explanation, the epistemic vector, in other words, epistemic things are conceived as explanatory factors in the history of research environments, which in this perspective shift from the periphery to the very center of interest (cf. Espahangizi 2010). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 400 Kijan Espahangizi doubt fascinating qualities in their own right (and as such, the raw material of many a fragile scientific anecdote).6 But they are also characteristics that nonetheless have not warranted further historical analysis and explanation so far. The common reference to laboratory glassware on book covers and titles is a mere topos,7 given the double meaning of the term as a popular object of imagination on the one hand, and as the spatial place in its original Aristotelian sense on the other hand.8 So the topos of laboratory glassware could be paraphrased as the idea of an ideal place of the experiment, surgically removed from the actual, complex textures of research environments. But having learned the lesson of the much-evoked material turn in history of science (cf. Pravica 2007), one might indeed suspect that the glass container is not the quasi-immaterial device we imagine it to be. It should rather be materially entangled with experimental research and inseparably embedded into its oikos – which is called laboratory. Thus, shifting our understanding of scientific glassware from topos to oikos, we gain access to the rich history of the formation and the contingent dynamics of these inner material boundaries so constitutive to experimental research. The introduction to a laboratory handbook on microbiology from the early twentieth century illustrates this shift in perspective. The author Ernst Küster writes: Microscopic as well as macroscopic organisms can be taken out of their natural habitats and transferred to artificial environments in order to be studied scientifically. All kinds of microorganisms can be cultivated under laboratory conditions, which are adapted to their natural habitats and which can be varied deliberately according to the ends of research. Therefore, we will start our considerations with water, the precondition of all organic development. . . . At this point we will only mention pure water, which cannot be understood without glass, because glass vessels as indispensible containers for water and aqueous solutions alter the contained liquids constantly by successive dissolution of their proper substance. One should not underestimate these unwanted admixtures. It seems reasonable to underestimate the quantity of the soluble substance yielded by the glass and to overestimate the need of the organisms for minerals. But, in reality the amount of potassium and magnesium originating from the glass is sufficient to feed thousands of generations of cells. (Küster 1907, 6–7) In this quotation, the author obviously contradicts the culturally dominant image of laboratory glassware. He rather understands it as a material, spatial, and causal boundary device, as a micro-oikos for laboratory metabolisms. Consequently, this illustrative 6 Breaking glassware has an established narrative function in scientific self-historization. It is often used to mark crucial moments of chance and fortune in research processes (cf. Espahangizi 2009, 61). 7 A very illustrative example is Rheinberger 1997. Though prominently mentioned in the title, the materiality of the test tube has no relevance for the argument (cf. also the book cover of Schummer et al. 2007). 8 Significantly, Aristotle himself abstracted the physical place, the topos, from the material object vessel (cf. Casey 1996). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 401 paragraph leads us to a historiographical as well as epistemological problem: How was it possible that vitreous material layers came to perform their complex epistemic task (the stable causal containment of spatially enclosed phenomena in laboratory contexts) throughout the changes which the experimental sciences have undergone since the scientific revolution? Revisiting the history of the laboratory sciences from this marginal perspective means deconstructing a firmly established cultural motif, the glassware topos. It also means reconstructing the numerous painstaking efforts in science geared towards demarcating the non-self-evident boundaries of the innermost dwelling of experimental research, the glass house of experiment so to say. In the following, I will focus on the material boundary work that was performed in the second half of the nineteenth century when modern laboratory research emerged. This will be done in order to understand how laboratory glassware turned into a problem for research in the first place and to grasp the ways scientists and other actors, for example in the glass industry, reacted to these situations. To do this, one has to reconstruct the glass theories that were developed in this context, the glass production, testing and standardizing technologies, as well as the entangled substances, practices, institutions and actors (Espahangizi 2010). Glass Culture and Glass Diseases in the Nineteenth Century When we think of glass culture in the nineteenth century, greenhouses, railway stations, and the so-called Crystal Palace in London instantly come to mind: The glass architecture of the World Exhibition in 1851, when the Empire gathered in London, formed part of an emergent glass vision of modernity (cf. Koppelkamm 1988; Armstrong 2008; Schivelbusch 1977). The new giant glass constructions provided a powerful imaginative medium for a whole new cultural outlook. At the same time, however, the glass facades in the real world inexorably suffered from chemical corrosion induced by water and other atmospheric substances (Dumas 1832, 610– 611; Péligot 1862 and 1877, 54; Benrath 1875). Decades before the urban historian Lewis Mumford came to lament the actual opacity of modern glass architecture due to air pollution, the image of crystal clear translucent glass transcending materiality was already being contradicted by dull, “blind,” and “sweating” surfaces in the real world (Mumford [1938] 1998, 207–208). This tension between lofty glass imaginations and the annoyingly profane material reality seems to be a characteristic inherent to the glass boom that took off in mid-nineteenth-century Europe, in the field of construction and architecture as well as in the household. Drinking glasses, bottles, vases and bowls, too, would rapidly lose their brilliance due to chemical reactions with their immediate environment, such as the surrounding atmosphere or the substances they contained (Dumas 1832, 610–611). These glass diseases as they were called later by the art historian G. E. Pazaurek (Pazaurek 1903), got worse with bulk production of glassware: Industrialization increased the output, but lowered the quality of the at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 402 Kijan Espahangizi material compared to traditional glass making at first (Foerster 1911, 135). But the need to improve glass quality, not only in the case of construction glass but also for example for wine bottles,9 heavily stimulated the interest of the new so-called technical glass chemistry in the material. Already in the 1830s, the theoretical and methodological progress of chemistry had made it possible to analyze the substance of different glass products quantitatively, for example with the use of hydrofluoric acid (cf. Rowney 1845; Warington 1845; Vogel and Reischauer 1859). The French chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas for instance, who is famous for his handbook on applied chemistry, had begun to study numerous commercial glass products that were on the market. By this means, he tried to derive the general glass formula, the so-called composition générale (Dumas 1830, 144). There was no coherent glass theory and not even a general consensus over the question whether glass should be understood as a pure chemical compound or a mixture of substances and compounds. But the observable corrosion of ordinary glassware and glass surfaces in general turned out to be a promising starting point for the inquiry into the very nature of this fascinating, but according to Dumas scientifically rather neglected material.10 Between the 1830s and 1850s, the new technical glass chemistry was not specifically concerned about laboratory glassware. Brilliance and crystalline transparency were essential properties for the performance of nonscientific glassware, but only secondary to experimental practice. Also, slight corrosion of laboratory glassware and material depositions on their surfaces, an everyday phenomenon for chemists, did not necessarily affect their scientific usability. Until the mid-nineteenth century experimentalists tended to overlook the chemical agency of their glassware, the same way we are used to ignoring the continuous chemical reactions between drinking water and the glass vessels in everyday life today. These physico-chemical micro-processes simply did not affect research: There were neither epistemically relevant effects and consequences tied to them, nor were there any instruments, measuring or observing procedures to exactly quantify and objectify the interactions between glassware and the substances they contained. To put it in other words: There was no epistemic awareness for these kinds of phenomena. However, this indifference of experimental research towards the chemistry of glass surfaces was questioned only when a revolution in experimental research occurred with the establishment of precision measurement around the mid- nineteenth century. 9 The French Societé d’encouragement pour l’industrie nationale for example offered a prize for chemists for the improvement of wine bottles in 1830. See the bulletin of the society on Dec 29, 1830. Cf. also the glass bottle studies of Robert Warington who worked as a chemist in the Truman Breweries in the 1830s and the Society for Apothecaries (Warington 1845). 10 For views on glass theory at that time, see Dumas 1832, 579; and also Faraday 1830, 30. For a historical account of the development of glass theories, see Ganzenmüller 1938; Beretta 2009 and 2011. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 403 The emergence of a whole new world of experimental research in the nineteenth and early twentieth century has been studied thoroughly by historians of science in the last decades. There has been a focus on the consolidation of new scientific values like exactness and objectivity, on issues of standardization, error analysis, and instrumentation, the development of new institutional forms in research and higher education, and the coming into being of new kinds of scientific objects in the expanding and diversifying landscape of modern experimental cultures.11 While drawing on all of these aspects and dimensions, ecological approaches to the history of this “laboratory revolution” try to understand the emergence of new specialized environments of laboratory research (Dierig 2006, 26). Various studies have shown that in order to provide the stability needed for research, this nascent modern oikos of experimental inquiry into nature to some extent had to be encapsulated from the immediate socio- cultural (often urban) environment (cf. Hoffmann and Schickore 2001; Hoffmann 2001; Schmidgen 2004). Its outer as well as inner boundaries had to be defined. The “well-tempered environment” of laboratory buildings – to use a term coined by the architectural critic Reyner Banham – which were supposed to buffer external acoustic, atmospheric, hygienic, physico-chemical or socio-technical, disturbances, had to be designed carefully. The outcome of this process was a multiply nested research environment – similar to a Russian doll – that reached from the outer shell of the building, the intermediary strata of administration and teaching to the innermost “extreme milieus” of the laboratory buildings, in which research was actually done (Latour 1992, 299; Felsch 2005, 30–32). In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, even within the sanctuaries of experimental research, we witness further stratification and a rigid redefinition of spatio-functional boundaries: Experimental glass containers, in which the objects of research were enclosed and studied, turned from a handcrafted technical object into an epistemically relevant and technologically controlled boundary, forming the envelope of the material nucleus of experimentation. This technological reconfiguration commenced in the 1850s when scientists First discovered that contrary to their traditional expectations, laboratory glassware was all but chemically neutral. Setting the Scene: Individual Glass Errors in the Laboratory There had been doubts about the chemical neutrality of laboratory glassware and its possible effects on experiments already in the eighteenth century in the context of a debate on the possible transmutation of water into earth (Eller 1746; Pott 1756; Marggraf 1756; Lavoisier 1770) and in the context of the discovery of the element fluor (Espahangizi and Orland 2014b, 11–13). But it took until the advent of precision 11 A few influential works in the field of historical laboratory studies: Wise 1995; Rheinberger 1997; Pickering 1995; Daston 2000, Daston and Galison 2007; Cahan 1985; Meine 2000; Kohler 2002. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 404 Kijan Espahangizi measurement and exact experimentation in the nineteenth century, when the chemical interaction of experimental glassware with the contained substances ceased to be a marginal curiosity to experimental practice and natural philosophy. Instead, this interaction turned into a dynamic and integral factor in emerging laboratory research environments. The first note on glass-induced measurement errors was published in 1853 in a short appendix to the third edition of the famous textbook Quantitative Chemical Analysis edited by the German chemist Carl Remigius Fresenius. Fresenius was working at Justus von Liebig’s internationally renowned laboratory in the city of Giessen, when he noticed irregularities while weighing residues in watch-glasses. He concluded: “A lot of strange phenomena that disturb chemical analysis are due to the contamination of the evaporated substance by the material of the vessel, gross errors often originate from this source. Because of its importance, I have made further investigations on this subject” (Fresenius 1853, 76; cf. also the appendix “Analytische Belege”). Fresenius’ textbook was a huge success, it was circulated widely and with it, the first notes on measuring errors caused by glassware (Poth 2006). The second, maybe even more important reference to this issue was made by the Belgian chemist Jean Stas a couple of years later. In the late 1840s Stas’ teacher, the already mentioned Jean-Baptiste Dumas, had called for a thorough reevaluation of the atomic weights measured in the early nineteenth century. The exact quantification of atomic weights was supposed to provide a solid fundament to future chemistry. Jean Stas adopted his teacher’s scrutiny. No measuring error, as minimal as it was, could eventually be tolerated (cf. Schickore 2005). All marginal conditions of experimental settings and measurements had to be controlled accurately, even supposedly unsuspicious glassware. In the introduction to his influential paper on atomic weights published in 1860, Stas stated: “Indeed, I have been observing that the weight of tubes, retorts or flasks made of glass . . . changes significantly. Be it because of the heat, the attack of chemical substances, which we assumed not to have any influence on glass” (Stas 1860, 220). With these remarks, and through a second more comprehensive paper in 1865, Jean Stas drew the attention of the scientific community to the chemical agency of experimental glassware (Stas 1865; Braun 1868). Shortly after, Robert W. Bunsen, professor at the University of Heidelberg, a shooting star of chemistry at that time and Stas’ friend, initiated the first systematical study on the chemical agency of experimental glassware.12 The aim of this work, executed by his assistant Adolph Emmerling, was to elicit possible regularities in the chemical interaction between the experimental container and the contained substances of interest and to derive precautionary measures in order to minimize glass errors in laboratory practice (Emmerling 1869). But beyond such limited practical rules for everyday laboratory life, like boiling the glassware beforehand, using 12 Bunsen wrote an impressive letter of recommendation for Stas who needed financial support from the Belgian government. Cf. “Lettre à Stas pour le Ministre Rogier. Heidelberg, 23 Septembre 1860” in the Archives of the University of Bruxelles (manuscript no. 004P/18/034). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 405 smaller amounts of experimental substances, preferring already used glassware, etc., a more sustainable solution was needed. Jean Stas, who was acquainted with technical glass chemistry due to his teacher Dumas, had come to the following conclusion: In order to re-stabilize the vitreous boundaries of experimental settings, new, specifically modified and adapted glasses had to be designed. That is, new glass types had to be invented. Half-heartedly supported by the Belgian state, Stas commenced to work on a new glass formula. In order to translate his theoretical paper work and laboratory experience on a possibly ideal glass composition into a workable recipe for glass making, he had to collaborate with a glass manufacturer near Brussels (Stas 1865, 217–218). In 1868, he was finally able to present the results of this early cooperation between glass science and the manufacture of glassware in William Crookes’ Chemical News (Stas 1868, 1). Jean Stas glasswork indicated the guidelines that the technology of scientific glassware would have to follow in the next decades. The glass composition had to be adapted to the exigencies of precision measurement. However, Stas’ project stayed in fact singular and isolated. No doubt, Stas had generated a glass suitable for his own work and more than that his scrutiny concerning the glass error was praised by his colleagues to be an ideal role model for the ethics of exact research and scientific preciseness (Braun 1868, 160, 165). But as an individual experimentalist working in his home laboratory, he had no ambition, no support, and even less infrastructural means to improve the general quality of experimental glassware. In order to understand the limitation of Stas’ efforts to deal with the glassware issue, one has to bear in mind that at the time there was no single laboratory glass on the market, but rather a wide and unclear variety of regional glass products with varying, traditionally secret recipes and therefore mostly unknown chemical compositions. Moreover, there were very different expectations with regard to the uses of glass containers in experimentation: In some contexts, glasses had to be more resistant to acids, in others more resistant to alkaline attacks or to water- induced corrosion, etc. (cf. Newton 1985). So on the one hand, there was functional heterogeneity of glass containers. But on the other hand, a certain standardization of the physico-chemical properties of scientific glass containers was essential to guarantee the general comparability of experimental outcome. In order to realize such an extensive project, the reconfiguration of the spatio-functional boundaries marked by laboratory glassware, actors and institutions from different fields, such as science, technology, industry, and politics had to come together. Existent glassware had to be analyzed, glass research had to be coordinated, uses and exigencies of glassware had to be identified, new glass batches had to be developed, standardization procedures and criteria of glass quality had to be determined, and finally, these glasses had to be distributed and brought to modern laboratories. In sum, the efforts of an individual like Jean Stas were heroic but rather insufficient. A large-scale adjustment of scientific glassware would depend on a whole techno-scientific infrastructure (cf. Edwards 2003, 188–189). In the following subchapter, I will sketch the emergence of this infrastructure in the second half of the nineteenth century. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 406 Kijan Espahangizi Preparing the Ground: The Emergence of Technical Glass Chemistry The first successful steps towards a collectively organized improvement of glassware were initiated by the industry, more precisely the Prussian Society for the Advancement of Industry, which had prominent members like Werner von Siemens and Hermann Helmholtz. In 1850, this influential interest group promoted the development of industrially applicable technical procedures to test and predict the “weathering” tendency of glass surfaces by offering various prizes “in the most widespread newspapers in Berlin.”13 As mentioned earlier, at that time the glass industry was taking off and material quality became an issue in the industrial production of glass products. In spite of the substantial advancements technical chemistry had made since the pioneering work of Jean-Baptiste Dumas, it took until the early 1860s when Rudolf Weber, a technical chemist from Berlin, was finally awarded the silver medal for his contribution to the glass-testing contest of the Prussian Society. Weber’s testing procedure encompassed the following steps: First, the glass specimen had to be cleaned thoroughly with alcohol and then put beneath a bell jar filled with vapors of strong nitric acid for 24 hours. In a next step, the glass specimen had to be taken out of the bell jar for another 24 hours so that the condensed acid would evaporate from its surface – the less steamy the glass, the better the quality (Weber 1864). Weber’s test was quite impractical, but due to the lack of alternatives it came into use within the glass industry in the 1890s. From a scientific viewpoint however, it was deeply unsatisfactory: It depended on a rather subjective assessment of glass quality without quantification and it did not provide any theoretical explanation of the chemical phenomena involved. Having become the Society’s glass expert, Weber, too, aimed at more than only providing a quick industrial test for glass surfaces. Like Jean-Baptiste Dumas before, technical glass chemists at that time searched for the formula of a true universal glass (Stein 1862, 25), the Normalglas, as the young glass chemist Herman Benrath at Baltic Dorpat University named it (Benrath 1868). With statistical methods generally advancing at this time, Benrath analyzed and compared dozens of glass products on the market, applying Weber’s nitric acid test among others, in order to determine the mean value of the chemical composition of all “good glasses” (Benrath 1875, 25–27). But what was a good glass? What is the meaning of good in this context? For Benrath, this attribute referred to the combined assessment on a set of different attributes: fusibility, processability, hardness, brilliancy, and resistance to chemicals. His Normalglas- formula, which was supported by Rudolf Weber’s results, should provide glassware suitable for every purpose (ibid., 34; and Weber 1879, 450). In contrast to the functional specificity of Jean Stas’ glassware, Benrath’s and Weber’s standard glass formula had been derived from statistical “field work” and the formula had to be an ideal all-in-one device, be it for scientific or non-scientific purposes. 13 Cf. the proceedings of the society in April 1850, vol. 28, p. 60. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 407 But at the same time, the use of glassware in laboratories had diversified and intensified since the mid-nineteenth century.14 Therewith, the problem of glass attack turned out to be more complex so that neither the idea of a mean value Normalglas, nor the individual enterprise of a solitary experimentalist like Jean Stas could eventually solve it. Both approaches, i.e. material standardization based on collective efforts as well as functional specificity, converged when around 1880, the needs of scientific research took the lead as the driving force in the quest for better glass containers. The techniques and criteria of laboratory measurement had changed dramatically since the early nineteenth century and so did the exigencies towards the boundaries of experimental settings. The “best” glassware was no longer needed in construction or in households, but in the laboratory. The field in which technical glass chemistry and the needs of modern laboratory research came together was, somewhat unexpectedly, scientific thermometry and not chemical glassware. Working Together: A Standard Glass for Thermometry By the 1870s thermometry, more precisely mercury-in-glass thermometry, had become an all-important research technology. Nonetheless, its precision suffered from a severe technological flaw. The zero point of the thermometric scale shifted with every use (Pernet 1875, 266). In 1874, the astronomer Wilhelm Foerster, one of the most prominent actors in the field of international metrology, a member of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures and head of the Imperial Standards Commission since the founding of the German Reich, put his assistant Leopold Loewenherz in charge of investigating this phenomenon to find a solution (Loewenherz 1877; Foerster 1911). Loewenherz, who would later become one of the founders of the influential German Journal for the Study of Scientific Instruments, joined the Prussian Society for the Advancement of Industry, which pushed the solution of this problem by offering yet another 1500 silver coins.15 In the next two years, Foerster’s assistants found out that the chaotic shifts of the thermometric scale were due to the complex thermal behavior of the glassware, which expanded and contracted in a non-linear way with every heating episode (Thiesen 1881). This is not the place to go into details of the history of thermometry, the important point would rather be that in the course of these collective efforts to stabilize mercury-in-glass-thermometry, the field of scientific metrology came into contact with the technology of glass chemistry. As a result, a nucleus of cooperation took shape that would be decisive for the improvement of scientific glass containers in the following years. In 1880, Hermann Wiebe, another assistant of Wilhelm Foerster at the German Standards Commission, contacted his 14 Catherine M. Jackson has coined the term “glassware revolution” for the history of chemistry (cf. Jackson 2008, 162). 15 Cf. proceedings of the Prussian Society for the Advancement of Industry, 1874, 53:21. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 408 Kijan Espahangizi former colleague from university, the young technical glass chemist and entrepreneur Otto Schott, who had earned his PhD in 1875 with a thesis on the Theory and Practice of Glass-Making at the University of Jena, and asked him for help. There is no need to emphasize the great importance of Otto Schott for the history of scientific glassware. Together with his associate, the German physicist Ernst Abbe who had been an assistant to Carl Zeiss, he founded the renowned glassworks in the city of Jena and revolutionized glass technology. But whenever the name Schott is mentioned, historians (of science) usually think of his contribution to the improvement of optical glasses (cf. Jackson 2000). Indeed, at first sight, scientific glassware seems to be a mere by-product of the success of Schott’s optical glasses. But in fact, it played an important role in the consolidation of Schott and Abbe’s fragile business start-up in the early 1880s (cf. Zschimmer 1909; Kühnert 1946; Kühnert 1949; Kühnert 1953; Kühnert 1957; Bayer et al. 2003). When Wiebe asked him for help, Schott was at first reluctant to being distracted from his work on optical glasses.16 But realizing it would make a good case for governmental aid, he finally agreed on cooperating with the Imperial Standards Commission on thermometric glass in 1882.17 Not surprisingly, the Prussian state granted the bitterly needed financial support shortly after. In Schott’s laboratory, state-of-the-art glass research and glass making came together in a new way. They did R&D avant la lettre, based on experimental glass melting, systematic variation of batch ingredients, and introduction of chemical elements guided by theoretical knowledge and minutely journalized results. Indeed, between April 1883 and November 1884, Schott was able to develop a glass batch – melt number 16III – which eliminated the zero-point problem by optimizing the ratio of sodium and potassium in glass composition. Schott alone however, like Jean Stas before him, could not have accomplished the necessary distribution of this new glass. His young company would have to compete with the established glassware manufacturers in the forest of Thuringia who were in fact still helping Schott. Schott depended on temporarily hiring skilled workers of the region in order to draw the necessary fine glass tubes (Kobe 2008, 42). Schott did not yet possess the experience, the resources, the necessary commercial network, or a base of customers. Against all odds, his sales were pushed by a governmental decree issued in 1885: Mercury-in-glass-thermometers had to be certified by testing houses led by the Standards Commission, with Schott’s new glass as the benchmark.18 It was to a great part the authority of the state, combined with entrepreneurial ability, which ensured and enforced the diffusion of the first specific standard glass, the so-called Jenaer Normalthermometerglas in the scientific world. 16 Letter from Otto Schott to Hermann Wiebe (October 7, 1880) (see in Kühnert 1953, 50). 17 Letter from Otto Schott to Hermann Wiebe (October 7, 1880) (see in ibid. 5). 18 Cf. the circular of the Imperial Standards Commission (September 27, 1885) (see in Kühnert 1957, 172-174; Wiebe 1886a, 22-25; and Wiebe 1886b, 167-171). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 409 Getting Serious: New Glasses for New Laboratories While Schott’s sales were increasing rapidly, quintupling from 1885 to 1890, glass- induced measurement errors of all kinds, not only in thermometry, had become ubiquitous in modern laboratory research. In the mid-1880s, glass errors were noted in different branches of analytical chemistry, in gasometry, physics, cathode ray physics, hygienology, and in physical chemistry (Fresenius 1883; Bohlig 1884; Warburg 1884; Warburg and Ihmori 1886; Egger 1884; Bottomley 1885; Wartha 1885; Lunge 1885; Kohlrausch 1885; Bunsen 1883; Bunsen 1885). Experimentalists had come to the conclusion that “facing the facts ... one cannot ignore anymore that the material our indispensible chemical instruments are made of does not fulfill the requirements, and that producing a remedy is highly desirable” (Kreusler and Henzold 1884, 40). The German Standard Commission, too, realized that glass errors were far more common than initially thought. Even the use of bubble levels (small glass vessels filled with ether and air that indicate whether a surface is horizontal or not) in astronomy, geodesy, and artillery was affected by the chemical agency of glassware.19 Material deposits on their inner surfaces impeded the free movement of the enclosed bubble and made precise surveying extremely difficult. Because of the experiences with mercury thermometers, the culprit for this phenomenon was easily identified: the substance of glassware. But Otto Schott was still working on the thermometric glass and he had no increased affection to deal with these new glassware “calamaties.”20 It took until the foundation of the Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt in Berlin, with its own laboratories, for the problem to be studied systematically. This state- funded institute for metrological research, which took up its work in 1887, was closely tied to the Imperial Standard Commission.21 Leopold Loewenherz for example, became the director of the technical division of the Reichsanstalt; and Hermann Wiebe, who had initiated the collaboration with Otto Schott, would head the heat and pressure laboratory. Franz Mylius, director of the new chemical laboratory of the Reichsanstalt in Berlin-Charlottenburg, continued the glass cooperation with Schott in place of Wiebe (Engel 2001; Foerster 1931). In the winter of 1887, Mylius visited the glassworks at Jena for the first time.22 Being in correspondence with Schott, Mylius quickly ascertained the reason for the problems with bubble levels. The deposits on the inner surfaces of their small glass chambers were caused by chemical attack not by the ether itself but by the small amount of water dissolved in the ether (Mylius 1888). This finding also matched perfectly with the experience of experimentalists in the 1880s. Much to their surprise, it was the precarious relationship between two supposedly pure and neutral 19 Wilhelm Foerster complained about this issue in the Vierteljahresschrift der Astronomischen Gesellschaft (1883, 18:243). 20 Letter from Otto Schott to Wilhelm Foerster (April 10, 1884) (see in Kühnert 1957, 250). 21 The two institutions merged in 1922. For the history of the Reichsanstalt, see Cahan 1989. 22 Letter from Franz Mylius to Otto Schott (December 19, 1887) in the Schott Archive (2/8). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 410 Kijan Espahangizi substances, such as glass and water, which turned out to be the most relevant source of measurement errors caused by experimental glassware. Franz Mylius was well aware of this general situation when he and his assistant Fritz Foerster started to focus their research on the interplay of glass and water. More than that, the interaction between these two substances turned out to be the leitmotif, or rather Ariadne’s thread, in the quest for standardized glass tests and new glassware. The Leitmotif of Glass Reform: Hygroscopicity Understanding the interaction of glass and water was a complex task: When Mylius and Foerster started their investigation they did not possess a theoretical model (of what happened when glass surfaces came in contact with water) nor a reliable testing procedure to measure the effects. However, since the early nineteenth century, chemists knew that watery solutions contained in glassware turned basic (cf. for example, Faraday 1830, 47–48). Mylius’ experiences with bubble levels on the one hand and with organic chemistry on the other hand led him to develop a colorimetric testing procedure based on a dye synthesized in the 1870s: iodeosin. When dissolved in an aqueous ether solution, the iodeosin and the alkali would form a red-colored salt that would then precipitate on the attacked glass surfaces. Therefore, color intensity could be taken as a measure of the chemical quality of the glassware. For the first time, the glass testing procedure was expressed in a chemical formula (Mylius 1889, 52). Nonetheless, Otto Schott did not hesitate to utter his critique. Mylius’ test was still purely qualitative, like Rudolf Weber’s acid nitric method at use in the glass industry. It literally stuck to the surface without getting to the core of the glass substance.23 Challenged by these valid objections, Mylius and Foerster refined their method in the following months and presented a modified quantitative, titrimetric procedure in 1891 (Mylius and Foerster 1891). With growing concerns about the neutrality of laboratory glassware and its functioning as an experimental boundary, this turned out to be just in time. Experimentalists were already demanding “not only to differentiate between suitable and non-suitable glasses, but to quantify their solubility in water by exact measuring methods in order to assess their performance ... numerically” (Pfeiffer 1891, 264). It was the duty of the Reichsanstalt, directed by Hermann Helmholtz, to take these demands seriously (Helmholtz and Loewenhertz 1891). Thus, from the early 1890s, Mylius and his team started to provide a public service for testing scientific glassware that was sent in, based on their iodeosin method, while extending their glass research. Mylius and Foerster were now able to model the interaction of water and glass as a two-stage process (Foerster 1893): In a first step, water soaked the glass surface dissolving the alkali parts of the glass substance, which was now understood as a mixture 23 Letter from Otto Schott to Franz Mylius (January 12, 1889). See in the Schott Archive (file 2/8). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 411 Fig. 2. Glass Testing with Iodine-Eosin. Source: Mylius 1889, 52. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 412 Kijan Espahangizi of compounds as well as a frozen solution. The dissolved alkali would in a second step leach the remaining glass substance and decompose the silicates. In other words, alkaline attack on glass could be subsumed under this model. The same applied for acid attack, which was actually caused by the aqueous solution, not the acid itself (except for fluoric acid). Backed by this theoretical model, this so-called glass hygroscopicity turned out to be a valid benchmark for assessing the general chemical durability of glasses. Mylius and Foerster could therefore use their iodeosin test in order to assess and compare the general quality of all laboratory glasses sent to the Reichsanstalt. Improving Glass Quality in Berlin and Jena Otto Schott was a glass technologist and entrepreneur and he had different objectives from the Reichsanstalt. His plan was not to provide a liable glass test but to design and sell new glassware adapted to the needs of laboratory research. This time however, he had no official order or mandate as in 1882. Nonetheless, his contact with Mylius and the Reichsanstalt encouraged him to carry out this work. Since 1885 Schott had also successfully expanded his network within the German scientific community. So, he was now able to “hear” the demands of the experimentalists without any mediation from the Reichsanstalt. Some scientists even started to consult the “glass doctor” (Kühnert 1949, 17) on glass issues. Among them were renowned scientists like Friedrich Kohlrausch, author of the famous Guidelines to Practical Physics and second president of the Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt. In 1889, Kohlrausch had noticed that the dissolution of glass introduced a significant error into the measurement of the electrical conductivity of pure water, a fundamental parameter for the nascent discipline of physical chemistry (Kohlrausch 1891). He realized that it made no sense trying to determine the electrical properties of laboratory water without taking into account its interaction with the glass container. During this research on the hygroscopicity and solubility of glass, he repeatedly contacted Schott, asking him for advice and for glass specimens.24 To sum up, in the aftermath of his successful collaboration with the Standards Commission on thermometric glassware, Schott had positioned himself strategically in the landscape of scientific research and official metrology.25 He knew of the needs and exigencies of laboratory research at first hand and this insider expertise went directly 24 There are seven letters between 1891 and 1893 documented in the Schott Archive (2/8). Kohlrausch’s glass studies between 1890 and 1893 are well documented in his laboratory journals nos. 41, 42, 45, 49, in the Archive of the Deutsche Museum in Munich. 25 Schott had also started to collaborate with local physicists. Together with Adolph Winkelmann, physicist at the University of Jena, he succeeded in setting up an equation, which related the composition of a given glass to some of its physical properties, like thermal expansion, specific heat, elasticity, etc. (cf. Winkelmann and Schott 1894). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 413 into his efforts to design new adequate glasses for experimentation and precision measurement. Moreover, it also led to his glass research. Schott too, had started to study the hygroscopicity of glass surfaces as early as 1889, finding out that glasses based on the melting agent sodium had a lower hygroscopicity than potassium (or mixed) glasses (Schott 1889). He also knew that the admixture of glass-forming borosilicates optimized the thermal durability of glassware (Schott 1891). Last but not least, analyzing the famous but “unscientific” glasses of his Thuringian neighbors, Schott discovered that their excellent processability was due to a certain amount of aluminum oxide (Schott 1887). By optimizing all of these parameters and generally benefitting from his intuition and experience in glass melting, Schott finally succeeded in spring 1892. Glass melt number 202III was the first promising candidate for a new laboratory glass. In his melting journal, we find the following side note: “resistance to chemical attack and abrupt change of temperature.”26 When Jean Stas had developed the first modern laboratory glass in the late 1860s, he published its composition in a chemistry journal. Some twenty-five years later the situation had changed completely. A complex infrastructure had come into being which involved various scientific, technical, political, and industrial actors and institutions, which was based on the strong Berlin-Jena axis. Schott’s efforts to design new laboratory glasses were embedded in this partly formal, partly informal techno- scientific infrastructure, which carried out the general reform of glassware used in all kinds of laboratories in Germany. The new apparatus glass could now be sent to the Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt in order to be tested, certified and, in a way, promoted. Before Mylius and Foerster would publish the results of their extensive testing of German glassware in 1894, Otto Schott did not miss the opportunity to write his colleagues in Berlin a letter praising the extraordinary quality of his new glass and to ask for its adequate “appreciation” by the Reichsanstalt.27 Schott & Company, who had already implemented new Siemens furnaces in order to start bulk production, expected this test to boost their sales – and Schott would not be disappointed. Foerster confirmed in public: Glasses from Jena had reached “the limits of what is technically possible” (Foerster 1894, 396). Schott’s glass products outmatched other glasses, but they did so only in general performance. Other glasses turned out to be more adequate to specific uses. The conclusion that Mylius and Foerster drew from their results was far-reaching: Even with the ongoing improvement of general glass quality, there was in principle no ideal universal glass that could possibly supersede all other glasses. In a speech at the fifth International Conference on Applied Chemistry in Berlin, Mylius ultimately buried the hopes of Benrath, Weber, and other technical glass chemists to find a Normalglas: 26 The melting journals can be found in the Schott archive (Steiner 1993). 27 Letter of Otto Schott to Fritz Foerster (December 30, 1893) (see in the Schott archive, file 2/8). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 414 Kijan Espahangizi Fig. 3. Otto Schott, Glass Melt 202III (1892). Source: Schott Archive, Jena. Sirs! We once imagined a universal glass to be possible, suitable for every purpose. We now know, that there is no such a glass. Quite the contrary, we know that each specific use of glassware has its own ideal standard. We are now witnessing that with every year the specialization of glasses advances ... . In fact, there is no glass, which resists equally to all kinds of chemicals, and there is no hope to ever find one. (Mylius 1903, 884) Mylius realized that the wish to homogenize the glass material itself contradicted the ongoing functional differentiation and multiplication of glass types. But what was the alternative? How could glass quality be generally improved and harmonized in order to guarantee the comparability of experiments and measurements in different laboratory settings? Mylius’ answer to that question was: standardizing the glass tests rather than the glass substance. In the course of his ongoing iodeosin tests in the 1890s, he had at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 415 Fig. 4. Mylius’ Hydrolytic Classification of Glass Quality. Source: Mylius 1913, 5. distilled the first classification system of glass quality, the so-called hydrolytic classes. Not surprisingly though, it was scaled in regard to the properties of Schott’s apparatus glass, the so-called Jenaer Geräteglas. Mylius and his team continued to work on this classification system and improve it step by step in first decade of the twentieth century (Mylius 1907, 1910). We propose a division in five hydrolytic classes of chemical durability for all types of technical silicate-glasses (independent from their percentile composition). ... the terms water-resistant and resistant glass are already in use for the first and the second class; . . . as well as poor glass for the fifth class. Glass substances belonging to the third and fourth class, which are not apparatus glass, are sufficiently characterized by the numbers. (Mylius 1913, 5) Mylius’ hydrolytic classification system was the scientific basis and the starting point of the development of specialized industrial norms (Din Denog) on glass quality that started after World War I in Germany in close cooperation with the Reichsanstalt, the German Association for Chemical Apparatus (Dechema), the special glass industry, industrial consumers of chemical glassware and other interest groups. A whole “cosmos of norms” (Vec 2006) dealing with scientific, industrial and commercial glass emerged at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 416 Kijan Espahangizi in the 1920s (in Germany) and 1930s (internationally),28 and these norms based on glass hygroscopicity continue to be the general reference of glass quality until today. Implementing New Glass Boundaries in Laboratory Research In spite of the substantial advances in standardized glass testing and glass development, the glassware reform had by no means come to an end in mid-1890s. It still had to reach the laboratories. In the case of thermometric glassware, governmental authority had pushed the diffusion of Schott glass in the scientific world. This time there was no decree, no mandatory testing or certifying of experimental glassware. However, the general awareness for the physico-chemical properties and unwanted effects of glassware had increased fundamentally since the 1880s. There was even a certain self-enforcing dynamic, as the ongoing debates on glassware drew the attention of even more disciplines and individual experimentalists. In the course of the collaboration between the German Standards Commission, the Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt and Schott’s glassworks, an informal infrastructure arose which had the epistemic, technical and normative authority and reputation to satisfy this demand and to initiate the necessary reform of laboratory glassware. The widespread diffusion of Jenaer Geräteglas into the laboratories is reflected in the sales figures (national and international) in the company’s archives (Steiner and Hoff 1995). We can follow the path of the new glasses into the inner core of experimental research also by looking at the scientific output. From the mid-1890s, Schott glasses were mentioned more and more frequently in experimental reports, papers, and textbooks. In 1900, Schott’s success as a global player and world market leader on technical glasses culminated in the World exhibition at Paris (Müller 1900).29 Nonetheless, the work on the physico-chemical boundaries in the laboratory was by no means limited to a replacement of old glassware by Schott glasses. In spite of their general quality, Schott glasses were neither ideal nor universally suitable for all uses. Hence, other manufacturers of scientific glassware started to revise their glass batches trying to match the new criteria established by the Reichsanstalt in order to satisfy the specific demands of their customers and compete with Schott. From the late 1880s, certified chemical and thermal durability of glassware was a sales pitch. It was the complex interplay of market dynamics, state intervention, and techno-scientific demands that broadly raised the general level of glass quality and the new awareness for glass quality in modern laboratories, spreading from analytical chemistry, to gasometry, physical chemistry cathode ray and X-ray physics, medicine, and – as shown in the quoted handbook at the beginning – into microbiological disciplines like bacteriology 28 The development of those industrial norms has a rich history of its own that will be the object of a forthcoming paper. For more details see also Espahangizi 2010. 29 In the same year the first comprehensive book on Schott glass was published (Hovestadt, 1900). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 417 and cell physiology (cf. Benecke 1896; Hesse 1904; Campbell-Swinton 1907; Sternberg 1914). This new glass consciousness even influenced commercial packing technology for food, beverage, and pharmaceutical products (Ford 1930). Inside the laboratory, the chemical agency of glassware had produced measurement errors. Outside the laboratory, i.e. in the sphere of industrial production and circulation of goods, it turned out to have unhealthy, painful, sometimes even lethal consequences. Glass-packed, water- based pharmaceutical substances like cocaine, strychnine, morphine, etc. for example were heavily altered by glass hygroscopicity (Grübler 1907; Stich and Wulff 1918). Again, it was the technoscientific reconfiguration of the glass boundaries, i.e. their packing material, which made these substances immutable and therefore mobile. Due to these chemically more inert glass envelopes the enclosed substances could be stored or transported for a longer time without any notable alteration.30 The standardization of the container material glass based on hygrospicity connected the fields of scientific research, technological application and industrial production in a productive way. One striking example for this would be Fritz Haber’s work on the so-called glass cell: In 1905 Fritz Haber, famous for his method of ammonia synthesis and less known for his glass studies, had been requested to develop an easy glass- testing method for the bottle industry. Scanning the vast literature on glass-testing since the 1860s, he eventually decided to repurpose the above mentioned findings of Friedrich Kohlrausch: If the dissolution of glass in water increased its electrical conductivity, this effect could be used the other way round as a testing method for glass quality (Haber und Schwenke 1904). This finding was his starting point. Being a scientist at heart his aim, however, was not only to measure the effects, but also to understand the processes going on at the phase boundary between glass and water (ibid., appendix). Around 1907 Fritz Haber, who was familiar with the earlier debates on the electrochemistry of cells (cf. Grote 2010), realized that the hygroscopicity of glass, as first theorized by Mylius and Foerster, could also serve as a model for the so-called “phase boundary force” (i.e. an electromotive force at the boundary of two electrolytic phases) at semipermeable cell membranes (Haber and Klemensiewicz 1909).31 The experiment that Haber designed in order to study his cell model was based on two nested laboratory glass vessels: The outer beaker was made of – significantly – Jenaer Geräteglas whereas the inner spheric vessel had to be made of the chemically less resistant old type of Thuringian glass. Here, water-induced corrosion was of course a desired effect. In a sense, a twofold history of glassware as a material boundary of experiment and as a medium of exploring boundaries converges in this experimental design (cf. Espahangizi 2011b): On one hand, Haber’s glass cell incorporated the traditional as well as the new, modified laboratory glass types, and on the other hand, the whole setting 30 For my generalization of Bruno Latour’s concept of immutable mobiles from inscriptions also to non-inscripted material objects, see Espahangizi 2011a. 31 As there was no single coherent membrane theory at that time, the glass membrane model was added to the conceptual mosaic (cf. Michaelis 1926). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 418 Kijan Espahangizi Fig. 5. Haber’s Glass Cell. Source: Haber and Klemensiewicz 1909, 411. was meant to be an experimental model for electrochemical processes at semipermeable cellular membranes. But the importance of the glass cell went far beyond modeling bioelectric potentials. The knowledge of glass hygroscopicity also inspired the design of a measuring instrument that is still in wide use today: the glass electrode. In his experiments, Haber had noted that the “phase boundary force” between the glass and the water increased with the logarithm of the acidity and alkalinity, respectively. In other words, Haber’s glass cell was potentially some kind of chemical yardstick for those parameters. In the same year Haber published his results, in 1909, and Søren Sørensen proposed the use of an index that today is known to indicate acidity/alkalinity – not only in research but also in everyday life – as the pH-value (Sørensen 1909). The glass electrode and its widespread use can be taken as one very illustrative example of a well-known phenomenon in the history of science, that is, the unintended epistemic productivity and unanticipated consequences of certain findings and technical development, in this case of the glassware reform in the modern laboratory. Indeed, the glass electrode turned out to be a valid measuring device for a fundamental quantitative index of at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 419 (bio-)chemical milieus (Kratz 1950). Moreover, being an all-important device today for pH-measurements in ecology (within the laboratory, as well as in the field), the glass electrode whose history begins with a glass-testing procedure for the bottle industry based on hygroscopicity turns out to be a meaningful emblem for the conceptual shift in the history of scientific glass containers that guides my paper: from topos to oikos. Outlook: From Topos to Oikos As mentioned in the opening paragraph, the culturally established image of scientific glassware can be understood as a topos in both of its meanings: It symbolically outlines the ideal place of experiment in (imaginative) vacuo, i.e. a place that is not embodied and embedded in the material conditionalities of real laboratory environments and their historical trajectories. This image obstructs the view of the material historicity of scientific glassware. No one doubts that there has been historical progress in glass making techniques, but what does this tell us about the changing nature of the material itself? A more or less defined set of properties seems to constitute and define this substance, first and foremost translucency. Chemical neutrality, too, is commonly ascribed to the nature of glass, although in a more implicit way. Without doubt, the extraordinary qualities of glass are reasons for the rich cultural history of the substance. But the underlying image of glassware neutrality rendered the actual materiality of this material as something invisible for scientists until the nineteenth century as well as for historians of science today. In my paper I have dealt with the reconfiguration of glass boundaries during the emergence of a modern laboratory environment in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. First, I related the development of container glass industry and technical glass chemistry in the mid-nineteenth century. Then I focused on the rise of a new awareness for measurement errors due to the chemical agency of experimental glass vessels in the context of precision research. In a third step, I sketched the emergence of the techno-scientific infrastructure that fostered the improvement and material standardization of scientific glass containers in late nineteenth-century Germany. The aim of the paper was to “re-materialize” the glass container in the history of science, which means to recover the rich materiality and historicity of its substance in the context of the modern research laboratory.32 But what have we learned about the very nature of this material? We have seen that the uses of glassware, the theories on the nature of glass, glass research, glass classifications, glass testing procedures, glass making techniques – all these dimensions of materiality are in constant flux. It is their historical interplay in the first place, which gives meaning to the question “What is glass?” Not surprisingly, it was in the heyday of glass standardization when the nature 32 This conceptual approach was developed in Klein and Lefèvre 2007 (cf. also Espahangizi and Orland 2014a). at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 420 Kijan Espahangizi of glass was again problematized and glass theory advanced fundamentally (Zachariasen 1932; Tammann 1933; Morey 1936). From the viewpoint of historical ontology we should understand glass not as a single substance, but as a wide variety of similar substances in a phenomenological continuum, divided by knowledge, practices, and the perception of what people think glass is or what it ought to do. From this perspective, the material genealogy of glass turns out to be essentially intertwined with the development of the specific uses and functions of glassware, in this case of scientific glass containers. Hence, there is no single history of glass, not even of all glass containers. The need of laboratory research, for instance, to settle in the world, to encapsulate and demarcate its experimental milieus in relation to external disturbances, was indelibly imprinted into the materiality of material glass around 1900. New techno-scientific objects were existentially bound to their new vitreous envelopes, and vice versa. With such a shift of perspective, the glass container turns from an iconic placeholder of the experiment, a topos, into a material oikos of research objects in modern laboratory research. References Armstrong, Isobel. 2008. Victorian Glassworlds: Glass Culture and the Imagination 1830–1880. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bayer Tilde, Uta Hoff, and Wolfgang Meyer, eds. 2003. Schott in Jena 1884–1949. Erfurt: Sutton. Benecke, Wilhelm. 1896. “Die Bedeutung des Kaliums und des Magnesiums für die Entwicklung und Wachsthum des Aspergillus niger v. Th., sowie einiger anderer Pflanzen.” Botanische Zeitung 54:97–132. Benrath, Hermann. 1868. Die Normal-Zusammensetzung bleifreien Glases und die Abweichungen von derselben in der Praxis: Eine technisch-chemische Studie. Eine der Hochverordneten physiko-mathematischen Facultät der Kaiserlichen Universität Dorpat behufs Erlangung der Magisterwürde eingereichte Abhandlung. Aachen: C.H. Georgi. Benrath, Hermann. 1875. Die Glasfabrikation. Braunschweig: Vieweg. Beretta, Marco. 2009. The Alchemy of Glass: Counterfeit, Imitation, and Transmutation in Ancient Glassmaking. Sagamore Beach: Science History Publications. Beretta, Marco. 2011. “Secrecy, Industry and Science: French Glassmaking in the Eighteenth Century.” In A Master of Science History: Essays in Honor of Charles Coulston Gillispie, edited by Jed Z. Buchwald, 357–366. Dordrecht: Springer. Bohlig, E. 1884. “Löslichkeit des Glases.” Zeitschrift für analytische Chemie 32(1):518–519. Bottomley, James Thomson. 1885. “Note on the Condensation of Gases at the Surface of Glass (Preliminary).” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 38:158–161. Braun, C. D. 1868. “Atomgewichtsbestimmungen von J. S. Stas.” Zeitschrift für analytische Chemie 7(1):160– 171. Bunsen, Robert W. 1883. “Ueber die Verdichtung der Kohlensäure an blanken Glasflächen.” Annalen der Physik 256(3):545–560. Bunsen, Robert W. 1885. “Zersetzung des Glases durch Kohlensäure enthaltende capillare Wasserschichten.” Annalen der Physik 265(10):161–165. Cahan, David. 1985. “The Institutional Revolution in German Physics 1865–1914.” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 15(2):1–66. Cahan, David. 1989. An Institute for an Empire: The Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt 1871 – 1918. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 421 Campbell-Swinton, Alan Archibald. 1907. “The Occlusion of the Residual Gas by the Glass Walls of Vacuum Tubes.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A 79(528):134–137. Casey, Edward. 1996. The Fate of Place: A Philosophical History. Berkeley: University of California Press. Daston, Lorraine, ed. 2000. Biographies of Scientific Objects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison. 2007. Objectivity. Cambridge: MIT Press. Dierig, Sven. 2006. Wissenschaft in der Maschinenstadt: Emil Du Bois-Reymond und seine Laboratorien in Berlin. Göttingen: Wallstein. Dumas, Jean Baptiste. 1830. “Recherches sur la composition des verres.” Annales de chimie et de physique 44:144. Dumas, Jean-Baptiste. 1832. Handbuch der angewandten Chemie: Für technische Chemiker, Künstler, Fabrikanten und Gewerbetreibende überhaupt, vol 2. Nürnberg: Johann Leonhardt Schrag. Edwards, Paul N. 2003. “Infrastructure and Modernity. Force, Time, and Social Organization in the History of Sociotechnical Systems.” In Modernity and Technology, edited by Thomas J. Misa, Philip Brey, and Andrew Feeberg, 185–225. Cambridge: MIT Press. Egger, E. 1884. “Ueber die Einwirkung von verdünnten Säuren auf Flaschenglas.” Archiv für Hygiene 68–74. Eller, Johann Theodor. 1746. “Seconde dissertation sur les elements.” Histoires de l’académie royale des sciences et belles lettres de Berlin 2:25–48. Emmerling, Adolph. 1869. “Ueber die Einwirkung kochender Lösungen auf Glas- und Porcellangefäße.” Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie 150(3):257–285. Engel, Michael. 2001. “Weshalb hakt die Libelle? Die glaschemischen Untersuchungen Franz Mylius.” In Glas – Kunst, Technik und Wirtschaft: Vorträge der Jahrestagung der Georg-Agricola-Gesellschaft 2000, edited by Werner Kroker, 115–129. Bochum: Georg-Agricola-Gesellschaft. Espahangizi, Kijan Malte. 2009. “Auch das Elektron verbeugt sich: Das Davisson-Germer Experiment als Erinnerungsort der Physik.” In Mythen - Helden – Symbole: Legitimation, Selbst- und Fremdwahrnehmung in der Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften, der Medizin und der Technik, edited by Siegfried Bodenmann and Susan Splinter, 47–70. München: Martin Meidenbauer. Espahangizi, Kijan. 2010. “Wissenschaft im Glas: Eine historische Ökologie moderner Laborforschung.” Ph.D. diss. ETH Zürich. Espahangizi, Kijan. 2011a. “Immutable Mobiles im Glas: Grenzbetrachtungen zur Zirkulationsgeschichte nicht-inskribierter Dinge.” Nach Feierabend. Zürcher Jahrbuch für Wissensgeschichte 7:105–125. Espahangizi, Kijan. 2011b. “The Twofold History of Laboratory Glassware.” In Membranes, Surfaces and Boundaries: Interstices in the History of Science, Technology and Culture, edited by Mathias Grote, Max Stadler, and Laura Otis, 17–33. Berlin: Preprints of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science. Espahangizi, Kijan, and Barbara Orland, eds. 2014a. Stoffe in Bewegung: Beiträge zu einer Wissensgeschichte der materiellen Welt. Zürich/Berlin: Diaphanes. Espahangizi, Kijan, and Barbara Orland. 2014b. “Peudo-Smaragde, Flussmittel und bewegte Stoffe: Überlegungen zu einer Wissensgeschichte der materiellen Welt.” In Stoffe in Bewegung: Beiträge zu einer Wissensgeschichte der materiellen Welt, edited by Kijan Malte Espahangizi and Barbara Orland, 11– 38. Zürich and Berlin: Diaphanes. Faraday, Michael. 1830. “The Bakerian Lecture: On the Manufacture of Glass for Optical Purposes.” Philosophical Transactions 120:1–57 Felsch, Philipp. 2005. “Das Laboratorium.” In Orte der Moderne: Erfahrungswelten des 19. und 20. Jahrhunderts, edited by Alexa Geisthövel and Habbo Koch, 27–36. Frankfurt am Main: Campus. Foerster, Fritz. 1893. “Ueber die Beurtheilung von Glasgefässen zu chemischem Gebrauche II.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 13:457–465. Foerster, Fritz. 1894. “Vergleichende Prüfung einiger Glassorten hinsichtlich ihres chemischen Verhaltens.” Zeitschrift für analytische Chemie 33:381-96. Foerster, Fritz. 1931. “Franz Mylius.” Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft 10:167–196. Foerster, Wilhelm. 1911. Lebenserinnerungen und Lebenshoffnungen 1832–1910. Berlin: Georg Reimer. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 422 Kijan Espahangizi Ford, Karl. 1930. “The Rise of the Glass Container.” The Glass Container 9(1):5–7. Fresenius, C. Remigius. 1853. Anleitung zur quantitativen chemischen Analyse, 3rd revised edition. Braunschweig: Vieweg. Fresenius, Wilhelm. 1883. “Mittheilungen aus dem chemischen Laboratorium des Prof. Dr. R. Fresenius zu Wiesbaden: Der Arsengehalt des Glases als eine Fehlerquelle bei der Nachweisung von Arsen.” Zeitschrift für analytische Chemie 22:397–404. Ganzenmüller, Wilhelm. 1938. “Die Anschauungen vom Wesen des Glases vom Mittelalter bis zum Beginn des 19. Jahrhunderts. Teil I&II.” Glastechnische Berichte 16:358-365, 392–398. Gieryn, Thomas F. 1983. “Boundary-Work and the Demarcation of Science from Non-Science: Strains and Interests in Professional Ideologies of Scientists.” American Sociological Review 48(6):781–795. Grote, Mathias. 2010. “Surfaces of Action: Cells and Membranes in Electrochemistry and the Life Sciences.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 41(3):183–193. Grübler, M. 1907. “Ueber die Wirkung von freiem Alkali auf Morfium und Adrenalin: Ein Beitrag zur Sterilisation.” Pharmazeutische Post 40(33):579–582. Haber, Fritz, and H. Schwenke. 1904. “Über die elektrochemische Bestimmung der Angreifbarkeit des Glases: Ein Beitrag zur technischen Glasuntersuchung.” Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie 10(9):143–156. Haber, Fritz, and Zsygmund Klemensiewicz. 1909. “Über elektrische Phasengrenzkräfte.” Zeitschrift für physikalische Chemie 67:385–431. Helmholtz, Hermann, and Leopold Loewenherz. 1891. “Die Tähigkeit der Physikalisch-Technischen Reichsanstalt bis Ende 1890.” In Tätigkeitsberichte PTR 1890–1895: Auszug aus den Ministerial-Akten des Departements des Aeussern und Innern. Schott Archive (file 25/18). Hentschel, Klaus. 2002. Mapping the Spectrum: Techniques of Visual Representation in Research and Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hesse, Gustav. 1904. “Beiträge zur Herstellung von Nährboden und zur Bakterienzüchtung.” Zeitschrift für Hygiene und Infektionskrankheiten, medizinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Virologie 46(1):1–22. Hoffmann, Christoph. 2001. “The Design of Disturbance: Physics Institutes and Physics Research in Germany 1870–1910.” Perspectives on Science 9(2):173–195. Hoffmann, Christoph, and Jutta Schickore. 2001. “Secondary Matters: On Disturbances, Contamination, and Waste as Objects of Research.” Perspectives on Science 9(2):123–124. Hovestadt, Heinrich. 1900. Jenaer Glas und seine Verwendung in Wissenschaft und Technik. Jena: Fischer. Jackson, Catherine M. 2006. “Re-Examining the Research School: August Wilhelm Hofmann and the Re-Creation of a Liebigian Research School in London.” History of Science 44:281–319. Jackson, Catherine M. 2008. “Analysis and Synthesis in Nineteenth-Century Organic Chemistry.” Ph.D. diss., University of London. Jackson, Myles W. 2000. Spectrum of Belief: Joseph von Fraunhofer and the Craft of Precision Optics. Cambridge: MIT Press. Klein, Ursula, and Wolfgang Lefèvre, eds. 2007. Materials in Eighteenth-Century Science: A Historical Ontology. Cambridge: MIT Press. Kobe, Gerhard. 2008. Die Glasindustrie in Stützerbach 1648–2008: 360 Jahre Glastradition. Stützerbach: Brandtdruck. Kohler, Robert. 2002. Landscapes and Labscapes: Exploring the Lab-Field Border in Biology. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Kohlrausch, Friedrich. 1885. “Die electrische Leitungsfähigkeit des im Vacuum destillierten Wassers.” Annalen der Physik 260(1):48–52. Kohlrausch, Friedrich. 1891. “Ueber die Löslichkeit einiger Gläser in kaltem Wasser.” Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft 24(2):3560–3575. Koppelkamm, Stefan. 1988. Künstliche Paradiese: Gewächshäuser und Wintergärten des 19. Jahrhunderts. Berlin: Ernst. Kratz, Ludwig. 1950. Die Glaselektrode und ihre Anwendungen. Frankfurt am Main: Dietrich Steinkopf. Kreusler, U., and O. Henzold. 1884. “Ueber die alkalische Reaktion des Glases als Fehlerquelle bei Analysen usw.” Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft 17(1):34–40. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 423 Kühnert, Herbert. 1946. Der Briefwechsel zwischen Otto Schott und Ernst Abbe über das optische Glas 1879– 1881. Jena: Fischer. Kühnert, Herbert. 1949. Die kulturelle Bedeutung der Jenaer Glasindustrie. Rudolstadt: Greifenverlag. Kühnert, Herbert, ed. 1953 and 1957. Briefe und Dokumente zur Geschichte des VEB Optik Jenaer Glaswerk Schott & Genossen, 2 vols. Jena: Gustav Fischer. Küster, Ernst. 1907. Anleitung zur Kultur der Mikroorganismen: Für den Gebrauch in zoologischen, botanischen, medizinischen und landwirthschaftlichen Laboratorien. Leipzig and Berlin: B. G. Teubner. Latour, Bruno. 1992. “The Costly Ghastly Kitchen.” In The Laboratory Revolution in Medicine, edited by Andrew Cunningham and Perry Williams, 295–303. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent. 1770. “Sur la nature de l’eau et sur les expériences par lequelles on a prétendu prouver la possibilité de son changement en terre.” Mémoires de l’Académie des sciences Paris: 1–28. Loewenherz, Leopold. 1877. “Vorläufige Mittheilungen über thermometrische Fundamentalversuche.” Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft 10(1):469–474. Loslalot, Alfred de. 1886. “Le salon de 1886: La peinture.” Gazette des beaux-arts. Courrier européen de l’art et de la curiosité 33(June):459–460. Lunge, Georg. 1885. “Zur Kritik verschiedener für die Maassanalyse neu vorgeschlagener Indicatoren.” Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft 18(2):3290–3291. Marggraf, Andreas Sigismund. 1756. “Continuation des preuves fondées sur des expériences exactes, qui font voir qu’il se trouve de la terre dans l’eau distillée la plus pure.” Histoires de l’Académie royale des sciences et belles lettres de Berlin: 20–30. Meinel, Christoph, ed. 2000. Instrument-Experiment: Historische Studien. Berlin: GNT. Michaelis, Leonor. 1926. “Die Permeabilität von Membranen.” Die Naturwissenschaften 14(3):33–42. Morey, George W. 1936. The Composition of Glass. Washington DC: Carnegie Institution. Müller, Falk. 2004. Gasentladungsforschung im 19. Jahrhundert. Berlin: GNT. Müller, Friedrich C. 1900. “Das Glas auf der Pariser Weltausstellung.” In Die Pariser Weltausstellung in Wort und Bild, edited by Georg Malkowsky, 381–386. Berlin: Kirchhoff & Co. Mumford, Lewis. [1938]1998. The Culture of Cities. New York: Routledge. Mylius, Franz. 1888. “Ueber die Störung der Libellen.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 8:267–283. Mylius, Franz. 1889. “Die Prüfung der Glasoberfläche des Glases durch Farbreaktion.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 9:50–57. Mylius, Franz. 1903. “Ueber die Classifikation der Gläser zu chemischem Gebrauch.” Sprechsaal 24:884– 885; 25:924-925. Mylius, Franz. 1907. “Die Eosinreaktion des Glases an Bruchflächen. Zeitschrift für anorganische Chemie 55:233–260 Mylius, Franz. 1910. “Die Eosinreaktion des Glases an Bruchflächen. II: Verwitterbarkeit schwerer Glasarten.” Zeitschrift für anorganische Chemie 67:200–224. Mylius, Franz. 1913. “Die hydrolytische Klassifikation und Prüfung der Glasarten mit Jodeosin.” Silikatzeitschrift 1:2–5, 25–28, 45–48. Mylius, Franz, and Fritz Foerster. 1891. “Ueber die Beurtheilung der Glasgefässe zu chemischem Gebrauche: Das Verhalten von Glasoberflächen zu Wasser.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 11:311– 330. Newton, Roy G. 1985. “The Durability of Glass – A Review.” Glass Technology 26(1):21–38. Pazaurek, Gustav Edmund. 1903. Kranke Gläser: Eine Untersuchung gewidmet dem internationalen Museumskongress zu Berlin 1903. Reichenberg: Nordböhmisches Gewerbemuseum. Péligot, Eugène-Melchior. 1862. Douze leçons sur l’art de la verrerie, Annales du Conservatoire impérial des arts et métiers. Paris: Conservatoire impérial des arts et métiers. Péligot, Eugène-Melchior. 1877. Le verre: son histoire, sa fabrication. Paris: Masson. Pernet, Jean. 1875. “Beiträge zur Thermometrie.” In Repertorium für Experimental-Physik, für physikalische Technik, für mathematische & astronomische Instrumentenkunde, vol. 9, edited by Philipp Carl, 257–309. München: Oldenbourg. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 424 Kijan Espahangizi Pfeiffer, Emanuel. 1891. “Ueber den Angriff von Glas durch Wasser und eine electrische Methode zur Bestimmung desselben.” Annalen der Physik 280(10):239–264. Pickering, Andrew. 1995. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency and Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Poth, Susanne. 2006. Carl Remigius Fresenius (1818-1897): Wegbereiter der analytischen Chemie. Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft. Pott, Johann Heinrich. 1756. D. Ioh. Henr. Pott Animadversiones Physico Chymicae Circa Varias Hypotheses Et Experimenta D. Dr. et Consiliar. Elleri. Physicalisch Chymische Anmerckungen über verschiedene Sätze und Erfahrungen des Herrn Hofr. D. Eller. Berlin. Pravica, Sandra. 2007. Materialität in der Naturwissenschaftsforschung: Eine bibliographische Übersicht. Berlin: Preprints of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science. Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg. 1997. Toward a History of Epistemic Things: Synthesizing Proteins in the Test Tube. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Rowney, Thomas. 1845. “Analysis of the Bohemian Glass as Found in the Combustion Tubes Employed in Organic Analysis.” Memoires and Proceedings of the London Chemical Society 3:299. Schaffer, Simon. 1989. “Glass Works: Newton’s Prisms and the Uses of Experiment.” In The Uses of Experiment: Studies in the Natural Sciences, edited by David Gooding, Trevor Pinch, and Simon Schaffer, 67–104. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Schickore, Jutta. 2005. “Through Thousands of Errors We Reach the Truth – But How? On the Epistemic Roles of Error in Scientific Practice.” Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science 36:539–556. Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. 1977. Geschichte der Eisenbahnreise: Zur Industrialisierung von Raum und Zeit im 19. Jahrhundert. Munich: Hanser. Schmidgen, Henning. 2004. “Telegraphie, Zeit und Lärm: Über die stabile Umgebung von Reaktionsversuchen.” In Kulturen des Experiments, edited by Henning Schmidgen, Peter Geimer, and Sven Dierig, 270–306. Berlin: Kulturverlag Kadmos. Schott, Otto. 1887. “Über die Verarbeitungsfähigkeit des Glases vor dem Gasgebläse.” Verhandlungen des Vereins zur Beförderung des Gewerbefleißes 66:799f. Schott, Otto. 1889. “Ueber das Eindringen von Wasser in die Glasoberfläche.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 9:86–90. Schott, Otto. 1891. “Studium einiger physikalischer Eigenschaften von Gläsern und über ein neues werthvolles Glas für die Thermometrie.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 11:330-37. Schummer, Joachim. 2008. “Popular Images Versus Self-Images of Science: Visual Representations of Science in Clipart Cartoons and Internet Photographs.” In Science Images and Popular Images of Science, edited by Bernd Hüppauf and Peter Weingart, 69–96. New York and London: Routledge. Schummer, Joachim, and Tami. I. Spector. 2007. “The Visual Image of Chemistry: Perspectives from the Art and Science.” In The Public Image of Chemistry, edited by Joachim Schummer, Bernadette Bensaude- Vincent, and Brigitte Van Tiggelen, 213–258. London: World Scientific. Schummer, Joachim, Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent, and Brigitte Van Tiggelen, eds. 2007. The Public Image of Chemistry. London: World Scientific. Soerensen, Soeren Peter. 1909. “Enzymstudien. II. Mitteilung: Über die Messung und die Bedeutung der Wasserstoffionenkonzentration bei enzymatischen Prozessen.” Biochemische Zeitschrift 21:131–304. Star, Susan Leigh, and James R. Griesemer. 1989. “Institutional Ecology, ’Translations’ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology.” Social Studies of Science 19(4):387–420. Stas, Jean Servais. 1860. “Recherches sur les rapports réciproques des poids atomiques.” Bulletin de l’ Académie royale de Belgique 10(8):208–336. Stas, Jean Servais. 1865. “Nouvelles recherches sur les lois des proportions chimiques, sur les poids atomiques et leur rapports mutuels.” Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, des Lettres et des Beaux- Arts de Belgique 35:1–512. Stas, Jean Servais. 1868. “On the Manufacture of Glass for Vessels Employed in Chemical Researches.” The Chemical News 17(January):1. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available From Topos to Oikos 425 Stein, Wilhelm. 1862. Die Glasfabrikation: Handbuch der chemischen Technologie. Braunschweig: Vieweg. Steiner, Jürgen. 1993. “Otto Schott and the Invention of Borosilicate Glass.” Glastechnische Berichte 66:165–173. Steiner, Jürgen, and Uta Hoff. 1995. “Vom Versuchslaboratorium zum Weltunternehmen: Das Jenaer Glaswerk 1884–1934.” In Zwischen Konvention und Avantgarde: Doppelstadt Jena - Weimar, edited by Jürgen John, and Volker Wahl, 209–232. Böhlau: Weimar et al. Sternberg, Carl. 1914. “Versuche über die Wassermannsche Reaktion.” Wiener klinische Wochenschrift 27(18):545–549. Stich, Conrad, and Carl Wulff. 1918. Bakteriologie und Sterilisation im Apothekenbetriebe mit eingehender Berücksichtigung der Herstellung steriler Lösungen in Ampullen, 3rd edition. Berlin: Springer. Tammann, Gustav. 1933. Der Glaszustand. Leipzig: Voss. Thiesen, M. 1881. “Vergleichungen von Quecksilber-Thermometern.” Metronomische Berichte 3:1–35. Vec, Miloš. 2006. Recht und Normierung in der industriellen Revolution: Neue Strukturen der Normsetzung in Völkerrecht, staatlicher Gesetzgebung und gesellschaftlicher Selbstnormierung. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann. Vogel, A., and G. Reischauer. 1859. “Ueber das Trübwerden gewisser Gläser beim Erwärmen.” Dingler’s Polytechnisches Journal 152(3):181–189. Warburg, Emil. 1884. “Ueber die Electrolyse des festen Glases.” Annalen der Physik 257(4):622–646. Warburg, Emil, and T. Ihmori. 1886. “Ueber das Gewicht und die Ursache der Wasserhaut bei Glas und anderen Körpern.” Annalen der Physik 263(4): 481–507. Warington, Robert. 1845. “Einiges über im Handel vorkommendes grünes Glas.” Dingler’s Polytechnisches Journal 36:37–39. Wartha, V. 1885. “Ueber die alcalische Reaction des Glases.” Zeitschrift für analytische Chemie 24(1):220. Wiebe, Friedrich Carl Hermann. 1886a. “Amtliche Prüfung von Thermometern.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 6:22–25. Wiebe, Friedrich Carl Hermann. 1886b. “Ueber Thermometerglas, insbesondere über das ’Jenaer Normalthermometerglas’.” Zeitschrift für Instrumentenkunde 6: 167–171. Weber, Rudolph. 1864. “Ueber das Beschlagen und Blindwerden des Glases und über die Methode zur Vorherbestimmung dieser Erscheinung. (Aus den Verhandlungen des Vereins zur Beförderung des Gewerbefleißes in Preußen 1863 S. 131).” Dingler’s Polytechnisches Journal 171:121–137. Weber, Rudolph. 1879. “Über die chemissche Zusammensetzung der Gläser und die dadurch bedingte Widerstandsfähigkeit derselben gegen atmosphärische Einflüsse.” Annalen der Physik 242(3):431–450 Winkelmann, Adolf, and Otto Schott. 1894. “Über thermische Widerstandscoefficienten verschiedener Gläser in ihrer Abhängigkeit von der chemischen Zusammensetzung.” Annalen der Physik 287(4):730– 746. Wise, Norton, ed. 1995. The Values of Precision. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Zachariasen, William H. 1932. “The Atomic Arrangement in Glass.” Journal of the American Chemical Society 54(October):3841–3851. Zschimmer, Eberhard. 1909. Die Glasindustrie in Jena: Ein Werk von Schott und Abbe. Jena: Eugen Diederichs. at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889715000137 Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. University of Basel Library, on 11 Jul 2017 at 11:42:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available 