ABSTRACT: 
The concept of social sustainability is discussed in a wide range of literatures, from urban planning to international development. Authors agree a notion of social sustainability is difficult to define, comprising numerous component parts (criteria), such as community cohesion, human wellbeing, effective dialogue and the access that citizens have to those that make important decisions on their behalf. The definition and measurement of these criteria and the role of social sustainability in energy decision making is a contentious issue. We argue that a community led, asset based approach is required to achieve any sense of how social sustainability can be defined in a community setting within the context of energy developments. We propose a conceptual framework based on a process of community group prioritization and visioning. Our earlier research on public participation and the role of dialogue for nuclear energy development in the UK, US and Japan is used to demonstrate barriers to be overcome if our systemic model of social sustainability is to become a reality. We highlight the importance of fairness and justice, place based approaches and socio-energy systems, concluding that these are necessary to promote a community and institutional awareness of social sustainability for large energy developments. 
 
PREDICTION: 
in this paper , we study the effects of the nature of the universe on the evolution of the earth s natural environment .<n> our work is motivated by the fact that the nature of the universe is a function of the history of the universe .<n> we argue that the emergence of the universe as a consequence of the events of the early universe , and the current state of the universe are determined by the properties of the universe at the time of its emergence .<n> we find that the laws of nature allow the existence of a natural environment .<n> we show that the evolution of the earth s environment is determined by the laws of nature at the time of its emergence .<n> we find that the laws of nature allow the existence of a natural environment , and the current state of the universe is determined by the properties of the universe at the time of its emergence .<n> we argue that the laws of nature allow the existence of a natural environment , and the current state of the universe is determined by the properties of the universe at the time of its emergence .<n> we find that the laws of nature allow the existence of a natural environment , and the current state of the universe is determined by the properties of the universe at the time 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 ArticleConceptualizing a Social Sustainability Framework for Energy Infrastructure DecisionsWhitton, John, Parry, Ioan Mihangel, Akiyoshi, Mito and Lawless, WilliamAvailable at http://clok.uclan.ac.uk/12065/Whitton, John, Parry, Ioan Mihangel, Akiyoshi, Mito and Lawless, William (2015) Conceptualizing a Social Sustainability Framework for Energy Infrastructure Decisions. Energy Research & Social Science, 8 . pp. 127-138. ISSN 2214-6296 It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the work.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.05.010For more information about UCLan’s research in this area go to http://www.uclan.ac.uk/researchgroups/ and search for <name of research Group>.For information about Research generally at UCLan please go to http://www.uclan.ac.uk/research/ All outputs in CLoK are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, includingCopyright law. Copyright, IPR and Moral Rights for the works on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in the http://clok.uclan.ac.uk/policies/CLoKCentral Lancashire online Knowledgewww.clok.uclan.ac.ukEnergy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138Contents lists available at ScienceDirectEnergy Research & Social Sciencejo ur nal homepage: www.elsev ier .co m/locate /erssOriginal research articleConceptualizing a social sustainability framework for energyinfrastructure decisionsJohn Whitton a,∗,1, Ioan Mihangel Parry a,1, Mito Akiyoshib,1, William Lawless c,1a Energy and Society Research Group, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, UKb Senshu University, Department of Sociology, 2-1-1 Higashimita, Tama, Kawasaki 214-8540, Japanc Paine College, 1235 15th Street, Augusta, GA 30901-2182, USAa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 12 May 2014Received in revised form 24 May 2015Accepted 26 May 2015Keywords:Social sustainabilityDeliberationCommunityEnergy infrastructurea b s t r a c tThe concept of social sustainability is discussed in a wide range of literatures, from urban planning tointernational development. Authors agree a notion of social sustainability is difficult to define, comprisingnumerous component parts (criteria), such as community cohesion, human wellbeing, effective dialogueand the access that citizens have to those that make important decisions on their behalf. The definitionand measurement of these criteria and the role of social sustainability in energy decision making isa contentious issue. We argue that a community led, asset based approach is required to achieve anysense of how social sustainability can be defined in a community setting within the context of energydevelopments. We propose a conceptual framework based on a process of community group prioritizationand visioning. Our earlier research on public participation and the role of dialogue for nuclear energydevelopment in the UK, US and Japan is used to demonstrate barriers to be overcome if our systemicmodel of social sustainability is to become a reality. We highlight the importance of fairness and justice,place based approaches and socio-energy systems, concluding that these are necessary to promote acommunity and institutional awareness of social sustainability for large energy developments.© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionThis paper presents a conceptual framework for social sus-tainability; a framework and a form of sustainability that allowsvarious stakeholder groups, through deliberation and communityvisioning [1–3], to agree priorities that contribute to energy deci-sion making for strong and successful communities. Communityvisioning is a citizen-based planning process, whereby an issue isdefined by diverse members of a community, community assetsare identified, a desired future is determined, and an action planto achieve this future is developed [3]. It is increasingly used asa community development technique; for example, to encouragemore participatory democratic processes in community planningand development [4], to address urban deterioration in North-ern Ireland [5], and in local area planning on the Gold Coast inAustralia [2]. As Lachapelle, Emery and Hays [3: 178] note, the∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 0 1772 894211.E-mail addresses: jwhitton@uclan.ac.uk (J. Whitton), imparry@uclan.ac.uk(I.M. Parry), mito.akiyoshi@gmail.com (M. Akiyoshi), wlawless@paine.edu(W. Lawless).1 These authors contributed equally to this work.process “emphasizes community assets rather than needs”, andidentifies future opportunities for communities.The decisions made regarding the management of new and age-ing energy infrastructure are of local, national and internationalimportance. Improved dialogue between industry and stakeholderscan significantly impact upon the quality of decision-making [6],demonstrating a more democratic decision-making process. Theliterature supports democracy, in governance and society, to be akey theme of social sustainability and our conceptual framework[7]. In this paper, we evidence the shift in the nature of the energystakeholder-industry relationship through reference to our work atUK nuclear sites [8,9], where there has been an increase in dialoguetaking place but questions regarding the fairness of this dialoguefor stakeholders.The importance of and need for further research into under-standing the perceptions, priorities, involvement and support oflocal residents regarding large scale energy infrastructure is evi-dent, and Walker, Wiersma and Bailey [10] echo this in thefollowing statement:“How to ensure fair processes and just outcomes for local commu-nities, and how to enhance the acceptability of energy generationfacilities amongst local populations remain important areas ofhuman-energy research.” [p. 46]http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.05.0102214-6296/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.128 J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138However, in democracies, obtaining public consent for devel-opment of any kind is challenging. We demonstrate this throughreference to our work at US nuclear sites, where open competitionfor consent for energy related developments appears to improvethe quality of the scientific choices made and the stability of thesechoices with a public faced by adverse events [11]. We embracethe move towards a participatory-based form of dialogue in deci-sions rather than a technocratic ‘top down’, expert-led, ‘one-way’form of consultation as we discuss with reference to our work inJapan. In our framework, dialogue is not only ‘two-way’, but multi-directional and dimensional, incorporating multiple stakeholders[12]. Through the application of our framework, we aim to start toprovide the tools required for communities to effectively engageand influence government and industry on decision-making thatdirectly impacts upon them.1.1. Why is a social sustainability framework needed?The need for a conceptual framework to improve understand-ing of what social sustainability involves and requires has beenacknowledged for some time. Lake and Hanson [13] emphasize this,whilst promoting urban sustainability:“Given the conceptual vacuity burdening much of the debate, thequestion is not whether sustainability can be resuscitated concep-tually but what conceptual framework offers the greatest promiseof constructive understanding. Given the term’s co-optation byinterests across the political spectrum, the question is not whethersustainability can be achieved but what must be achieved to assuresustainability” [p. 2]Previous conceptual frameworks for social sustainabilityinclude those proposed by Yitfachel and Hedgcock [14] for urbansocial sustainability and Jones and Tonts [15] for rural social sus-tainability, the latter being an adaptation of the former. Thesepresent urban and rural sustainability as being influenced by social,environmental and economic components, in simple diagramswhere these relationships are one-way, feeding into the urban orrural sustainability systems, without the self-reinforcing relation-ships proposed by Cuthill [2]. The factors contributing to the socialcomponent of both frameworks are identified as equity, commu-nity, and urbanality [14] or rurality [15]. This not only demonstrateshow the understanding of key social sustainability components inthe literature has progressed over the past two decades but also thelack of progression over the same period in developing an appro-priate conceptual framework for social sustainability.Cuthill [2] demonstrates a recent attempt to improve under-standing of the social sustainability concept; employing an actionresearch approach based on rapid urban growth in South EasternQueensland, Australia. The author provides a framework employingtheoretical, operational, ethical and methodological componentsdeemed essential to regional social sustainability; social capital,social infrastructure, social justice and engaged governance respec-tively. This is similar to the conceptual framework presented here;similarly an action research approach, aiming to work with varioussocial groups within a community to understand and acknowl-edge social issues that they prioritize rather than issues deemedby officials or other decision makers to be important.In regard to sustainable decision-making for new energyprojects, the work of Raven et al. [16,17] has informed our work.Managing social acceptance for new energy projects has high-lighted the value of incorporating the views and contributionsof local stakeholders, in order to anticipate and avoid potentialproblems with societal acceptance. The authors’ ESTEEM modelemploys vision building techniques and identifies conflicting issueswith stakeholders. The conceptual framework presented here isalso based on generating an understanding of local stakeholderpriorities and vision building to improve decision making. By doingso, later conflict may be avoided, as projects are able to developmore sustainably by incorporating a detailed understanding ofstakeholder expectations and priorities, and formulating moresocially acceptable options and solutions.We theorize that the impact of a large infrastructure develop-ment on a community is more direct and tangible when comparedto the regional and national scale. This is not to say that ecologicaland economic considerations are not of equal importance, but thatsocial issues and potential social impacts at the community levelshould be given attention, understood in greater detail and incor-porated further into local decision making processes. The result ismore democratically informed and legitimate decision making, andpotentially more sustainable at the community level. This does notgenerate a scenario to the extent of reflexive modernization [18],but it shares notions of this theory; working towards futures whichare more desirable, to communities in this instance, rather thanfuture scenarios that are pre-defined, to which people are forced toadjust to [19], and therefore, are likely more unsustainable.2. Conceptual framework for social sustainabilityWhen discussing social systems such as a community, we distin-guish between systems thinking and systemic thinking [20]. Ratherthan assuming knowledge that identifies a social system to beobjective and one that can be readily identified and improved; weunderstand reality as the creative construction of human beings[21]. We have used this definition as a basis to conceptualize socialsustainability, seeking to understand reality as the construction ofpeople’s interpretation of their experiences, in this case regardingenergy infrastructure developments and their impacts on com-munities. Accepting the various traditions that comprise systemsapproaches to tackling complexity, as Systemists we aim to seethe whole picture, entertaining shifts in perspective to reflect dif-fering positions held by engaged observers [22]. By constructingmental models to create conceptual systems, interdependenciesare highlighted. This approach seems particularly relevant whenreflecting on large scale developments that affect communities overlong periods of time. Energy developments, such as power stations(generation) and power lines (transmission) are an example of this.These have an operational lifetime of around 50 years, so impactson a community can be intergenerational and variable, from gainsin employment to a perceived loss in visual amenity.Bijl [23] argues that social sustainability is instrumentally andintrinsically relevant to sustainable development, as “society needsa sense of community and commitment” (p. 162). Multiple def-initions have been developed such as those for urban planning[24–26], as researchers/practitioners seek to understand social sus-tainability and its sub-themes, such as well-being and democraticgovernance [7] or development, bridge and maintenance sustaina-bility [27]. Social sustainability is a concept gaining recognition asbeing critical for sustainable development and societal prosperity.2.1. Social sustainability, stakeholder participation and dialogueHow do we ensure that social sustainability as a concept isincorporated into community-led decision-making? As previouslydiscussed, we embrace the move towards a participatory-basedform of dialogue to derive robust socially sustainable decisions overthe long term. A substantial literature supports the notion thatgreater public participation in decision-making serves to signifi-cantly reduce conflict, leading to more robust decisions for largeenergy infrastructure developments. Less opportunity for pub-lic participation increases the likelihood of public opposition anddelays to developments [28]. Such developments include nuclearJ. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138 129waste repository siting [29], electricity transmission and infra-structure planning [30,31], wind energy developments [32], smallhydropower projects [33] and rural renewable energy implemen-tation [34]. The advantages of greater public participation are welldocumented, such as the participatory process adopted for nuclearwaste management decisions in Sweden [35]. However, failure tosufficiently consider and involve the public can have negative con-sequences for similar projects, as has been the case in the CzechRepublic [36], and in the UK [37], where a lack of trust has beenshown to be a key factor in public uncertainty towards plans fora national nuclear waste repository, which we discuss later in thissection. Similar effects have been found in regards to other largescale energy infrastructure in Europe. A recent study conductedby Aas et al. [38], believed to be the first cross-national com-parative study into public acceptance of new high voltage powerlines (HVPL), suggested that there is common public perception inthe UK, Norway and Sweden of weak local resident involvementin planning and decision-making processes. In the UK, the studyfound significantly low levels of trust towards grid networks andoperators, and consistently low levels of acceptance of HVPL devel-opments, both locally and generally. The authors also note that theresults of this and several other empirical studies, on HVPL andother large scale renewable energy projects [39–43], demonstratethat local acceptance is commonly lower than general acceptance.We have made the basis of our approach clear; public participa-tion and dialogue is essential to any notion of social sustainability.But who is this public, and who can we describe as a stakeholderin any decision either made by or on behalf of a community whenseeking social sustainability? For the purpose of theorizing a socialsustainability conceptual framework, this consideration is essen-tial. The most common definitions of the term ‘stakeholder’ viewthese as any group or individual that can affect or is affected by aproposal, project or decision. This definition is broad and does notaim to categorize or understand any requirements that stakehol-ders may have. As Aaltonen et al. [44] discuss, stakeholder theoryprovides a solid starting point for identifying, classifying and cate-gorizing stakeholders and understanding their behaviour in orderto better manage them. Research usually adopts the perspectivesof the organization convening the engagement process rather thanthe participants, to describe and analyse the different stakeholdermanagement strategies adopted. We have adopted an alternativedefinition of the term stakeholder presented by Mitchell et al. [45],referring to those individuals whose claims are perceived to bemore salient in terms of power, legitimacy and urgency.Accepting the definition, how this power, legitimacy andurgency are translated from communities to decision-makersthrough engagement practice is important if engagement withcommunities is to be considered a worthwhile exercise. Our UK casestudy example reviews the move in the UK towards open and acces-sible stakeholder dialogue and references recent work carried outwith participants of the engagement process associated with thedecommissioning of UK nuclear power station sites [46]. This high-lighted the shift towards attempts at deliberative dialogue duringengagement and provided a definition of deliberation based on theliterature. The author also highlighted the role of stakeholder influ-ence (power) on decision making and relates this to the conceptof fairness. The case study from Japan highlights the importanceof a perception of fairness. Deliberation, influence and fairness areproposed as emerging themes in stakeholder theory (see our work-ing definitions in Table 1) and contribute towards the conceptualframework for social sustainability.Political theorists and social scientists have traditionally arguedthat concepts related to public acceptance (e.g. fairness) are ofgreatest importance regarding participation in policy setting, whilethose arguing from an economic and scientific perspective haveargued that the quality of the decision and process is moreimportant (and often, that lay persons lacking knowledge shouldhave little role to play in technical/scientific policy making) [52].When discussing highly technical projects, the argument regardingthe need for quality decisions, based on the best technical dataavailable is hardly surprising. However, this technocratic approachto decision making has failed in the past when decisions madehave been subjected to public scrutiny [9]. In this paper, we arguethat this approach is not socially sustainable where there is a clearpublic interest. The option based on the pinnacle of technical excel-lence may not be acceptable to the wider public or appropriate in acommunity setting. This corresponds with notions of Post-NormalScience Theory [see 53–56], arguing that the scientific system mustmove beyond the traditional ‘reductionist’ approach, relying almostexclusively on industry or technical experts, deeming it as insuf-ficient, and that the role of other stakeholders, and indeed thepublic, should be viewed as necessary if the scientific system isto be legitimate and democratic. As Funtowicz and Ravetz [54]argue, a post-normal science approach which promotes the col-lective production of knowledge, involving those “affected by theissue who enter into dialogue on it” [57: 8], is appropriate when“facts are uncertain, values in dispute, stakes high and decisionsurgent” [54: 744, cited in 57]. Such participatory approaches areparticularly relevant when decision-making on issues involving orpresenting potential risks to society, such as energy infrastructure,in particular nuclear power developments, are considered.We acknowledge there are challenges with and limitations toparticipatory approaches. These can include a dearth of peoples’interest or time to participate in the process; an inability to suf-ficiently engage with, discuss or debate highly technical issues orconcepts; potentially significant costs associated with organizingand conducting workshops or public engagement sessions with theethical or social aspects of new technologies; consultation fatigue;and causing public mistrust if the process is seen to be merelya ‘box-ticking exercise’ for a pre-determined decision, with nogenuine opportunities to influence outcomes or decision-making[57–59]. We propose that by discussing and establishing the pri-orities of local stakeholder groups at an early stage, the dialogueis time-effective, locally relevant, focused towards specific stake-holder interests, and generates knowledge which can be utilizedwithin a range of decision-making processes. If broad group prior-ities are understood, this could potentially reduce the amount ofpublic consultations and engagement processes required within agiven locale, particularly where multiple developments are occur-ring over a short time period leading to increased ‘consultationdensity’. Therefore, there are also opportunities for mitigating con-sultation fatigue through reduced energy-related consultations,where similar topics may be discussed and consulted upon.According to Habermas [60,61] in his Theory of CommunicativeAction, good participation is seen as both fair and competent. Buthow does this fairness and competence translate to a conceptualframework of social sustainability? Beierle [51] states that fairnessis achieved by broad representation and equalization of partici-pants’ power, whilst competence often involves the use of scientificinformation and technical analysis to settle factual claims. Otherauthors have disputed this equalization of participants’ power as anideal not always represented in deliberative practice. van Stokkom[62] emphasises that deliberative processes to inform policy donot always meet equality and rationality ideals. Behind the idealof rational dialogue between equal participants the author finds aninterplay of power and emotion dynamics that can aid or impededeliberation.In the UK, support for greater dialogue-based engagementfrom central and local government, and government agencies hasincreased in recent years, in order to encourage public involvementin decision-making processes to inform and influence a range ofissues and policies [46]. Dryzek [19] highlights the ‘deliberative130 J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138Table 1Definition of key terms.Key themes and concepts Working definition References to literatureStakeholder An individual whose claims are perceived to bemore salient in terms of power, legitimacy andurgency.Mitchell et al. (1997) [45]Deliberation A process that “presumes and promotesreciprocity which requires people to findmutually acceptable ways of resolving moraldisagreements whilst maintaining mutualrespect”.Also; “deliberation is expected to lead toempathy with the other and a broadened sense ofpeople’s own interests through an egalitarian,open-minded and reciprocal process of reasonedargumentation”.Shapiro (1999) [47], alsoMendelberg (2002) [48]Dialogue Deliberation must occur through ‘dialogue’ or‘rational discourse’. The dialogue process is basedin Communicative Reason.Rossi (1997) [49]Participation “When information is exchanged betweenparties . . . dialogue and negotiation serve totransform the opinions in the members of bothparties”Rowe and Frewer (2005) [50]Fairness The “broad representation and equalization ofpower and equity among participants”Beierle (2002) [51]Procedural justice “demonstration of fairness andrighteousness . . . in processes or decision makingprocedures”Walker et al. (2014) [10]turn’ in democratic theory at the end of the twentieth century, ina move towards greater democratic legitimacy and involvementof those affected by collective decisions. Historically, a period ofpublic consultation is considered by the United Kingdom (UK) Gov-ernment to be the correct process in which to involve the public inthe development of new policy and legislation [63]. The feedbackreceived from the consultation informs the government’s decisionmaking process, resulting perhaps in policy or legislative changes.When new plans are large-scale and considered controversial, aplanning inquiry (with independent adjudication) is often the routetaken to derive an outcome. As the UK Government has a majoritystake in the nuclear industry, this consultative process and asso-ciated guidance has been adopted, however, there are exampleswhere the industry has gone further than consultation.Examples of industry-stakeholder dialogue in the UK includethe decommissioning of Trawsfynydd [64]. This case study, wherepublic participation contributed in selecting decommissioningoptions, is uncommon, in that it demonstrates local communityinvolvement in nuclear decision-making processes. Cotton andDevine-Wright [31] echo this observation in their study of pub-lic engagement in electricity transmission infrastructure planningin the UK. They find that while network operators claim to supportdeliberative dialogue with the public, opportunities and evidenceof such public engagement are lacking, with citizens perspectivesremaining on the periphery of decision-making. Such involve-ment of local stakeholders has been suggested as vital to projectmanagement and development. Kemp et al. [65] describe variouspractices and techniques in stakeholder dialogue regarding nuclearwaste management in the UK, and emphasize the importanceof engaging fully with local stakeholder and community groups.Stakeholder dialogue has also been promoted as a critical com-ponent for biomass technology developments in the Netherlands[66], as for any large development with significant environmentalimpacts:‘. . . in order to deal with complex environmental issues, struc-tured stakeholder dialogues are needed that map out and articulatethe various perspectives – values, interests, knowledge claims andunderlying assumptions – that exist with regard to the issue’ [p.579].However, appropriate public engagement and stakeholderdialogue remains to be a persistent issue for some energy infra-structure developments. For example, the UK study of Evans et al.[67], of proposals by supermarket chain ASDA for the constructionof wind turbines in semi-rural areas, highlighted an inadequate‘business-as-usual’ approach to engagement. This included pre-sumptions made in regards to public perceptions of RenewableEnergy Technology (RET) developments. Proposed legislation aim-ing to remove barriers to the development of infrastructure inthe UK, such new nuclear power stations, may restrict progress indemocratic decision making.Within the context of participation associated with the UKnuclear legacy, the form of democracy administered by UK Cen-tral and Local Government does not provide stakeholders with thepower to veto decisions by majority rule, nor require the deci-sion maker to reach a consensus with stakeholders. However, theterm ‘influence’ mentioned in the Energy Act of 2004 [68] seemedto give stakeholders an increased level of involvement in nucleardecision-making.Whitton worked with community participants between 2007and 2010 at a biannual UK wide gathering of stakeholders for thedecommissioning of UK nuclear energy generation and reproce-ssing sites, to generate mixed methods research data on individuals’perceptions of the type of dialogue used to engage them and theirperceived influence on decision making [9,46]. The findings fromtwo questionnaires completed by 57 NDA stakeholders, followedby a sample of interviews, recorded that the ability of participantsto express views, have fair engagement with NDA, understandother stakeholder positions and expect transparency regardingtheir influence was important to participants. Despite all of thesebeing achieved in part, stakeholders remained confused regardingthe extent of their influence on decision-making, their role in theprocess and the nature of the dialogue being implemented. Muchof this is due to a lack of what the literature terms reciprocity: trans-parency regarding how the views of stakeholders influence strategyand associated decision making – if at all.The UK Government’s Managing Radioactive Waste Safely(MRWS) process (2008–2013) used consultation to identify vol-unteer communities for a deep geological repository. Three localauthorities volunteered for the MRWS programme: CopelandJ. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138 131and Allerdale Borough Councils, and Cumbria County Council. InJanuary 2013, the three local authorities voted on whether toproceed to stage 4 of the process. The two boroughs voted in favour,but the county of Cumbria voted against continuing with the siteselection process. Government had stated in 2011 that the siteselection process would only continue if there was agreement atboth borough and county level. The county’s decision thereforeended the existing site selection process, and the Department ofEnergy and Climate Change (DECC) released a statement sayingthat the current site selection process has been brought to a closein West Cumbria [69].Our US example is significantly different to the UK above. Here,we demonstrate the complexity of involving stakeholders in energydecisions. Chartered under the US Federal Advisory Committee Act,citizen advisors to the Department of Energy (DOE) are chosento advise on nuclear site activities. There were 9 Citizen AdvisoryBoards (CABs) advising on waste management and environmentalclean-up [70]. The DOE recommend that consensus rules are usedwhen decision making: “To encourage the Board [of citizens] to lis-ten carefully to all points of view and to work toward consensus”[71,72]. However, CABs are permitted to decide among themselveswhat system of decision making to use. As a result, in 2005 onlyfour CABs operated under consensus rules, with five permitted byDOE to use majority rules. This provided an opportunity to investi-gate the stability of decisions made under each system of decisionmaking. We focused on DOE’s Hanford Site and its Savannah RiverSite (SRS).The Hanford Citizens Advisory Board (HAB) draws its membersfrom around DOE’s Richland, WA, facility. Its members are nomi-nated by different interest groups, for example, environmentalists,pubic organizations and governments. HAB adopted consensusrules, but a group consensus on decisions proved difficult andmade HAB’s advice and decisions less stable and subject to change.Minorities on both sides of an issue can block a decision, meaningthat reaching concrete decisions at Hanford has proved difficult. Asa result, very few policy changes at Hanford have accelerated theclean-up. A similar effect happened in the EU: “The requirementfor consensus in the European Council often holds policy-makinghostage to national interests in areas which Council could andshould decide by a qualified majority” [73: 29].SRS Advisory Board is a group of stakeholders from South Car-olina and Georgia [74]. The SRS–CAB uses majority rules. Its 25members are required to be a diverse cross-section of citizensnear SRS. Comparatively, SRS–CAB had significantly more diversitybut also more college graduates than other CABs across DOE [70].Roughly 50% of CAB members live adjacent to SRS with another10% within 50 miles, the balance drawn from among those who livedownstream of SRS (e.g., Hilton Head, SC and Savannah, GA) [74].The decisions and advice by SRS–CAB have proved stable and havenot been subject to change. For example, regarding the closure ofwaste storage tanks at the site, it recommended: “Take extraordi-nary measures to meet or exceed the schedule for closure of Tanks18 and 19 consistent with the FY 2012 closure schedule and notdelay closure unless significant safety issues are raised.”2From our research, it would appear that active competitionamong ideas is a requisite for improved decision-making, with sci-entists and the public, especially in the face of adverse events. Inhis dissent, Justice Holmes [75] wrote that:“the ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas– that the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itselfaccepted in the competition of the market”2 SRS CAB (2012, 1/24), “Need to Continue Ongoing Progress for Closure of Tanks18 and 19”.A large part of the problem with the deliberation model is itstacit assumption that decision-making can be studied as a ratio-nal, cooperative process. The empirical evidence contradicts thisassumption by indicating that interdependence plays the key rolein increasing uncertainty, in creating incomplete information, andin creating competitive alternative interpretations of actions anddecisions. The role of participant consensus has been highlighted inour US case study, in this case leading to decision-making gridlockbetween participants. We concluded that a majority-based systemof decision-making is more effective when technical, engineeringbased solutions are required [11]. Others recommend caution withthis type of approach [76], demonstrating that although majority-based systems are a good starting point for deliberation, this mayhinder active discussion among stakeholders, negatively affectingconsensus formation when stakeholders aim to improve their sat-isfaction through a collaborative process. The authors state that:“As the level of conflict among stakeholders intensifies, startingwith an unpopular proposal can ‘fuel the fire’ of the delibera-tion and contribute to the consensus-building process, especiallywhen stakeholders are willing or able to adjust their preferences inresponse to input from other participants” [p. 100].Our research in Japan demonstrates how the relationshipbetween government agencies and citizens is broadly based onpublic relations rather than deliberative engagement. Japaneseauthorities make decisions on behalf of citizens, but they are unableto find the means to elicit public support.3 On the other hand, theindividuals and communities have not been invited to the tableof effective dialogue in spite of significant interest in the future ofnuclear energy development, as evident in numerous mass demon-strations observed throughout the country after the Fukushimaaccident. Following the Fukushima Daiichi crisis, the government ofJapan implemented a structural reform. The Nuclear and IndustrialSafety Agency and the Nuclear Safety Commission were replacedwith the Nuclear Regulation Authority in 2012. It remains to be seenwhether and how the new organizational structure will addressthe long-standing issue of citizen participation in nuclear energydecision-making.This dissatisfaction with a top down, technocratic policy ofenergy decision making has led to public “acceptance” becoming adivisive and controversial term when applied to nuclear energy andradioactive waste management policies [77]. The 2011 FukushimaDaiichi nuclear plant accident and its aftermath are the latestexamples of enduring controversies. Outside of government andindustry, few stakeholder perspectives were acknowledged; e.g.,the risk of nuclear power plant failure in the event of the tsunamiin warnings by seismologists prior to the 2011 earthquake wentunheeded [78]. An expert on citizen participation cited the exampleof the Danish Board of Technology and pointed out that “Japan is yetto reach the stage of institutionalizing citizen participation” [79].The positive impact of greater participatory decision-making pro-cedures on public acceptance has been documented for other largescale energy infrastructure [80,81]. Dialogue is a central componentof public participation and its success or failure can dramaticallyalter the publics’ perceptions of fairness, trust and inclusion, whichin turn can impact upon support or acceptance of a developmentor industry. However, public participation is not without problemsas we discuss later.The suspension of nuclear energy related engagement pro-grammes in the UK and US seem to demonstrate that currentforms of public engagement have largely failed. In addition, socialmovements in Japan are increasingly challenging the top-down,3 Japan Today (2012, 3/19), “80% in Japan support nuclear phase-out”. Based on asurvey conducted by Tokyo Shimbun (www.japantoday.com/).132 J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138technocratic system of energy decision making, calling for moredialogue with the public. New forms are required if public con-sent for development is truly sought by government and otherdecision-makers. Amendments to UK planning and infrastructurallaw detailed within the 2014–2015 Infrastructure Bill are currentlybeing reviewed in the House of Lords. The new legislation departsfrom the 2008 Planning Act [82] and the 2011 Localism Act [83] thataims to involve local communities in decisions which affect them.The Infrastructure Bill appears to suggest more decision-makingpowers being returned to the Secretary of State in order for large-scale developments, particularly in the low-carbon energy sector,to be realized. This highlights the beginning of a ‘deliberative U-turn’ in UK infrastructural politics, and a threat to opportunities forgreater local democracy. There are also significant political uncer-tainties regarding a nuclear waste geological repository in the US.The States may resist “any signs that DOE is planning long-termwaste storage at their sites” [84: 21–22]. To address these issues,DOE will continue to need robust public engagement, strong scien-tific support, and stable public consent.2.2. Social groups and communitiesIt would seem an obvious point; social groups within com-munities have different priorities. However, this has not beenacknowledged sufficiently in the literature on social sustainability.Researchers have historically not considered social sustainabilityfrom the perspective of different social groups in sufficient detail,and the various pathways of social sustainability which may existwithin a community. However, a recent study by Batel and Devine-Wright [43] promotes gaining a deeper understanding of howgroups and individuals in different places perceive particular devel-opments. To do this, they suggest that an emplacement perspective,as opposed to a siting perspective, should be taken to under-stand local perceptions of large scale energy infrastructures. This‘place-based’ perspective would focus upon how residents, bothindividuals and groups, within different settlements perceived andresponded to specific energy infrastructures, “referring not onlyto specific sites where developments are proposed, but also wider‘energy landscapes’ that might be cumulatively affected by sev-eral low carbon infrastructure proposals” [43: 4; also see 57]. Theauthors also note the importance of understanding the characteris-tics of localities and the nature of the residents within these placesto better understand response patterns to infrastructural develop-ments, for example in regards to expected local impacts [also see58]. They state that their research highlights the possibility of “morein-depth and context-sensitive information about people’s beliefsregarding energy infrastructures” [43: p. 13] when examining indi-viduals’ responses based on “communities of locality at the locallevel” [43].As Checkland [85] points out, human systems are better under-stood in terms of emergent systems of meaning that people ascribeto the world. Differences between communities have been describedas “area specific and ‘hidden’ conditions” [86: 712], and issues of“local accuracy” and greater incorporation of “local values and pri-orities” [86: 713] during sustainability indicator development havebeen highlighted [86,87]. As Turcu [86] states, indicators are onlyappropriate when they are flexible, “accounting for local priori-ties and needs” [p. 20], and that there exists “multiple pathwaysto urban sustainability, as areas and communities have differentcircumstances and priorities” [p. 19].How do we establish the boundaries for our various commu-nity/stakeholder groups? Responses from the various social groupsin our research on public opinion of nuclear power in Angle-sey, North Wales has recorded different community priorities, anddemonstrated varying levels of trust of the nuclear energy industryand local government. Parry carried out research on the island ofAnglesey, North Wales [88] to investigate local public opinion andperceptions of risk towards nuclear energy infrastructure. Data wasgathered from questionnaires distributed by hand to three differentsocial groups; farmers, the general public, and students aged 16–17,and responses were recorded using a five point Likert scale. Amongthe topics covered by the questionnaire were appropriate levels ofdialogue and participation. The results recorded that a significantmajority of all three social groups perceived the amount of dialoguethat had taken place, between the public and ‘officials’ in regardsto nuclear power developments, was insufficient. Regarding publicparticipation during decision-making, farmers demonstrated sig-nificant uncertainty and disagreement towards the sufficiency ofcurrent participation levels. Both students and the general pub-lic demonstrated less disagreement than farmers, but considerableuncertainty about the appropriateness of current levels of public innuclear infrastructure decision making. In the context of dialogueand participation as components of social sustainability, the find-ings are profound. This directed our thoughts to the possibility ofvarious social and stakeholder groups within a community, withthe potential for numerous ‘social sustainability pathways’ exist-ing within a locality. The research highlights the complex natureof ‘public opinion’ and demonstrates variance at the communitylevel, rejecting the singularity of the notion of ‘the public’. Thedegree of importance of dialogue and participation to those ques-tioned could not be deduced from the results of the above study.However, participant responses suggest that, in regards to dialogueand participation for energy developments and decision-making,significant work is required.In this paper, we propose a change in emphasis regarding therole of the community, to establish a basis for a socially sustain-able approach. This contrasts sharply with the situation in othercountries such as the United States (US), particularly when decom-missioning nuclear facilities. However, in both the UK and US,citizens are willing to become involved in government consulta-tions in the hope that they will be able to obtain knowledge andperhaps influence the decision that is to be made on their behalf.The challenge to involve stakeholders in strategic level decision-making continues to be a particularly poignant issue for the UKgovernment, the nuclear industry and new energy industries suchas the recent development of shale gas in North West England.This has led the authors to consider an approach to communitylevel engagement and decision-making which recognizes intra-community diversity, promotes trust building through neutralfacilitating, seeks to understand social group priorities and visionsof sustainability, and to begin developing a conceptual frameworkthat reflects this approach. However, as our research progressesfrom this early stage, it would be naïve of us to ignore the possi-ble interrelatedness of actors from different groups – for examplethe children of the farmers we have identified as a social group.Alternatively, if there are priority disparities between social groups,how does this impact upon achieving or working towards socialsustainability within communities?3. Conceptual framework processThe conceptual framework proposed in this paper is based onthe assumption that a diverse range of social priorities is held byvarious stakeholder and social groups and that this is represen-tative of the wider community. We assert that considering ‘thepublic’ as a single, uniform entity is unhelpful in regards to effec-tive engagement so we target pre-existing social groups for oursample. As Pidgeon [89] states, there are a wide range of views in‘nuclear communities’ which represent a “diverse set of publics” (p.2). We suggest that by understanding this range of priorities anddeveloping ‘priority profiles’ for different social groupings, moreJ. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138 133informed, legitimate and sustainable decisions can be made withincommunities.In terms of process, the approach presented by our concep-tual framework (Fig. 1) is community led and asset based, usingdeliberation to generate community priorities. We aim to initiatea lasting change within communities through building social capi-tal; focusing on community assets not deficits [90]. This approachis being used by Big Local Trust, the £220 m, 15 year UK NationalLottery programme to encourage voluntary action and communitydevelopment to support communities to achieve their own goals.Methodologically, we have also adopted an action orientatedapproach, a cyclical process of: diagnostic research; reflection andaction planning; data gathering; reflection and intervention [91] toprovide structure and rigour to the research process. This approachwas specifically chosen to facilitate research in a fluid situationwhere change is inevitable. Periods of reflection are incorporatedwithin the research process between workshops and will allowassessment of the data in real time as participants’ knowledge andviews are likely to develop. Whilst recognizing the relative limita-tions that are placed on researchers in terms of limited access to theresearch group, the research is action orientated with what Midg-ley [92] calls “action for improvement”. This is the ultimate goal ofthe research and incorporates the purposeful action by an agent tocreate change.We will employ a community visioning process, similar to thatproposed by Ames [1]. This approach comprises five steps to strate-gic visioning, four of which are reflected during the workshopseries. The development of ‘priority profiles’ in Workshop 1 reflectsthe objectives of Step 1 (Where are we now?), developing an inven-tory through descriptive data, and identifying values. In Workshop2 participants are encouraged to develop possible future scenarios(Step 2 – Where are we going?). Finally in Workshop 3, visioning andbackcasting techniques are used to identify preferred sustainablefutures and derive pathways to them (Step 3 – Where do we wantto be? and Step 4 – How do we get there?). The fifth and final stepinvolves implementation and monitoring (Are we getting there?),which is outside the scope of the conceptual framework presentedhere, but is considered as future work. We assert that an effort tomaintain procedural justice throughout the process is essential, toensure a fair and legitimate process. How this will be achieved andmaintained can be discussed with groups at the beginning of theprocess, and revisited throughout the process, so that any notionof fairness can informed by group expectations and feedback.Such processes have been employed previously at the locallevel to, for example, consider local solutions and action towardsclimate change [93,94], processes which can also provide opportu-nities to promote and accelerate participant capacity/social capitalbuilding. As Sheppard et al. [94] note, visioning approaches arebased upon “improved two-way communication and informationtransfer” (p. 401) at community level, and aim to progress frommore conventional, dis-jointed silo thinking [95] of historic plan-ning processes employing more ‘top-down’ approaches. Visioningapproaches commonly employ more ‘bottom-up’, participativemethods and often utilize the experiences and knowledge of localpeople.3.1. Workshop 1The first workshop enables participants to identify prioritiesthat impact on their community, whilst considering criteria thatreflect participants’ interests. The researchers will provide criteriabased on the literature to support participants, as Whitton, Parryand Howe have suggested previously [96]. The approach inten-tionally promotes a ‘citizen’ focus to engagement, from the outsetwe will facilitate trust-building, cooperation and respect betweenparticipants and facilitators.Social sustainability criteria are proposed in reports from Gov-ernment, NGOs, industry [97–99] and academia [24,26,88,100]including commentary on the relevance and legitimacy of suchcriteria in their local context. In conjunction with a discussion ofthese criteria, participants would be encouraged to discuss theirown experiences, knowledge and social priorities. A list of socialsustainability criteria is developed, in the form of a ‘priority pro-file’. We will employ a mixed methods approach [93] to gain adetailed understanding of prioritized issues, accepting that differ-ent participants may favour different methods. We propose thiscontributes to engagement that is fair and inclusive. Turcu [86]employs quantitative methods in her UK study to identify issuesof local priority from those identified in previous studies. We willemploy similar methods to identify group priorities, followed bythe ranking of priorities by participants, in order of importance. Thiswill highlight social group values, and intra-group variation or con-sensus on topics. We suggest that through the early identificationof group priorities, and placing these at the centre of discussions,trust-building with communities can result, which will aid the facil-itation of future dialogue. The outcome of the first workshop is aprimary priority profile for each social group, the first stage of acommunity visioning process. This outcome will allow us to reflecton the early findings and plan the second workshop as part of ouraction orientated approach.3.2. Workshop 2We will facilitate the development of a community-led narrativeat the second workshop, which will contextualize the communityprofiles (e.g. regarding proposed energy developments). In refer-ence to our conceptual framework, this reflects ‘dialogue framing’.The priority profile of the group will be discussed within this con-text, to identify whether priorities change or become less or moreimportant.By contextualizing, the group will be encouraged to deliberateand develop a series of desirable futures, representative of Step2 (Where are we going?) of the five steps of community visioningproposed by Ames [1]. Futures will be based on a context (energydevelopments) and the priority profile of the group. The objective ofthis deliberation is to understand what futures may be desirable toeach group and the social priorities such futures would be based on.We also aim to test practical methods that can support the commu-nity visioning process such as visual and graphical methods. These‘visual minutes’ will be used to develop an image of the deliberationand a visual representation of a desirable future. The main outcomeof the second workshop is a series of desirable future scenarios tobe evaluated by the facilitation team.As discussed previously in reference to our action orientatedapproach, periods of reflection are incorporated between work-shops and will allow assessment of the data in real time asparticipants’ knowledge and views are likely to develop. Consid-ering procedural justice as an overarching theme of our work, wewill demonstrate that whilst community priorities are the focusof the process we will also record how perceptions and prioritieschange as capacity among participants increases. This is necessaryto promoting a greater sense of ownership of the visioning processand outcomes.3.3. Workshop 3The third and final workshop provides an opportunity for eachgroup to provide feedback on the scenario presented by the facil-itation team. Each social group participant will be provided witha workshop summary to promote an awareness of how work hasprogressed and informed the development of scenarios. Group vali-dation of this ‘sustainable future’ is important as it ensures the local134 J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138Workshop 1(per group) Deliberave Dialogue - Establishing Sustainability CriteriaSocial GroupSocial GroupSocial GroupSocial GroupProcedural Jusce (throughout)OUTPUT – PRIORITY PROFILE (RANKING OF CRITERIA)OUTPUT – DF SCENARIOS(VISIONING)Workshop 2(per grou p)Deliberave Dialogue - Criteria Priorisaon and Desirable Futures (DF)DEVELOPMENT OF DF OPTIONS BY RESEARCHERWorkshop 3(per group)Validaon and Deliberave Dialogue – DF Selecon from Opons and Necessary Steps OUTPUT – PATHWAY TO SUSTAINABLE FUTURE(BACKCASTING)Dial ogue FramingFig. 1. Conceptual framework for the establishment and prioritization of sustainability criteria with various community-level social groups, and developing sustainablefuture pathways.legitimacy of what has been developed, and further supports thewhole-process aim of achieving procedural justice.A backcasting approach will be used to identify a developmentpathway in order to reach this future. Key stages will be identifiedby the group, working from the end scenario back to the presentday, establishing what must be done to achieve this desired and sus-tainable future. Referring back to the five steps of strategic visioningproposed by Ames [1], this workshop reflects Step 3 (Where do wewant to be?) which involves identifying preferred futures, and Step4 (How do we get there?) which involves determining the actionswhich enable this future to be attained through the developmentof an action plan.Developmental pathways will be generated by each socialgroup, evaluated following the workshop series to find commoninter-group themes and priorities. This will inform future engage-ment and public participation in the locality, promote trust buildingand demonstrate greater legitimacy. These pathways are not iden-tified in order to fracture or divide a community, but to understandits complexity and work towards robust, sustainable decision mak-ing, which is legitimately informed, by locally defined prioritiesand inter-generational support. We support the notion that societaldifferences are to be acknowledged and embraced within deci-sion making processes. As Dryzek suggests in his promotion of atheory of discursive democracy, these processes should embrace“the necessity to communicate across difference without erasingdifference” [19: 170]. This can produce a socially convergent devel-opment pathway at the local level which should be – as Dryzekproposes to be the feasible and attractive outcome of deliberationand foundation of consensus – based upon “workable agreementsin which participants agree on a course of action, but for differentreasons” [19].4. DiscussionAny attempts towards the control of engagement process par-ticipants by a convening government or organization, or betweenparticipants themselves, would appear to work against those idealsof fairness and the discursive validity of the freedom to partici-pate and influence decisions, proposed by Habermas. The authorstresses the need for greater levels of participation in all areas oflife where important public decisions are made, but White [101]highlights that Habermas provides us with little information onwhat type of institutional forms are appropriate for this purpose.We concur with Habermas, who does not propose democratic insti-tutional control by its citizens, but rather that the principle ofparticipation should act as a burden of proof on the conveningorganization to demonstrate why there could not be greater par-ticipation in decisions which affect citizens and communities. AsRowe and Frewer point out [50], the concept of fairness also relatesto the public acceptance of a particular process of participation.4.1. Fairness and justiceWe agree with Reed [59]; that the structure of a conveninginstitution or body and its ability to institutionalize stakeholderengagement as a method to influence strategy is also fundamentalto successful engagement and understanding the current approachadopted. Many of the limitations experienced in participatory pro-cesses have their roots in the organizational cultures of thosewho sponsor or participate in them. For example, non-negotiablepositions, or as was evident in our UK research a lack of clarityregarding the influence of participants, may simply be the result ofpre-determined positions decided at higher levels within the orga-nization, prior to participation in the process, that representativesdo not feel able to negotiate.When considering fairness within our conceptual framework,we have drawn heavily on justice theory to support our asser-tions regarding participation and deliberation. This is concurrentwith a growing critique and emerging consensual rejection by aca-demics of the popular NIMBY (Not In My Back Yard) perspective. Itdescribes the behaviour of individuals who claim or appear to sup-port, commonly, renewable energy projects in principle but opposesuch developments in their local area or ‘back yard’ [102], oftenleading to hypocrisy-based criticisms. However, for more than adecade an increasing number of authors have deemed the NIMBYconcept to be short sighted, simplistic and lacking in empiricaland theoretical vigour, particularly in the wind power literature[102–107]. As Walter [108] asserts, the NIMBY perspective has now“largely been abandoned as a research paradigm” (p. 78).The notion of justice, in broad legalistic terms, relates to fairnessand righteousness [109, cited in 10]. When considered in terms ofenergy and societies, the definition becomes gains complexity andJ. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138 135integrates numerous themes. In their recent article on socio-energysystems, Miller, Richter and O’Leary [110] describe the nature ofenergy systems and energy transitions as being deeply socially,economically and politically embedded. They describe justice interms of human outcome distribution, i.e. power and voice distribu-tion within energy decision-making and the deeper energy–societyrelationships which emerge from their interaction. In constructingour conceptual framework, we have incorporated this notion ofthe distribution of power and voice in decision-making, promot-ing greater understanding and centralisation of local issues andplace-based matters to facilitate increased legitimacy and justiceduring decision-making processes. We propose a communicativepower-shift during these processes, whereas local context and thepriorities of local people are central within ‘upstream’, primarylevel discussions, as opposed to the dominance of expert-level dis-cussions establishing the energy-related ‘problems’ or ‘challenges’at hand, in absence of place-based considerations and citizenperspectives. This works to further acknowledge the integratedrelationship of energy systems and local societies, the importanceof meaningful engagement with ‘affected citizens’, and the critical-ity of realizing and ensuring justice for citizen groups throughoutdecision-making processes.Distributive and procedural justice are also examples of themeswe have been found to be important, explanatory factors inresearch concerned with energy-related policy and decision-making and stakeholder engagement processes. Whitton [9]concentrates on the dialogue used to engage participants and a con-cept of fairness, by empowering stakeholders not just to considerwhether a meeting or process has been a ‘success’, but also to con-sider their role in the dialogue process and how they perceive theirinfluence on the decisions made. Influence through deliberationis considered by the author to add to this concept of fairness. Bymoving away from purely technocratic decision-making towards adeliberative model of engagement informed by technical special-ists, stakeholders can realize a level of influence through fair andsocially sustainable dialogue. This is discussed in terms of the reci-procity; between stakeholders involved in the engagement processand the decisions made.As Walter [108] notes, theories of distributive justice explainperceptions of fairness relating to the distribution of outcomesfrom specific resources or projects, where fairness may be assessedby comparing outcome distributions against principles of fairnesssuch as equity and need (e.g. [111]). Others describe distributivejustice as relating to individual perceptions of fairness regardingoutcome distributions or allocations [10]. In contrast, theories ofprocedural justice are concerned with individual perceptions offairness towards processes and decision-making procedures [10],and are explained by structural and relational models [108]. Struc-tural models demonstrate how perceived justice is influencedby “structural procedure characteristics” [10: 78], such as duringpublic engagement processes, whereas relational models are con-cerned with the development of sustainable relationships betweenauthorities and citizens, through an understanding of the charac-teristics and behaviour of authorities (e.g. [112, cited in 108]), whichcan impact stakeholder trust and support.4.2. Place-based approachesOur framework clearly supports a context-based approach asthe most appropriate so as to ensure procedural legitimacy andultimately, greater public support. Wolsink [113] argues thatcase-specific variables are most critical in order to achieve localacceptance, and the utilization of general attitudes towards a tech-nology should be avoided in predicting local acceptance of windprojects. Batel and Devine-Wright [43] (2015), in their work onpublic responses to large scale energy infrastructures, suggestthat instead of a site-based approach, a place-based approachmay be more beneficial for understanding people’s beliefs aboutenergy infrastructures, by gathering and utilizing more in-depthand context-specific information. As Pidgeon and Demski [114]highlight, understanding and considering the different character-istics of places and how places are constructed by those wholive there is important to understand response patterns to large-scale infrastructures. More recently, Batel and Devine-Wright [43]suggest that policies for infrastructural deployment, and indeedpublic support for developments, may be impacted by an approachwhich enables greater understanding of public responses in differ-ent places. Therefore, in association with our conceptual frameworkwhich promotes a priority-based approach identifying local condi-tions and values, we suggest that a ‘case and place-based’ approachwould assist in facilitating more legitimate decision-making andcontribute towards social sustainability locally through increasedtrust and empowerment. We propose that the structural pro-cedure characteristics of such an approach – a priority-basedapproach, utilizing in-depth, context-specific information to placelocal stakeholders and ‘case and place-based’ constructs at the coreof dialogue during decision-making – result in greater proceduraljustice through increased perceptions of relevance and legitimacy,acknowledgement of local context, and stakeholder involvement.As Miller, Richter and O’Leary [110] point out, for many decadesenergy policy institutions have operated out of the public eye andwith minimal public involvement, and now face new challengesas the public becomes more attentive and responsive to energychoices. Transitions in socio-energy systems, particularly concern-ing large-scale energy infrastructure and contentious technologiessuch as nuclear power, produce wide ranging social impacts andresult in power reconfigurations across communities. These haveled to widespread social protest and conflict surrounding energypolicy decisions [110], realities which further support a shift toan approach to local decision-making, as we propose, promotinggreater aspects of procedural justice. The conceptual frameworkencourages decision-making facilitators to become familiar withthose local stakeholder groups potentially impacted more greatlyby the socio-energy systems which they inhabit and the transitionsoccurring within them.4.3. Socio-energy systemsMiller et al. [110] suggest four strategic directions to transformenergy policy into processes for socio-energy system design. Oneof these avenues – socializing energy policy – proposes the needfor new strategies to integrate human and social dimensions into“processes of energy design, planning, and policy-making”, requir-ing “understanding, acknowledging, and incorporating the waysin which people inhabit energy systems” (p. 36). Our conceptualframework demonstrates a contribution towards such an objective,through its focus on understanding local stakeholder group prior-ities, values and preferences and contributing this knowledge intoenergy-related decision-making. It provides further opportunity tounderstand how individuals inhabit and perceive socio-energy sys-tems and any changes, such as new infrastructural developments,occurring within these systems. A second avenue proposed by theauthors – publicizing energy policy – is also contributed to by theapproach proposed here, in its engagement of stakeholder groupsand consideration of how energy changes are to impact upon thesepublics. As Devine-Wright [81] highlights, people are increasinglyaware of energy system transformations, and of their potentialimpacts, and are therefore increasingly demanding to participatein and influence energy policy. Despite this, and whilst acknowl-edging that future socio-energy systems should be envisionedand designed through energy industry and community collabora-tions, Miller et al. [110] identify challenges surrounding developing136 J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138new methodologies to devise “future energy pathways on multi-ple scales and temporalities” (p. 37), concurrent to the dearth ofopportunities available to communities to become engaged in suchstrategic processes. We propose that our conceptual frameworkapproach contributes towards these ‘publicising’ objectives withinsocio-energy systems, through deliberative engagement with localstakeholders and facilitating a dialogue in which their prioritiesand visions for the future are understood and utilized in decision-making processes.The literature highlights a community-led desire to becomemore involved in decision-making processes, particularly regardinglarge-scale developments which can potentially impact upon thesocial, environmental and economic fabric of society [34,115–118].Continuing at the current level of community participation indecision-making may negatively impact upon the social sustaina-bility of local communities, such as Anglesey, if decisions are madewithout those whom they impact upon most greatly, or withouttheir tangible influence. The conceptual framework proposed forsocial sustainability represents a radical shift in the organizationalculture of government agencies and other institutions. Clearly,access to and how citizens engage with institutions and decision-makers is an important aspect of social sustainability and will formthe basis of our future research.5. ConclusionsDespite public engagement initiatives to discuss energy devel-opments, there is currently an absence of process or appropriatedialogue to illicit a sustainable community response to the plannedclosure of many energy generation sites or the development of newenergy infrastructure, such as shale gas in the UK. We propose a sys-temic, community led, asset based approach to societal dialogue;one that captures the views and concerns of the wider stakeholdercommunity and is able to inform views/decision-making at thecommunity level and inform strategic levels of decision-making.Our conceptual framework will allow us to derive a systemic viewof community-led priorities – that is, the social construction ofaffected communities. In addition, it will allow us to contribute toa concept of fairness when engaging with communities.This community-led conceptual framework for social sustaina-bility operates on two levels. The first allows communities to definetheir priorities and understand how social sustainability may beconstructed, as either as a social group or as a community collectiveof individuals. The second is to produce clear views from the com-munity to inform institutional and governmental decision-makers.To achieve this, we will carry out action orientated research, epis-temologically similar to that outlined by Whitton [46]. We arecurrently in the process of testing the framework and the valid-ity of criteria and have recently completed fieldwork in Anglesey,North Wales with young people to discuss a wide range of energyperception issues – not least their views on energy developmentsand sustainable communities.References[1] Ames S. Community visioning. In: Steiner FR, Butler K, editors. Planning andurban design standards. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons; 2006. p. 39–40.[2] Cuthill M. Strengthening the ‘social’ in sustainable development: developing aconceptual framework for social sustainability in a rapid urban growth regionin Australia. Sustain Dev 2010;18:362–73, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sd.397.[3] Lapachelle P, Emery M, Hays RL. The pedagogy and the practice of commu-nity visioning: evaluating effective community strategic planning in ruralMontana. Commun Dev 2010;41(2):176–91.[4] McKinlay P. The challenge of democratic participation in the communitydevelopment process. Commun Dev J 2006;41(4):492–505.[5] Murtagh B. City visioning and the turn to community: the case ofDerry/Londonderry. Plan Pract Res 2001;16(1):9–19.[6] Webler T, Tuler S, Kreuger R. What is a good public participation pro-cess? Five perspectives from the public. Environ Manag 2001;27(3):435–50,http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002670010160.[7] Magis K, Shinn C. Emergent themes of social sustainability. In: Dillard J, DujonV, King MC, editors. Understanding the social aspect of sustainability. NewYork: Routledge; 2009.[8] Whitton J. Stakeholder participation for the Legacy Ponds and Legacy Silos(LP&LS) facility at Sellafield, Cumbria, UK: the nature and effectiveness of thedialogue. In: Proceedings of ICEM ’09. 2009.[9] Whitton J. Participant perceptions on the nature of stakeholder dialogue car-ried out by the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority (NDA) [Ph.D. thesis]. UK:University of Manchester; 2010.[10] Walker BJA, Wiersma B, Bailey E. Community benefits, framing and the socialacceptance of offshore wind farms: an experimental study in England. EnergyRes Soc Sci 2014;3:46–54, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2014.07.003.[11] Lawless WF, Akiyoshi M, Angjellari-Dajci F, Whitton J. Public con-sent for the geological disposal of highly radioactive nuclearwastes and spent nuclear fuel. Int J Environ Stud 2014;71(1):41–62,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207233.2014.881165.[12] Innes JE, Booher DE. Reframing public participation: strate-gies for the 21st century. Plan Theory Pract 2004;5(4):419–36,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1464935042000293170.[13] Lake RW, Hanson S. Needed: geography research on urban sustainability.Urban Geogr 2000;21(1):1–4, http://dx.doi.org/10.2747/0272-3638.21.1.1.[14] Yitfachel O, Hedgcock D. Urban social sustainability: theplanning of an Australian city. Cities 1993;11(2):139–57,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0264-2751(93)90045-K.[15] Jones R, Tonts M. Rural restructuring and social sustainability: some reflec-tions on the Western Australian wheatbelt. Aust Geogr 1995;26(2):133–40,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00049189508703142.[16] Raven RPJM, Jolivet E, Mourik RM, Feenstra YCFJ. ESTEEM: manag-ing societal acceptance in new energy projects. A toolbox methodfor project managers. Technol Forecast Soc Change 2009;76:963–77,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2009.02.005.[17] Raven RPJM, Mourik RM, Feenstra YCFJ, Heiskanen E. Modu-lating societal acceptance in new energy projects: towards atoolkit methodology for project managers. Energy 2009;34:564–74,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2008.08.012.[18] Beck U, Giddens A, Lash S. Reflexive modernization. Politics, traditionand aesthetics in the modern social order. Stanford University Press;1994.[19] Dryzek JS. Deliberative democracy and beyond: liberals, critics, contestations.Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 2000.[20] Flood RL. The relationship of systems thinking to action research. Syst PractAction Res 2010;23:269–84, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11213-010-9169-1.[21] Jackson MC. Systems methodology for the management sciences. New York:Plenum; 1991.[22] Welch C. Guest editorial to special edition. System 2009;31(2&3):43–4.[23] Bijl R. Never waste a good crisis: towards social sustainable development. SocIndic Res 2011;102:157–68, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11205-010-9736-y.[24] Sachs I. Social sustainability and whole development: exploring the dimen-sions of sustainable development. In: Egon B, Thomas J, editors. Sustainabilityand the social sciences: a cross-disciplinary approach to integrating envi-ronmental considerations into theoretical reorientation. London: Zed Books;1999. p. 25–36.[25] Littig B, Grießler E. Social sustainability: a catchword between politi-cal pragmatism and social theory. Int J Sustain Dev 2005;8(1/2):65–76,http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJSD.2005.007375.[26] Dempsey N, Bramley G, Power S, Brown C. The social dimension of sus-tainable development: defining urban social sustainability. Sustain Dev2011;19:289–300, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sd.417.[27] Vallance S, Perkins HC, Dixon JE. What is social sustainability? A clarificationof concepts. Geoforum 2011;42:342–8.[28] Devine-Wright P, Devine-Wright H, Sherry-Brennan F. Visible tech-nologies, invisible organisations: an empirical study of public beliefsabout electricity supply networks. Energy Policy 2010;38:4127–34,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.039.[29] Krütli P, Stauffacher M, Flüeler T, Scholz RW. Functional-dynamicpublic participation in technological decision-making: site selection pro-cesses of nuclear waste repositories. J Risk Res 2010;13(7):861–75,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13669871003703252.[30] Cotton M, Devine-Wright P. Putting pylons into place: a UK casestudy of public perspectives on the impacts of high voltage over-head transmission lines. J Environ Plan Manag 2012;56(8):1225–45,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2012.716756.[31] Cotton M, Devine-Wright P. Making electricity networks “visible”:industry actor representations of “publics” and public engagementin infrastructure planning. Public Underst Sci 2012;21(1):17–35,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963662510362658.[32] Cowell R, Bristow G, Munday M. Acceptance, acceptability andenvironmental justice: the role of community benefits in windenergy development. J Environ Plan Manag 2011;54(4):539–57,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2010.521047.J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138 137[33] Rojanamon R, Chaisomphob T, Bureekul T. Public participation in devel-opment of small infrastructure projects. Sustain Dev 2012;20:320–34,http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sd.473.[34] Shamsuzzoha AHM, Grant A, Clarke J. Implementation of renewable energy inScottish rural area: a social study. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:185–91,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2011.07.146.[35] Lidskog R, Sundqvist G. On the right track? Technology, geology and soci-ety in Swedish nuclear waste management. J Risk Res 2004;7(2):251–68,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1366987042000171924.[36] Dawson JI, Darst RG. Meeting the challenge of permanent nuclear waste dis-posal in an expanding Europe: transparency, trust democracy. Environ Polit2006;15(4):610–27, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09644010600785226.[37] WCMRWS (West Cumbria Managing Radioactive Waste Safely Partnership).The final report of the West Cumbria managing radioactive waste safely part-nership. Copeland, UK: Copeland Borough Council; 2012. Available at: http://www.westcumbriamrws.org.uk/images/final-report.pdf [accessed 12.02.13].[38] Aas Ø, Devine-Wright P, Tangeland T, Batel S, Ruud A. Public beliefsabout high-voltage powerlines in Norway, Sweden and the UnitedKingdom: a comparative survey. Energy Res Soc Sci 2014;2:30–7,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2014.04.012.[39] Walker G. Renewable energy and the public. Land Use Policy 1995;12:49–59.[40] Wustenhagen R, Wolsink M, Burer MJ. Social acceptance of renewableenergy innovation: an introduction to the concept. Energy Policy 2007;35:2683–91.[41] Burningham K. Using the language of NIMBY: a topic for research, not anactivity for researchers. Local Environ Int J Justice Sustain 2000;5:55–67.[42] Devine-Wright P. Rethinking NIMBYism: the role of place attachment andplace identity in explaining place-protective action. J Commun Appl SocPsychol 2009;19:426–41.[43] Batel S, Devine-Wright P. A critical and empirical analysis of the national-local‘gap’ in public responses to large-scale energy infrastructures. J Environ PlanManag 2015;58(6):1076–95.[44] Aaltonen K, Jaakko K, Tuomas O. Stakeholder saliencein global projects. Int J Proj Manag 2008;26:509–16,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2008.05.004.[45] Mitchell RK, Agle BR, Wood DJ. Toward a theory of stakeholder identifica-tion and salience: defining the principle of who and what really counts. AcadManag Rev 1997;22(4):853–86.[46] Whitton J. Emergent themes in nuclear decommissioning dialogue: a systemsperspective. Systemist 2011;33(2/3):132–49.[47] Shapiro I. Enough of deliberation: politics is about interest and power. In:Macedo S, editor. Deliberative politics: essays on democracy and disagree-ment. New York: Oxford University Press; 1999. p. 28–38.[48] Mendelberg T. The deliberative citizen: theory and evidence. Polit Decis MakDelib Particip 2002;6:151–93.[49] Rossi J. Participation run amok: the costs of mass participation for deliberativeagency decision-making. Northwest Univ Law Rev 1997;92:173–249.[50] Rowe G, Frewer LJ. A Typology of Public Engagement Mechanisms. Sci TechHum Val 2005;30(2):251–90.[51] Beierle TC. The quality of stakeholder-based decisions. Risk Anal2002;22(4):739–49, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.00065.[52] Rowe G, Frewer LJ. Public participation methods: a frame-work for evaluation. Sci Tech Hum Values 2000;25(1):3–29,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/016224390002500101.[53] De Marchia B, Ravetz JR. Risk management and governance: a post-normalscience approach. Futures 1999;31:743–57.[54] Funtowicz SO, Ravetz JR. Science for the post-normal age. Futures1993;(September):739–55.[55] Ravetz JR. The post-normal science of precaution. Futures 2004;36:347–57.[56] Ravetz JR. Post-Normal Science and the complexity of transitions towardssustainability. Ecol Complex 2006;3:275–84.[57] Buhr K, Wibeck V. Communication approaches for carbon capture and stor-age: underlying assumptions of limited versus extensive public engagement.Energy Res Soc Sci 2014;3:5–12.[58] Irvin R, Stansbury J. Citizen participation in decision making: is it worth theeffort? Public Adm Rev 2004;64:55–65.[59] Reed MS. Stakeholder participation for environmental man-agement: a literature review. Biol Conserv 2008;141:2417–31,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2008.07.014.[60] Habermas J. Towards a theory of communicative competence. Inquiry1970;13:363–72.[61] Habermas J. Theory of communicative action, vol. 2: reason and the rational-ization of society. Boston: Beacon Press; 1987.[62] van Stokkom B. Deliberative group dynamics: power, status andaffect in interactive policy making. Policy Polit 2005;33(3):387–409,http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/0305573054325701.[63] Cabinet Office. Consultation Principles. Crown Copyright; 17th July2012 [Updated 5th November 2013]. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/consultation-principles-guidance[accessed25.04.14].[64] Bond A, Palerm J, Haigh P. Public participation in EIA of nuclear power plantdecommissioning projects: a case study analysis. Environ Impact Assess Rev2004;24:617–41, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2004.02.002.[65] Kemp RV, Bennett DG, White MJ. Recent trends and developments in dia-logue on radioactive waste management: experience from the UK. EnvironInt 2006;32:1021–32.[66] Cuppen E, Breukers S, Hisschemöller M, Bergsma E. Q method-ology to select participants for a stakeholder dialogue on energyoptions from biomass in the Netherlands. Ecol Econ 2010;69:579–91,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.09.005.[67] Evans B, Parks J, Theobald K. Urban wind power and theprivate sector: community benefits, social acceptance and pub-lic engagement. J Environ Plan Manag 2011;54(2):227–44,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2010.505829.[68] Energy Act 2004. The Stationary Office, London.[69] DECC. Written ministerial statement by Edward Davey on the managementof radioactive waste. 31st January 2013. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/written-ministerial-statement-by-edward-davey-on-the-management-of-radioactive-waste [accessed 24.04.14].[70] Lawless WF, Bergman M, Feltovich N. Consensus-seeking versustruth-seeking. ASCE Hazard Toxic Radioact Wastes 2005;9(1):59–70,http://dx.doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)1090-025X(2005)9:1(59).[71] US DOE SSAB 2008. Available online at: www.em.doe.gov/Pages/ssab.aspx(accessed 21.09.08).[72] Bradbury JA, Branch KM, Malone EL. An evaluation of DOE-EM public par-ticipation programs (PNNL-14200). Online report; 2003. Available at: http://www.pnl.gov/main/publications/external/technical reports/pnnl-14200.pdf[73] CEC. White Paper 2001. European Governance (COM (2001) 428 final; Brus-sels, 25.7.2001). Brussels: Commission of the European Community.[74] US DOE-SRS-CAB. 2008. DOE Savannah River Site Citizens AdvisoryBoard website. Available online at: http://cab.srs.gov/srs-cab.html [accessed02.05.14].[75] Holmes OW. Dissent: Abrams v. United States; 1919.[76] Robertson PJ, Choi T. Deliberation, consensus and stake-holder satisfaction. Public Manag Rev 2012;14(1):83–103,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14719037.2011.589619.[77] Cabinet Office. A summary of opinion poll about nuclear power. (“Gen-shiryoku ni kansuru tokubetsu yoron chosa no gaiyou”). Cabinet Office, TheGovernment of Japan; 2009.[78] Ishibashi K. Earthquake induced nuclear power plant failure (“Genpatsu Shni-sai”). Kagaku 1997;67:720–4.[79] Wakamatsu Y, Available at: http://www.nsr.go.jp/archive/jnes/tokushu/taiwa3/index.html [accessed 21.04.14] Civic Engagement (“Sanka surushimin”); 2005.[80] Bell D, Gray T, Haggett C. Policy, participation and the ‘social gap’in wind farm siting decisions. Environ Polit 2005;14(4):460–77,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09644010500175833.[81] Devine-Wright P. Renewable energy and the public: from NIMBY to partici-pation. London, UK: Earthscan; 2011.[82] Planning Act. Chapter 29. London: The Stationary Office; 2008.[83] Localism Act. Chapter 20. London: The Stationary Office; 2011.[84] BRC. Blue Ribbon Commission on America’s Nuclear Future. In: Report (Final)to the Secretary of Energy, Washington, DC; 2012.[85] Checkland PB. Systems thinking, systems practice. Chichester: Wiley; 1981.[86] Turcu C. Re-thinking sustainability indicators: local perspectivesof urban sustainability. J Environ Plan Manag 2013;56(5):695–719,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2012.698984.[87] Reed M, Dougill AJ. Participatory selection process for indicators ofrangeland condition in the Kalahari. Geogr J 2002;168(3):224–34,http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1475-4959.00050.[88] Parry IM. Public opinion and perceptions of risk towards local nuclear powerin Anglesey, north Wales [M.Sc. thesis]. UK: Keele University; 2011.[89] Pidgeon N. Memorandum on public attitudes and nuclear power. In: Houseof Lords Science and Technology Committee Inquiry on ‘Nuclear R&D Capa-bilities’. 2011.[90] NCVO. Big local: the early years; 2015.[91] Coghlan D, Brannick T. Doing action research in your own organization. Lon-don: Sage Publications; 2005.[92] Midgley G. Science as systemic intervention: some implications of systemsthinking and complexity for the philosophy of science. Syst Pract Action Res2003;16(2):77–97.[93] Shaw A, Sheppard SRJ, Burch S, Flanders D, Wiek A, Carmichael J, et al. Makinglocal futures tangible – synthesizing, downscaling, and visualizing climatechange scenarios for participatory capacity building. Glob Environ Change2009;19:447–63.[94] Sheppard SRJ, Shaw A, Flanders D, Burch S, Wiek A, Carmichael J, et al.Future visioning of local climate change: a framework for communityengagement and planning with scenarios and visualization. Futures 2011;43:400–12.[95] Busby P. Carbon neutrality: now is the time for action. Renew Can Lett 2009:5.[96] Whitton J, Parry IM, Howe JM. Social sustainability: participant-led dialogueas a basis for the development of a conceptual framework for energy infra-structure decisions. Int J Sustain Policy Pract 2014;9(3):1–13. Available at:http://ijspp.cgpublisher.com/product/pub.274/prod.78[97] DEFRA. Measuring Progress: Sustainable Development Indicators 2010.National Statistics Compendium. Crown Copyright, 2010. Available at: http://sd.defra.gov.uk/documents/SDI2010 001.pdf [accessed 13.08.12].138 J. Whitton et al. / Energy Research & Social Science 8 (2015) 127–138[98] ODPM. The Egan review: skills for sustainable communities. London: Officeof the Deputy Prime Minister; 2004.[99] OECD. Society at a Glance 2011 – OECD Social Indicators. The Organisationfor Economic Co-operation and Development; 2011. Available at: www.oecd.org/els/social/indicators/SAG [accessed 29.08.12].[100] Colantonio A. Social Sustainability: An exploratory Analysis of its Definition,Assessment Methods, Metrics and Tools. OISD (EIB) (Oxford Institute for Sus-tainable Development) (European Investment Bank) Working Paper No. 1;2007.[101] White SK. Reason and authority in Habermas: a critique of the critics. AmPolit Sci Rev 1980;74(4):1007–17. Available at: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1954320?origin=JSTOR-pdf [accessed 09.10.14].[102] Petrova MA. NIMBYism revisited: public acceptance of wind energy in theUnited States. Wiley Int Rev: Clim Change 2013;4(Nov/Dec (6)):575–601.[103] Devine-Wright P. Local aspects of UK renewable energy development: explor-ing public beliefs and policy implications. Local Environ: Int J Justice Sustain2005;10(1):57–69.[104] Devine-Wright P. Rethinking NIMBYism: the role of place attachment andplace identity in explaining place-protective action. J Commun Appl SocPsychol 2006;19:426–41.[105] Jones CR, Eiser JR. Identifying predictors of attitudes towards local onshorewind development with reference to an English case study. Energy Policy2009;37:4604–14.[106] Wolsink M. Wind power and the NIMBY-myth: institutional capacityand the limited significance of public support. Renew Energy 2000;21:49–64.[107] Wolsink M. Wind power implementation: the nature of public attitudes:equity and fairness instead of ‘backyard motives’. Renew Sustain Energy Rev2007;11:1188–207.[108] Walter G. Determining the local acceptance of wind energy projects inSwitzerland: the importance of general attitudes and project characteristics.Energy Res Soc Sci 2014;4:78–88.[109] Macquarie CCH. The CCH Macquarie dictionary of law. Sydney: CCH AustraliaLimited; 1996.[110] Miller CA, Richter J, O’Leary J. Socio-energy systems design: a policy frame-work for energy transitions. Energy Res Soc Sci 2015;6:29–40.[111] (a) Skitka LJ, Winquist J, Hutchinson S. Are outcome fairness and outcomefavorability distinguishable psychological constructs a meta-analytic review.Soc Justice Res 2003;16(4):309–41;(b) Walker BJA, Wiersma B, Bailey E. Community benefits, framingand the social acceptance of offshore wind farms: an exper-imental study in England. Energy Res Soc Sci 2014;3:46–54,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2014.07.003.[112] Tyler TR, Lind EA. A relational model of authority in groups. In: Zanna MP,editor. Advances in experimental social psychology, vol. 25. San Diego, CA:Academic Press; 1992. p. 115–91.[113] Wolsink M. Undesired reinforcement of harmful ‘self-evident truths’ concern-ing the implementation of wind power. Energy Policy 2012;48:83–7.[114] Pidgeon N, Demski C. From nuclear to renewable: energy systems transfor-mation and public attitudes. Bull Atomic Sci 2012;68(4):1–12.[115] Bronfman NC, Jiménez RB, Arévalo PC, Cifuentes LA. Understanding socialacceptance of electricity generation sources. Energy Policy 2012;46:246–52,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.03.057.[116] Doukas H, Karakosta C, Flamos A, Psarras J. Electric power transmission:an overview of associated burdens. Int J Energy Res 2011;35:979–88,http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/er.1745.[117] Glasson J. Better monitoring for better impact management: thelocal socio-economic impacts of constructing Sizewell B nuclearpower station. Impact Assess Project Apprais 2005;23(3):215–26,http://dx.doi.org/10.3152/147154605781765535.[118] Rogers JC, Simmons EA, Convery I, Weatherall A. Public perceptions ofopportunities for community-based renewable energy projects. Energy Policy2008;36:4217–26, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2008.07.028.