ABSTRACT: 
Energy security remains a vital issue for the European Union (EU), even more so in the wake of the events that unfolded in early 2014 in Ukraine. The EU’s already fragile position in the international energy arena in terms of security of supply appears to be more uncertain than ever after its umpteenth fallout with its historic energy supplier, Russia. This situation is untenable and calls for swift and decisive action to adequately tackle the issue once and for all. The article looks at the creation of a single EU energy market through integration of energy networks in the EU. It then examines various ways to diversify the EU’s energy supply, whether through increasing the import of liquefied natural gas, through its relations with the Eurasian Union, the promotion of renewable energy or the construction of alternative pipelines and energy routes. The article then offers an analysis of the latest developments of the Energy Charter Conference. The article concludes that from energy transit, to technology transfer, to investment protection, energy and trade present interplays across various fields. Improvements can be made to the EU trading system to ensure greater energy security and more efficient energy markets. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we discuss the relation between security of energy and its  security of infrastructure '' .<n> we also address the question of security of energy by considering the case of a single energy reservoir .<n> we show that in the case of a single energy reservoir a security of infrastructure can be defined in terms of a  state of infrastructure '' .<n> we argue that in the case of a single energy reservoir a security of infrastructure can be defined in terms of a  state of engineering '' .<n> we show that in the case of a single energy reservoir a  state of engineering '' can be defined in terms of a  state of control '' .<n> we also show that in the case of a single energy reservoir a  state of control '' can be defined in terms of a  state of manipulation '' .<n> we consider the case of a single energy reservoir .<n> we show that in the case of a single energy reservoir a  state of control '' can be defined in terms of a  state of engineering '' .<n> we show that in the case of a single energy reservoir a  state of control '' can be defined in terms of a  state of manipulation '' .<n> we show that in 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 The European Union and its energy security challenges: engagementthrough and with networksLeal-Arcas, R; Rios, JA; Grasso, C © Informa UK Limited, an Informa Group Company For additional information about this publication click this link.http://qmro.qmul.ac.uk/xmlui/handle/123456789/10030 Information about this research object was correct at the time of download; we occasionallymake corrections to records, please therefore check the published record when citing. Formore information contact scholarlycommunications@qmul.ac.ukThis article was downloaded by: [169.255.160.239]On: 14 July 2015, At: 08:21Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: 5 Howick Place, London, SW1P 1WGClick for updatesContemporary PoliticsPublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ccpo20The European Union and its energysecurity challenges: engagementthrough and with networksRafael Leal-Arcasa, Juan Alemany Ríosb & Costantino Grassoba European and International Economic Law, Centre forCommercial Law Studies, Queen Mary University of London,London, UKb Centre for Commercial Law Studies, Queen Mary University ofLondon, London, UKPublished online: 14 Jul 2015.To cite this article: Rafael Leal-Arcas, Juan Alemany Ríos & Costantino Grasso (2015): TheEuropean Union and its energy security challenges: engagement through and with networks,Contemporary Politics, DOI: 10.1080/13569775.2015.1061242To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13569775.2015.1061242PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLETaylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as tothe accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinionsand views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Contentshould not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sourcesof information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever orhowsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arisingout of the use of the Content.This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsDownloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 The European Union and its energy security challenges: engagementthrough and with networksRafael Leal-Arcasa*, Juan Alemany Ríosb** and Costantino Grassob***aEuropean and International Economic Law, Centre for Commercial Law Studies, Queen Mary Universityof London, London, UK; bCentre for Commercial Law Studies, Queen Mary University of London,London, UKEnergy security remains a vital issue for the European Union (EU), even more so in the wake ofthe events that unfolded in early 2014 in Ukraine. The EU’s already fragile position in theinternational energy arena in terms of security of supply appears to be more uncertain thanever after its umpteenth fallout with its historic energy supplier, Russia. This situation isuntenable and calls for swift and decisive action to adequately tackle the issue once and forall. The article looks at the creation of a single EU energy market through the integration ofenergy networks in the EU. This article then examines various ways to diversify its energysupply, whether through increasing the import of liqueﬁed natural gas or through itsrelations with the Eurasian Union. It then explores the International Energy Charter as anexample of the EU’s engagement with transnational policy networks. It concludes that fromenergy transit, to technology transfer, to investment protection, energy and trade presentinterplays across various ﬁelds. Improvements can be made to the EU trading system toensure greater energy security and more efﬁcient energy markets.Keywords: EU; energy security; single EU energy market; energy supply; natural gas;Eurasian Customs Union1. IntroductionEnergy security remains a vital issue for the European Union (EU), even more so in the wake ofthe events that unfolded in early 2014 in Ukraine. The EU’s already fragile position in the inter-national energy arena in terms of supply security appears to be more uncertain than ever after anumpteenth fallout with its historic energy supplier, Russia. This situation is untenable and calls forswift and decisive action to adequately tackle the issue once and for all.© 2015 Taylor & Francis*Rafael Leal-Arcas, Reader in European and International Economic Law, Queen Mary University ofLondon (Centre for Commercial Law Studies), United Kingdom. 2015 Fellow, Energy Community Sec-retariat. Ph.D. (European University Institute, Florence); JSM (Stanford Law School); LL.M. (ColumbiaLaw School); M.Phil. (London School of Economics and Political Science); BA, LL.B. (Granada Univer-sity). Member of the Madrid Bar. Author of: International Energy Governance: Selected Legal Issues(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2014); Climate Change and International Trade (Edward Elgar Publishing,2013); International Trade and Investment Law: Multilateral, Regional and Bilateral Governance(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2010) and Theory and Practice of EC External Trade Law and Policy(Cameron May, 2008). Email: r.leal-arcas@qmul.ac.uk**Juan Alemany Ríos, Research Associate, Queen Mary University of London (Centre for Commercial LawStudies). LL.M. (in European Law) (Queen Mary University of London); LL.B. (Université Catholique deLouvain). Email: lc13239@qmul.ac.uk***Costantino Grasso, Research Associate, Queen Mary University of London (Centre for Commercial LawStudies). Ph.D. (University of Naples); LL.M. (Queen Mary University of London); International ResearchFellow (Depaul University, Chicago). Qualiﬁed to practise as a solicitor in England and Wales, and as alawyer in Italy. Email: c.grasso@qmul.ac.ukContemporary Politics, 2015http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13569775.2015.1061242Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 In addition to the EU’s energy dependence on the outside world,1 other considerable difﬁcul-ties exist. Firstly, the current regulatory framework on global energy governance is largely multi-layered and fragmented (Leal-Arcas & Filis, 2013a). The absence of both a single internationalorganization that regulates global energy governance as well as a single agreement governingenergy in a comprehensive manner contribute to this legal vacuum at the international stage ona crucial issue. Moreover, the disparate energy realities of the EU member states further aggravatethis lack of cohesiveness within the EU itself by hindering a regional and comprehensive responsefrom the EU (Leal-Arcas & Filis, 2013b, p. 1241).If effective energy security is to be attained by breaking the Russian stronghold on energysupplies, the EU will need to mobilize multiple courses of action, both internally and externally.These measures should seek to enhance the governance of energy trade in order to foster energysecurity. We shall suggest measures and models which could normatively encourage this.First, we will argue that the establishment of a single EU energy market could entail notablebeneﬁts in terms of global energy security through the interconnection of grids and transit ruleswith other regional energy markets.Moreover, we shall contend that the diversiﬁcation of energy supply sources should be aprime concern for the EU. In that sense, all EU member states should seek to trade with asmany suppliers as possible. For instance, European countries should aim to import more liqueﬁednatural gas (LNG) from an array of emerging energy exporters such as Iran, Indonesia, Malaysiaor the USA, for instance. Consequently, the EU should invest in the construction of LNG term-inals scattered all over the European continent.2 Additionally, the construction of (abandoned, insome cases) alternative pipelines and energy routes, such as the Trans-Adriatic pipeline (TAP),the Trans-Anatolian gas pipeline (TANAP), Nabucco, South Stream or the Trans-Saharan gaspipeline, should be encouraged as a means to broaden energy trade relations and diversifyenergy imports. The idea of creating an EU energy union may help make all of this possible.Finally, we shall argue that the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) has considerable potential toplay a determining role in attaining effective EU energy security. This could be the case werethe ECT to be thoroughly revised and strengthened in order to effectively address today’senergy security challenges. Moreover, expanding the Energy Charter’s membership to energy-rich countries in the Middle East, North Africa and the Economic Community of West AfricanStates might enhance EU energy security through the creation of infrastructure that will boostinternational, long-distance trade in energy. In that vein, as of October 2014, the fourth roundof negotiations regarding the creation of an International Energy Charter had been concluded.3The International Energy Charter is intended to be formally adopted and signed at a MinisterialConference in The Hague in 2015. This declaration reﬂects the ambition of the Energy Charter toplay an important role in the evolving architecture of global energy governance, well beyond theinitial Eurasian steps.After this introduction, the article will look at the creation of a single EU energy marketthrough the integration of energy networks in the EU. This article will then examine variousways to diversify its energy supply, whether through increasing the import of LNG or throughits relations with the Eurasian Union and explore the International Energy Charter as anexample of the EU’s engagement with transnational policy networks (TPNs).2. The creation of a single EU energy market2.1. General overviewWhilst the EU, in general, relies on the outside world for over half of its primary energy needs, thelandscape changes vastly from one member state to another (e.g. Denmark is entirely self-sustain-ing, as it covers the totality of its energy needs through its own production, whilst Malta is2 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 completely dependent on energy supplies from abroad).4 These acute disparities in energy reali-ties within the 28 EU member states lead to a certain fragmentation which hampers cohesive EUpolicy-making. In addition, the versatile nature of energy further exacerbates this cleavage, ascertain aspects of energy fall within EU exclusive competence5 or shared competence6between the EU and its member states, whilst others ﬁrmly remain within the sole competenceof member states. Therefore, the EU faces unique challenges, at the moment of taking decisionson the international stage, that are inherent to its one-of-a-kind legal nature and which are notencountered by any other sizeable global actor, such as the USA or Japan, for instance (Leal-Arcas, 2008, p. 70).Notwithstanding the traditional perception of energy policy as a profoundly delicate questionthat should be left to the individual discretion of each EU member state, the interdependencebetween EU member states in this particular ﬁeld has never been so strong in political, economicand technical terms (Delors, Nilsson, Andoura, & Buffetaut, 2012, p. 2). For instance, Germany’sunilateral decision to switch off nuclear power plants without consultation, in the wake of theFukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, triggered the decoupling of energy prices betweenGermany and the Netherlands on one side, and France and Belgium, on the other (Palle, 2013,p. 9). The EU is at a decisive juncture that calls for a comprehensive and solidarity-orientedapproach in energy. If such a resolution is to be achieved,the Europeans need to collectively move on, consigning to the history books their ‘energy patriotism’,their permanent dithering which has led to a situation where it is no longer clear who of the Union andits member states guarantees the shared interests of the peoples of Europe. (Delors, Andoura, & Der-devet, 2013)The creation of the EU ensued from the Treaty Establishing the European Coal and Steel Com-munity, concluded in 1951 between the six EU founding member states (Belgium, France, WestGermany, Italy, the Netherlands and Luxembourg). At the time, this was an unprecedented agree-ment which guaranteed cooperation among these nations in order to assure peace but also preventcompetition between European countries over energy resources.7 In that sense, the EuropeanCommission has, on several occasions, prompted EU member states to remain loyal to theEU’s roots: ‘Europe needs to act now, together, to deliver sustainable, secure and competitiveenergy. In doing so, the EU would return to its roots (… ) the founding member states saw theneed for a common approach to energy.’8For a long time, EU energy policy has exclusively targeted the establishment of the internalenergy market for gas and electricity, or the so-called European energy union, with the strongbelief that such a development would reduce energy prices as well as promote energy security,by pushing for the gradual integration of national markets (Andoura, 2013). The advent of theLisbon Treaty enabled the enshrinement of the concept of solidarity in Article 194.1 of theTreaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), which introduces the TFEU’s TitleXXI on energy. Even though Article 194.1 TFEU expressly calls for solidarity among memberstates in, inter alia, the attainment of effective energy security supply, this provision fails toendow EU institutions with the effective legislative means to fulﬁll this goal (Leal-Arcas &Filis, 2013a). In spite of this unfortunate deﬁciency, the EU gained a formal legal basis fromwhich to derive an energy infrastructure policy as a means to accomplish a true internal energymarket, a development which would constitute an undoubtedly important step towards energysecurity (Palle, 2013, p. 4).The completion of a single EU energy market was set to be accomplished by 2014, with theaspiration that no EU member state would remain isolated from gas and electricity networks after2015.9 Taking into account the crucial importance of the energy sector for Europe’s competitive-ness, welfare and energy independence, the EU cannot afford failure.10 Moreover, a 2014 studyContemporary Politics 3Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 by the European Commission projected that, were this internal energy market to be effectivelycreated, it would entail a net economic beneﬁt ranging from €16 billion to €30 billion per year(Booz & Company et al., 2013, p. 4).In sum, the very disparate realities of each EU member state and the myopic pursuit ofnational interests are proving detrimental to the quest for effective EU energy security. WereEU member states to agree to cooperate and act within a ‘spirit of solidarity’ (as enshrined inArticle 194.1 TFEU), thus enabling the EU to speak with a single voice, this longed-for compre-hensive and regional approach would certainly prove more effective than a myriad of individualand national measures, thereby increasing the EU’s bargaining power at the global stage.2.2. Integration of energy markets between EU member statesFor many years, the EU has encouraged the development of energy networks in a variety of ways:(1) by ﬁnancing, at the European level, the construction of trans-European energy networks;11(2) by adopting measures in order to foster the liberalization and opening up of electricity andgas markets;12 and(3) by creating specialized European bodies to facilitate cooperation between transmissionsystem operators (TSOs)13 and energy regulators, such as the Agency for the Cooperationof Energy Regulators (ACER).The EU’s Third Energy Package,14 adopted in 2009, provides the EU with the necessary regulat-ory and legislative tools to complete a single EU energy market. More speciﬁcally, this legislativepackage tackles issues such as ownership unbundling,15 regulatory oversight and cooperation,network cooperation, transparency, record keeping and access to storage facilities and LNG term-inals by regulating transmission network ownership; ensuring more effective regulatory over-sight; reinforcing consumer protection; regulating third-party access to gas storage; andpromoting regional solidarity among EU member states in the event of a severe disruption ofgas supply.16In spite of calls (Delors & Nilsson, 2012) being made by reputed pundits and think tanks (suchas Notre Europe, for instance) to promote a common response at the EU level through top-downmeasures17 in order to achieve the completion of the internal energy market, to engage in such amovement straight ahead might prove counter-productive. Indeed, successful past experiencesdemonstrate that a regional, bottom-up18 dynamic seems to be more suitable to tackle theissues encountered by the actors involved in the internal energy market, as the latter generallyprefer to work with their neighbours, with whom they tend to share common interests and hard-ships, rather than at the EU level, where it is often difﬁcult to reach a common position (Palle,2013, pp. 5–6).That said, the ultimate objective still remains the successful establishment of a fully ﬂedgedsingle EU energy market. Nonetheless, one may argue that the progressive integration of Euro-pean energy markets through regional initiatives appears to be a more feasible route towardsthis goal than the imposition of binding EU targets, which could disregard national circumstances.Therefore, a collective response is indeed necessary at the EU level. However, given the multi-faceted nature of energy and the divergent realities surrounding each EU member state, a trulyEuropean response might be best achieved through a gradual blending of regional enterprisesthat would hopefully lead to the effective ‘Europeanization’ of the internal energy market.This option seems to have been recognized by the European Commission in one of its com-munications,19 and there are several examples that support our views. For instance, the Nordicpower market (also known as Nord Pool) is a regional success story which proved that regionalinitiatives are well suited to fuse energy markets between EU member states (Palle, 2013, p. 7).4 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 This bottom-up initiative resulted in the integration of the electricity markets of all Nordiccountries (Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden), with the exception of Iceland, and shouldbe shortly expanding to the Baltic States as well as the UK. Further illustrations of such regionalventures include the Pentalateral Energy Forum (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Luxem-bourg, the Netherlands and Switzerland)20 and the Iberian electricity and gas markets (Portugaland Spain), to name a few (Palle, 2013, p. 7). The aim of all these enterprises is to harmonizeprices and operations as well as to optimize cross-border capacity allocation. Thus, market inte-gration favours the emergence of ‘European’ energy prices.Broadly speaking, the security of natural gas supply is a more pressing concern in Central andEastern Europe, whilst environmental considerations tend to underlie the energy policies of mostEU member states located in the North-West of the continent (De Jong & Egenhofer, 2014, p. 2).Regional initiatives which are tailored to address speciﬁc difﬁculties encountered by a particulararea of Europe seem to constitute a preferable alternative to a hasty ‘Schengenization’21 of the EUenergy policy. This perception is further reinforced by the principle of subsidiarity,22 which guar-antees that action is taken at the lowest appropriate level of government. In that respect, the Euro-pean Commission notes thata regional approach has been and will also in the future be decisive for the integration of the Europeanenergy market. It allows for immediate results and can stimulate cross-border exchanges, increasesecurity of supply and facilitate the integration of renewables. Often cooperation in a smallergroup than the entire EU can go faster and can be better suited to address the particular challengesof the region concerned.23The EU has undergone considerable progress over the last few years in its journey towards theeffective materialization of the internal energy market. This drive has engendered a number ofsigniﬁcant developments: wholesale electricity prices have remarkably declined, while themore volatile wholesale gas prices have remained stable since 2008;24 there is a wider range ofchoice for consumers in terms of energy suppliers (European Commission, 2014b); more infra-structure links have been created;25 and cross-border trade in gas and electricity between EUmember states has experienced an upsurge.26In spite of these auspicious advancements, much remains to be done. More concretely, invest-ments should be directed towards the gas sector as a means to end the network isolation to whichBaltic States are subjected, by diversifying the energy supplies in Central-Eastern and South-Eastern Europe.27 In addition, linking the electricity grids within Germany and intra-BalticStates, those of the Iberian Peninsula, and Ireland as well as the UK with the European continent,constitutes a prime concern.28 Further challenges that lie ahead include the creation of an inte-grated offshore grid in the Northern Seas as well as electricity highways that will enable cost-optimal integration of the EU’s substantial offshore and renewables generation in the powersystem.29 On 29 October 2014, EU member states voted in favour of allocating €647 millionto ﬁnance key energy infrastructure projects, three-quarters of which should be completed by2020 (European Commission, 2015). These initiatives will carry the label of ‘projects ofcommon interest’ (PCI), which will entitle them to beneﬁt from more expedient granting pro-cedures as well as an enhanced regulatory treatment.30 These projects will be scattered all overthe European continent and will follow the guidelines instituted by the latest regulation ontrans-European energy infrastructure.31Moreover, the efﬁciency of the current European electricity infrastructure needs to beenhanced by establishing smooth and harmonized rules across Europe; these rules should beadopted by the European Commission (2014a). In addition, public intervention should berestrained, inasmuch as secure energy ﬂows can be guaranteed by the energy market, sincesuch interference may undermine investments in the necessary infrastructure and energy efﬁ-ciency, as well as result in adverse consequences on consumer bills.32 Finally, the role ofContemporary Politics 5Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 consumers within energy markets should become more active and links between wholesale andretail markets further strengthened in order to make the beneﬁts of the European internal energymarket more apparent on the retail level.33In sum, referring vaguely to the concept of solidarity in order to trigger a truly comprehensiveEuropean response towards the completion of the internal energy market seems to be somewhatnaïve and illusory. Our premise is that a cohesive European blueprint may be better achievedthrough the gradual blending of regional initiatives, instead of hastily pressing for an EUcommon position in order to ﬁnalize the European internal energy market. Although a harmo-nized position by the EU would undoubtedly be preferable to an array of discordant nationalmeasures, our premise is more nuanced. Indeed, pushing ipso facto for an EU common positionin such a delicate and versatile matter as energy might prove counter-productive, especially if theEU member states involved lack the political will to do so. Instead, we would suggest that abottom-up, regional approach could be better suited to ﬁnalize the longed-for European energyunion. One may contend that these regional initiatives (which, as outlined earlier, have alreadyproven remarkably successful in the past) composed of states confronted with the sameadversities and pursuing similar goals will eventually merge into a coherent European blueprint.Such an approach might not bring about a truly internal energy market by as hoped for in theshort term. Nonetheless, the advocated resolution presents the advantage of securing the foun-dations of such an ambitious enterprise by guaranteeing the effective commitment of all EUmember states.3. The diversiﬁcation of energy supplies3.1. Increasing the import of LNGLNG34 is increasingly being perceived as providing the most immediate and promising alternativeEU energy source to Russian gas (Stern et al., 2014, p. 29). This is so for a variety of reasons.First, LNG presents the invaluable advantage of transportation ﬂexibility, which enables its effec-tive geographical diversiﬁcation (Brunekreeft & Guliyev, 2009). This point is of vital importancefrom a European perspective, as it would enable the EU to deal with alternative energy markets toRussia’s (such as the USA or Qatar), which are recognized as strategically more reliable, in spiteof involving longer distances, than energy supplies transported via pipelines from and throughconﬂict-ridden or war-torn gateways, as is generally the case. Second, LNG encourages compe-tition in the market. This is because the tankers and LNG terminals (which constitute the capital)are geographically less conﬁned than gas pipelines. Therefore, they enable third parties to enterthe market, thereby increasing competition.Notwithstanding a meager rise in LNG imports to Europe in 2014, European LNG terminals(which enjoy a total re-gasiﬁcation capacity of 200 billion cubic meters per year) have ample sparecapacity, as their re-gasiﬁcation capacity was less than 22% utilized in 2013 (Stern et al., 2014,p. 29). The issues of LNG imports displacing Russian gas revolve around the question ofwhether LNG supplies can actually be delivered to Central and Eastern Europe (i.e. countriessuch as Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovakia almost entirelydepend on Russian energy exports), and whether LNG prices will be competitive with Russiangas. Following an assessment of May 2014 by the Commission,35 Central and Eastern Europeancountries, which are in a particularly vulnerable plight vis-à-vis Russia, have been taking preven-tive measures. For instance, Lithuania is striving to construct a new LNG terminal, in order to storeand re-gasify LNG supplies originating from alternative energy partners (Buchan, 2014, p. 6).This initiative was praised by the European Commission as a pivotal advancement towards thealleviation of the region’s energy hardships, since the Klaipe˙da LNG terminal will readilyensure LNG supplies to all Baltic States, were Russia to cut-off its gas ﬂows (Seputyte, 2014).6 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 In spite of having a considerable total re-gasiﬁcation capacity, European LNG terminals arescattered in a singularly uneven manner across the continent, further deepening the fracture onthe approach adopted by different regions towards energy security. Indeed, most of this re-gasi-ﬁcation capacity is located in North-West Europe (namely Belgium, France, the Netherlands andthe UK) and South-West Europe (Italy, Portugal and Spain), which accounted for a towering97.1% of the total European re-gasiﬁcation capacity; South-East Europe (with only one LNGterminal, based in Greece) merely represented 2.9%, whilst the Baltic region remained idleon this front, as of 2014.36 Notwithstanding notable improvements being undertaken (especiallywith the increase of the network’s capacity to reverse energy ﬂows) following the so-calledsecurity regulation,37 most of the existing European energy infrastructure and grids were orig-inally assembled with the main purpose of delivering Soviet gas to the West and the Southof Europe. In that sense, the somber circumstances surrounding South-East Europe and theBaltic States may only be surmounted through prominent investment in new infrastructure(Stern et al., 2014, p. 37).Over the last few years, the EU has been striving to ﬁnance and foster LNG terminals acrossEurope in order to diversify its sources of supply, thereby revitalizing its energy security. As far asthe ‘danger zones’ alluded to earlier are concerned, the most promising developments seem to bethe Klaipe˙da LNG terminal in Lithuania and the S´winoujs´cie LNG terminal in Poland.38 Indeed,in spite of having a relatively negligible capacity of nine billion cubic metres,39 their inceptionmarks the ﬁrst material steps embodying the yearning within that region to overthrow its historicenergy dependence on Russia. Moreover, these auspicious initiatives have inspired othercountries to follow suit. For instance, Latvia is contemplating the construction of an LNG terminalin Riga; Estonia is working on a number of projects, including Paldiski, Muuga Tallinn and Sil-lamäe LNG terminals; whilst Croatia is considering the construction of a ﬂoating re-gasiﬁcationunit in Krk Island, to name a few (Stern et al., 2014, pp. 38–39). Furthermore, many of theseenterprises enjoy a PCI status, thereby entitling them to signiﬁcant licensing and regulatorybeneﬁts, which should hopefully spur their ﬁnalization.403.2. The Eurasian Customs Union, the Single Economic Space (SES) and the EurasianUnionThe dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), which followed the Bela-vezha Accords,41 ushered in several regional integration initiatives (on the collapse of theSoviet Union – de Tinguy, 1997). As a matter of fact, the Belavezha Accords represent the agree-ments that declared the Soviet Union effectively dissolved and that established, in its place, theCommonwealth of Independent States (CIS). As Hanson argued, although this agreement wassigned on 8 December 1991 in Belovezhskaya Pushcha, the dissolution of the USSR has itsroots in the systemic reform and revolutionary change adopted in the early 1990s (Hanson,2004, p. 531). In the ensuing years, other regional organizations such as the Eurasian EconomicCommunity (EurAsEC) (WIPO, 2000), the Russia–Belarus Union42 and the Collective SecurityTreaty Organisation (CSTO) (ODKB, 2002) were established. Notwithstanding such initiatives,until recently real integration was absent. The situation appears to have changed only in 2010 withthe entry into force of the Eurasian Customs Union and the following set of agreements thatformed the Single Economic Space (SES)43 in 2012 (Libman & Vinokurov, 2012, p. 29).The Eurasian Customs Union (CU) of the Republic of Belarus, the Russian Federation and theRepublic of Kazakhstan represents an integrated customs area which forms part of the EurAsEC.Under such supranational agreement, no customs duties or economic restrictions apply to recipro-cal trade within the Union’s territory. Its geographical area covers more than 20 million sq. kilo-metres and includes an overall population of around 170 million people (see Figures 1 and 2).Contemporary Politics 7Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 The regulatory system adopted by the Eurasian Customs Union resembles that of othercustoms unions. In fact, its supreme body is the Interstate Council (the so-called Mezhgossovet)which, like the European Council, consists of state and government leaders and is presided overby a chairman elected twice a year. Moreover, as of October 2007, a Customs Union Commission(CUC) was established as an executive body, whose main task is to assure a proper functioningand development at the supranational level (Krotov, 2012, p. 130). In accordance with the termsof an agreement with the Russian government, the CUC, whose executive body is the Secretariat,is based in Moscow. This structure represents an absolute innovation in the Eurasian contextbecause, since its beginnings in the 1970s, socialist economic integration traditionally showedconsiderable opposition and reluctance to introducing supranational institutions and, conse-quently, was diametrically opposite in its infrastructural details to the integration strategiespursued in Western Europe (Butler, 2013, p. 604). The Eurasian Customs Union’s legal and regu-latory framework, comprising more than 70 international treaties and more than 900 regulationsissued by the Eurasian Economic Commission, achieved full functionality by the end of 2011(Eurasian Commission, 2013, p. 17).On 18 November 2011, the presidents of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia signed a Declara-tion on Eurasian Economic Integration, predicated on recognition of the success of the CustomsUnion. Consequently, the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council developed a package of inter-national agreements setting out the legal framework that established a SES, to come into effectamong Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia. On 1 January 2012, the SES became eventually oper-ational (Eurasian Commission, 2013, p. 7). The SES represents a further stage of Eurasian Econ-omic Integration and is based on the recognition of the so-called ‘four freedoms’ (i.e. the freemovement of goods, capital, services and people) within the SES (Eurasian Commission,2013, p. 18). The functioning of the SES entails that the member states should pursue coordinatedFigure 1. Eurasian Customs Union’s Geographical Area.Source: The World Bank – Land Area (2010–2014), available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.LND.TOTL.K2.Figure 2. Eurasian Customs Union’s Population (in million of inhabitants).Source: The World Bank – Data by Country (2013), available at http://data.worldbank.org/country.8 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 policies in key areas of their economies (e.g. macroeconomics, the ﬁnancial sector, transportation,energy, trade and industry).On 29 May 2014, the presidents of Kazakhstan, Belarus and Russia signed the agreement onthe Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), also known as Eurasian Union, which came into effect on 1January 2015. In October 2014, a treaty was signed to enlarge the EEU to Armenia (EurasianEconomic Union countries and Armenia arrange to ratify accession agreement soon, 2014). It rep-resents the most recent stage of Eurasian integration. There are prospects that the EEU will be themost advanced organization for regional cooperation that the former Soviet bloc has ever seen, anachievement preceded by many false starts (Vitkine, 2014). According to this project, the Eura-sian Customs Union and the SES represent the two main pillars of the EEU. The establishment ofthe EEU is based on a large codiﬁcation work of the Eurasian Customs Union’s and SES’s lawsand regulations. Such a codiﬁcation is aimed at improving the applicability of the agreementsbetween member states in several economic areas and deﬁning the path to further Eurasian inte-gration (Eurasian Commission, 2013, p. 39). From the EU’s perspective, the entry into force ofthe Eurasian Union should be regarded, ﬁrst and foremost, as the incarnation of a political projectinstigated by President Putin, which represents an alternative to the EU for Eastern Europeancountries (Garcés De Los Fayos, 2014, p. 5).3.2.1. Link to the broader European contextThere is a variety of cogent reasons that explain the important role that the Eurasian CustomsUnion plays in the European context and that justiﬁes the considerable inﬂuence on policy anddecision-making that such a supranational institution and its members might exert within theEU. Energy policy and security appear to be the common thread running through the several criti-cal issues that have arisen from the establishment of the CU as well as from its members’ activitiesand policies.First of all, as will be shown in the ensuing part of this section, the EU should be concernedabout Eurasian political instability. Although Russia remains a major military power and attemptsto project its dominance in Eurasia, the fact that a growing degree of instability is affecting theregion calls into question Russia’s capacity for leadership (Mamlyuk, 2014, p. 620). Severalevents are emblematic of the political fragility that the entire region is currently suffering. Theso-called ‘Five-Day War’ is a case in point.On 7 August 2008, Georgian forces responded to attacks by secessionists in South Ossetia andAbkhazia. The rebels were supported by Russian troops deployed as peacekeepers in thoseregions 15 years earlier with Georgia’s consent. Because the Georgian attack killed someRussian soldiers, Moscow intervened and the two countries fought a ﬁve-day bloody war thatkilled more than 800 people (King, 2008). On 26 August 2008, the Russian President Medvedevunilaterally recognized Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states. Such recognition byRussia was condemned by the USA, the G7, the secretary-general of the Council of Europe,the president of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and the Organizationfor Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) chairman because of the violation of Georgia’sterritorial integrity. The conﬂict was motivated by a wish to control strategic oil and gas pipelineroutes and, speciﬁcally, the Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan pipeline as a major route for oil delivery fromKazakhstan to Europe (Shanahan Cutts, 2008, p. 287).Moreover, in June 2010, the adoption of a new constitution in Kyrgyzstan that aimed to estab-lish a parliamentary system of governance resulted in four days of ﬁerce ethnic clashes in theSouthern cities of Osh and Jalal-Abad, leaving as many as 2000 people dead (Toktogulov & Bou-dreaux, 2010).Contemporary Politics 9Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 More recently, the 2013–2014 ‘Euromaidan’44 protest in Ukraine led to Russian militaryoccupation of Crimea and support to rebels in East Ukraine. Such hostile actions seem to rep-resent a punishment for the Ukrainian decision of moving closer to the EU and refusing to jointhe EEU (Vitkine, 2014). The drastic nature of this retaliation appears to be related to thecrucial importance that Ukraine assumes in the Eurasian context. As the former US national secur-ity adviser put it, ‘without Ukraine, Russia ceases to be a Eurasian empire’ (Brzezinski, 1998).Consequently, it is reasonable to suppose that further acts of violence will be perpetrated inthe Caucasian region and that some currently frozen conﬂicts may be re-ignited, including theone related to Transnistria in Moldova and Nagorno-Karabakh in Armenia and Azerbaijan(Mamlyuk, 2014, p. 621).Furthermore, the Eurasian Customs Union is assuming a greater role as a European antagonistin the confrontation for political and economic control and inﬂuence over the Eurasian region.According to Butler, the EU holds that some former Soviet Republics, such as Armenia, mustchoose between Brussels and Moscow (Butler, 2013, p. 599). As a matter of fact, from a Europeanperspective, there is an inherent incompatibility between being associated with the EU and being amember of the Eurasian Customs Union. As reported by the Wall Street Journal, ‘countries in theMoscow-led customs union can’t be integrated into the EU [… ] because they have effectivelyceded sovereignty over trade issues to Russia’ (Bendavid & Norman, 2013). As a consequence,in a realist view of power relations, any success for Russia in terms of institutional realignmentwith its former Soviet ‘satellites’ represents inevitably a loss for Europe, and vice versa.The serious deterioration in relations between Armenia and the EU is highly illustrative of thisconﬂicted approach. In fact, Armenia was expected to enter into an Association Agreement withthe EU during the Third Eastern Partnership summit held in Vilnius in November 2013, aimed atestablishing closer cooperation between the EU and its eastern European partners (i.e. Armenia,Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine) (European Union ExternalAction, 2014). However, on 4 September 2013, the website of the Kremlin in Moscow posted abrief statement declaring that during a meeting between the President of the Russian Federation,Vladimir Putin, and the President of the Republic Armenia, Serge Sargsyan, Armenia had dis-closed its decision to accede to a Customs Union originally formed by Belarus, Kazakhstanand Russia, rather than sign an Association Agreement with the EU (Bendavid & Norman,2013). Although foreseeable and convincing motives led to this sudden and complete reversal,it caused considerable consternation within the EU. In fact, the choice appears to be based onArmenia’s crucial national interests. In order to obtain the turnaround, Russia used its powerfuleconomic and military leverage: it is Armenia’s sole natural gas supplier and is able to determinethe price of fuel; moreover, according to a bilateral treaty signed in 1996, there are about 3000Russian soldiers ofﬁcially reported to be stationed at the 102nd military base located in the Arme-nian town of Gyumri (Bendavid & Norman, 2013).3.2.2. The role of energyIn such a complex scenario, energy plays a fundamental role. The dependence of the EU onenergy imports, particularly oil and more recently gas, forms the backdrop for policy concernsrelating to the security of energy supplies. Russia is currently the main exporter of gas andcrude oil to the EU (see Figure 3).As a consequence, the need to establish a closer dialogue with the Eurasian Customs Unionappears to be unavoidable in the near future. The situation is exacerbated by the fact that the EU’snew Eastern members and aspiring members depend on Russian energy supply more than otherEU member states. In fact, many countries that were members or satellites of the Soviet Unionrely exclusively on gas and oil supply from Russia for their energy consumption. For countries10 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 such as Poland, Hungary, Romania and Ukraine, obtaining energy independence from Russiaseems even more difﬁcult to achieve within a reasonable time frame. As opposed to WesternEurope, gas pipelines in Eastern European countries mainly follow an east-west direction,without many interconnections (see Figure 4). As demonstrated during the gas crises betweenFigure 3. EU’s Main Origin of Primary Energy Imports (2012).Source: European Commission – Eurostat, ‘Energy production and imports’, available at http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Energy_production_and_imports.Figure 4. European Gas Pipelines.Source: Exectech – Europe’s Dependence on Russian Gas, available at https://executivetechnology.wordpress.com/2014/11/09/europes-dependence-on-russian-gas-part-2/.Contemporary Politics 11Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 Ukraine and Russia in 2006 and 2009, the absence of interconnections makes it almost impossibleto provide gas to Eastern European countries in the event of a sudden interruption of supply fromRussia. It is therefore not surprising that the EU is not only trying to improve the diversiﬁcation ofsources and routes of oil and gas furnishing but also to enhance the security of energy supplythrough the establishment of a Central Eastern European Pipeline Ring, aimed at closing thegaps in the existing network (European Commission, 2011).3.2.3. Russian energy companiesIn order to establish a dialogue on energy issues with the Eurasian Customs Union, Europeansinevitably need to build up a commercial relationship with the main Russian giant oil companies.The central complication here arises from the fact that, due to the strong inﬂuence that the Russiangovernment exerts on these companies, they operate more like national oil companies than privatecompanies, which renders the creation of a TPN more difﬁcult because of lack of transparencyand independence. They do not seek to only maximize proﬁts, but also have politically drivenaims such as fostering foreign and strategic policies, wealth redistribution and job creation(Olsen, 2013, p. 618). Because of profound differences in pursued policies, establishing a dialo-gue with these companies appears dependent upon more intense mediation by the EU institutions.In this context, it is necessary to highlight signiﬁcant features that distinguish the mainRussian oil companies from all other international oil companies. Speciﬁcally, both Gazprom,the largest Russian gas producer, and Rosneft, which is the largest Russian oil producer (seeFigure 5), will be brieﬂy analyzed.Gazprom. Gazprom’s CEO, Aleksej Borisovicˇ Miller, was politically appointed and is seen as oneof Vladimir Putin’s most trusted lieutenants. This fact is emblematic of the inﬂuence exerted bythe government on the company (Olsen, 2013, p. 627). Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, thecompany has represented an extension of Russia’s foreign policy in Europe. In the 1990s,Figure 5. Russia’s oil and natural gas production by company (2012).Source: Eastern Bloc Energy, available at http://www.easternblocenergy.com.12 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 Gazprom entered into joint ventures with several companies in Germany, France, Italy andFinland and, by 1995, it already accounted for 21% of the Western European market and 55%of the Eastern European market (Poussenkova, 2010, p. 107). The signiﬁcance of Gazprom asa fundamental actor in the energy sector can also be seen in the fact that the pipelinesmanaged by the company are essential to the economies of Eurasian countries. The 2004 crisiswith Belarus and, more recently, the gas disputes between Russia and Ukraine of 2006 and2009 (Poussenkova, 2010, p. 117) are illustrative of Gazprom’s strategic relevance and its will-ingness to adopt an aggressive approach to foster Russian economic and political interests.In order to reduce its dependence on Ukraine as a transit country and to foster Russia’s geopo-litical aspirations, Gazprom has recently shown great interest in expanding its pipelines (Olsen,2013, p. 629). In particular, it organized the construction of the Nord Stream pipeline, whichruns under the Baltic Sea, with the capacity of 55 billion cubic metres annually. Gazprom signedfor a 51% share in a joint venture with two German companies (EON Ruhrgas and BASF/Winter-shall) (Tarasov, 2011, p. 77). Moreover, Gazprom participated in the South Stream pipeline projectas a response to the European and American plan for constructing Nabucco, a 3300-km-long pipe-line going from Turkey to Austria through Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary in order to obtain gasdirectly fromCentral Asian countries such asAzerbaijan, Turkmenistan and Iran (see Figure 6) and,consequently, make Europe more independent of Russian supply (Tarasov, 2011, p. 84).The statement issued by the then President of the European Commission José Manuel Barrosoappears emblematic of the importance that such a pipeline had for Europe: ‘The Nabucco projectis of crucial importance for Europe’s energy security and its policy of diversiﬁcation of gassupplies and transport routes’ (European Commission, 2009). In 2010, Putin intervened,signing an agreement with Turkey forbidding the Nabucco pipeline to pass through Turkish ter-ritory in exchange for supporting another pipeline to be built in Turkey. As a result, by the end of2012, the Nabucco project was ofﬁcially abandoned, whereas the construction of the SouthStream pipeline was initiated (Olsen, 2013, p. 631) but eventually abandoned. This projectwould have allowed Gazprom to send its gas to Southern and Central Europe via a pipelineunder the Black Sea (see Figure 6).Figure 6. Nabucco and South Stream Pipeline Projects.Source: BBC – Gazprom to control Serbia’s oil, available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7799396.stm.Contemporary Politics 13Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 Despite the enormous costs and difﬁculties of building such a pipeline, Gazprom repeatedlysaid it was committed to the project. In the absence of other valid economic reasons for thecompany, its main purpose appears to be to undermine European ambitions of reducing depen-dence on Russia’s gas supply by means of the construction of Nabucco.In conclusion, Gazprom has actively sought to thwart any European attempt to obtain energysupply from other nations and its expansionist ambitions have caused a signiﬁcant politicalinstability in the Eurasian context (Olsen, 2013, p. 631). Moreover, Gazprom has become theKremlin’s faithful servant and dangerous sword. Its role in today’s Russia is best described byan old cliché: ‘what is good for Gazprom is good for Russia’ (Poussenkova, 2010, p. 111).Rosneft. Rosneft’s relevance among Russian oil companies grew exponentially after VladimirPutin was elected president in 2000. Rosneft was chosen by Putin as an instrument to achievehis aim of establishing state control over the Russian energy sector. As a consequence, Rosneftconsolidated its assets, becoming a national oil company (Olsen, 2013, p. 624). However, itacquired its strategic importance after the elimination of its rival gas company Yukos.At the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, Yukos was one of the largest private oil companies inthe world and the largest in Russia (e.g. in 2003 it produced 589.11 million barrels of oil equiv-alent and signed important deals to export to both China and USA) (Poussenkova, 2010, p. 110).In the early 2000s, the CEO of Yukos, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, challenged Putin and his party,United Russia. Consequently, in 2003, Khodorkovsky was arrested and his company wasaccused of crimes, including tax evasion, by the Russian government. Throughout the summerof 2004, the government betrayed its real objective by announcing its intention to sell offYukos’ stock. The Baikal Finance Group, a shell company (i.e. a corporation without activebusiness operations or signiﬁcant assets), created two weeks before the auction and registeredat the same address as a grocery store in the provincial Russian town of Tver, put in the onlybid above the reservation price and then, eventually, Rosneft acquired Yukos’ most valuableassets. This move ended days of speculation over what has been deﬁned as one of the mostbizarre and controversial sell-offs in Russian history (Belton, 2004).The ﬁnal liquidation of the company occurred in the fall of 2007 and all the assets of Russia’slargest energy company passed into the hands of Rosneft (Stephan, 2013, p. 25). Rosneft hasmore than tripled its daily production in barrels of oil, becoming, since 2007, the largest oil pro-ducer in Russia. However, the arrest of Khodorkovsky and the seizure of Yukos’ assets seriouslyweakened investors’ conﬁdence in the integrity of the Russian economy and many of them movedtheir capital out of the Russian market (Waltrip, 2008, p. 584). It appears evident that the massiveexpansion of this Russian energy corporation has its roots in a symbiotic relationship between thecompany and the government and, speciﬁcally, in the interests pursued by Putin and his entourageof oligarchs (Poussenkova, 2010, p. 103). The Khodorkovsky affair and the prominent role thatRosneft has currently assumed among Russian oil companies make it hard to keep believing in theproject – launched after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 – for creating a ‘new Russia’through the privatization of industry, housing and land (Goldman, 2004, p. 33).4. EU engagement with energy TPNs: an International Energy CharterThis section aims at showing the EU’s inﬂuence and engagement in energy networks. Its involve-ment has shaped the EU’s approach to energy security very successfully, as discussed below. Thisshows that the EU should continue to be engaged with energy TPNs moving forward.Ever since Russia hastily withdrew from the ECT, there has been an unyielding resolutiontowards the modernization of the Energy Charter, which seems to be slowly but surely14 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 materializing into concrete steps. Most notably, at the time of writing, there are rounds of nego-tiations regarding the creation of an International Energy Charter, which is intended to be formallyadopted and signed at a Ministerial Conference in The Hague in 2015 (Energy Charter, 2014). Anenlightening draft of the proposed text has already been released.45 This declaration reﬂects theambition of the Energy Charter to play an important role in the evolving architecture of globalenergy governance. Given the seemingly far-reaching consequences of this advancement, onemay ask: what exactly will be the differences between the old and the new Charter?First, the new Charter will seek to get rid of the perceived geographical ties with Europe. Thenew Charter will depict a new vision of energy security by deﬁning the concept in such a mannerthat will enable the term to encompass not solely security of supply, but also other perspectivessuch as predictability of demand, safety of transit and absence of energy poverty (Beckman,2014). In terms of their legal nature, the new Charter will merely be a political declarationwhich will lay out common principles for international cooperation in the ﬁeld of energy(Energy Charter Secretariat, 2014, p. 1). Moreover, the new Charter will endeavor to accuratelyinterpret and identify the new energy challenges of the current volatile juncture. Indeed, the needto replace ageing infrastructure, coupled with the unbridled growth of renewables and the estab-lishment of new climate goals, exacerbates the uncertainty amidst investors as to where to invest(Beckman, 2014). Therefore, by clearly singling out the most pressing issues, the new Chartershould empower countries to develop a luring investment climate through the waning of thesetrade and investment uncertainties within the energy sector.The major challenge for the new Charter will be to attract nations which enjoy momentousenergy wealth. The legitimacy and credibility of a new global agreement on energy would cer-tainly, at best, be questionable were energy giants such as Russia or Saudi Arabia to articulatea blunt reluctance to the conclusion of such a treaty. In that sense, the new Charter will haveto break free from the, alleged, aura of favoritism towards European hardships and goals thatthe current Energy Charter unpins. An international agreement which takes into considerationthe disparate energy realities encountered by the various nations around the globe would enjoygreater recognition and hopefully become a cornerstone of more cohesive international energygovernance for the future. In a similar vein, one may argue that the negotiations on this newCharter may provide an optimal platform for Europe and Russia to reconcile their wildly discor-dant stands on the energy front. In that sense, it is a remarkably telling fact that the current nego-tiations are held in English with Russian translation and that one of the ofﬁcial languages of thenew Charter is Russian (Energy Charter Secretariat, 2014, p. 5).These great expectations should be tempered by recalling that the updated Energy Charter willmerely have a political nature.46 That said, one may contend that the purely voluntary essence ofthis visionary enterprise might be pivotal towards achieving a larger consensus between countriesof all continents confronted with eminently divergent energy afﬂictions and aspirations. By layingdown harmonized principles which truthfully reﬂect the current dynamics of the internationalenergy scenery, one may anticipate that an initial political agreement on these matters mightbe the prelude to a more daring and ambitious multilateral legally binding treaty. If this moreaffable setting enables the accord of a vast number of energy importers and exporters, theadvent of the new Charter will represent an unsurpassable opportunity to push for the enlargementof the Energy Charter’s membership to energy-rich countries in, inter alia, the Middle East, NorthAfrica and the Economic Community of West African States, thereby constituting a furtheravenue towards the enhancement of EU energy security through the creation of an infrastructurethat will boost international, long-distance trade in energy.In order to accentuate Europe’s determination to truly diversify its sources of energy supplies,all EU member states should seek to trade with as many suppliers as possible. As a means to pressfor the fulﬁllment of this particular goal, a norm, whereby each signatory of the ECT should notContemporary Politics 15Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 rely on a single supplier outside its own continent for more than 50% of its primary energy needs,should be enshrined in the International Energy Charter. Why 50%? One may contend that thistarget (50%) has, arguably, the merit of being challenging enough so as to spur EU memberstates and other ECT signatories to resolutely diversify their sources of energy supply. Moreover,from the EU’s point of view, such a rule would imply drastic changes in the energy policies ofmany of its member states (particularly those located in Central and Eastern Europe). Indeed,countries such as Austria, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovakiaalmost entirely depend on Russian energy exports. As to the 50% target per se, one may argue thatgiven the current energy juncture within the European continent (characterized by the Russianstronghold on energy supplies), the ﬁgure acknowledges the difﬁculty of the task, whilst remain-ing daring and ambitious.While waiting for the developments regarding the new Charter to unfold, one may argue that(except for Australia, the Caspian countries and Norway) most of the ECT parties are also cravingenergy importers, especially after Russia’s withdrawal from the ECT. Therefore, these states maybeneﬁt from such a rule by diversifying their sources of energy supply for their own sake. In asimilar vein, taking into account, the arguably, moderate success of the EU’s self-indulgentstrife to promote its regional energy interests through the ECT, we suggest that embracing amore constructive and comprehensive approach by truly acknowledging the energy woes ofother states would be more effective towards the attainment of global energy security which,in turn, would entail positive consequences for Europe.In sum, we contend that, the current winds of change, through the prospected advent of anInternational Energy Charter in 2015, provide a preeminent chance to modernize the currentEnergy Charter in order for the International Energy Charter to adequately confront the currentthreats that loom over the international energy landscape. The new Charter could play a keyrole in the carving of the future architecture of global energy governance. To do so, the anticipatedInternational Energy Charter will have to encompass the very diverse energy afﬂictions that smiteall states around the globe, by redeﬁning the term energy security, to gather major energy playersand pave the way for more cohesive international energy governance.5. ConclusionFrom energy transit, to technology transfer, to investment protection, energy and trade presentinterplays across various ﬁelds. Improvements can be made to the EU trading system to ensuregreater energy security and more efﬁcient energy markets. The international community couldcreate single energy markets at the regional level in different regions of the world (e.g. the internalenergy market in the EU) and then connect the various regions (inter-regional connection ofenergy agreements). This entails the interconnection of grids and transit rules, which wouldprovide energy security globally. Here is where the notion of energy TPNs can play a majorrole moving forward, both for the EU’s own energy networks and more generally energy net-works around the globe. Moreover, the expansion of the Energy Charter’s membership tocountries in the Middle East and North Africa and to the Economic Community of WestAfrican States may be an avenue to enhance EU energy security through the creation of an infra-structure that will enhance international, long-distance trade in energy. Also, the promotion ofsustainable energy use abroad may, in the long run, contribute towards EU energy securityindirectly by making more efﬁcient use of energy resources globally.Disclosure statementNo potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.16 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 Notes1. The EU is 54% energy dependent on the outside world. See Rostowska (2014, p. 1).2. That said, given the high cost of LNG infrastructure, an alternative way to enhance EU energy securitywould be through renewable energy, which is currently expensive. Southern Europe is blessed with sun-light; there is a lot of wind in northern Europe. The EU should therefore explore renewables as a long-term mechanism to achieve energy security and subsidies should go to this industry to make it cost-effective.3. http://www.encharter.org/index.php?id=21&id_article=568&L=0. To access the document of the pro-posed International Energy Charter, see http://www.encharter.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/document/IEC_ENG.pdf4. European Commission, Key Figures, Market Observatory for Energy, Directorate-General for Energy,p. 8 (June 2013).5. The EU alone is able to legislate and adopt binding acts in these ﬁelds. The role of the member states istherefore limited to applying these acts, unless the Union authorizes them to adopt certain acts them-selves. Certain energy-related matters fall within exclusive EU competence, such as the competitive con-ditions of energy trade within the internal market, for instance. Article 3 TFEU.6. Both the EU and member states are authorized to adopt binding acts in these ﬁelds. However, memberstates may exercise their competence only in so far as the EU has not exercised, or has decided not toexercise, its own competence. Energy, in its wide sense, is expressly referred to as a matter of sharedcompetence between the EU and its member states. Article 4 TFEU.7. Article 67 of the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community.8. Communication from the Commission to the European Council and the European Parliament: AnEnergy Policy for Europe, at p. 3, COM(2007) 1 ﬁnal (10 January 2007).9. Conclusions of the European Council of 4 February 2011 (pp. 1–2), available at http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/119141.pdf10. Conclusions of the European Council of 21 March 2014 (p. 1), available at http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/141749.pdf11. Regulation (EC) No 67/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009,laying down general rules for the granting of Community ﬁnancial aid in the ﬁeld of trans-Europeannetworks.12. Directive 96/92/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (19 December 1996) concerningcommon rules for the internal market in electricity; Directive 98/30 of the European Parliament andof the Council (22 June 1998) concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas.13. European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) in 2003 and Gas(ENTSO-G) in 2005.14. The EU’s Third Energy Package is a legislative package for an internal gas and electricity market withthe purpose of further opening up these markets in the EU. It consists of two directives and three regu-lations: Directive 2009/72/EC, concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity; Directive2009/73/EC, concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas; Regulation (EC) No 714/2009, on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity; Regulation (EC)No 715/2009, on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks; and Regulation (EC) No713/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 establishing an Agency for theCooperation of Energy Regulators.15. Ownership unbundling is theprocess by which a large company with several different lines of business retains one or more corebusinesses and sells off the remaining assets, product/service lines, divisions or subsidiaries. Unbund-ling is done for a variety of reasons, but the goal is always to create a better performing company orcompanies.Investopedia, http://www.investopedia.com/terms/u/unbundling.asp.16. European Parliament, ‘Towards a European Energy Community for the 21st century?’ Directorate-General for Internal Policies of the Union (p. 12), available at http://www.europarl.europa.eu/webnp/webdav/site/myjahiasite/users/nsalliarelis/public/BN%20on%20June%202010%20JPM.pdf17. A top-down approach to a problem is a situation that begins at the highest conceptual level and worksdown to the details. An example of such an approach would be where targets are set out at the inter-national level and must be attained through national policies and measures.Contemporary Politics 17Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 18. A bottom-up approach to a problem is one that begins with details and works up to the highest concep-tual level. An example of such an approach would be where action starts at the national level based oneach country’s circumstances through a patchwork of national policies and measures (which are notnecessarily binding) until they develop into uniﬁed policies at the international plane.19. See, for instance, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, theEuropean Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Progress towards com-pleting the Internal Energy Market, at p. 15, COM(2014) 634 ﬁnal (13 October 2014).20. In 2005, the energy ministers of Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands createdthe Pentalateral Energy Forum in order to promote collaboration in the ﬁeld of cross-border exchange ofelectricity. See http://economie.fgov.be/en/consumers/Energy/Energy_policy/International_context/Pentalateral_Energy_Forum/. Austria and Switzerland joined at a later stage.21. The term Schengenization refers to the Schengen Agreement, which abolishes passport or any otherform of intra-European border control among the 26 participating European countries, thereby establish-ing a common internal visa policy.22. The principle of subsidiarity aims to determine the level of intervention that is best suited to address atask which falls within the areas of competences shared between the EU and its member states. Actionmay be taken at the EU, national or local level. The EU may only intervene when its intervention wouldprove more effective than that of its member states. See Article 5 of the Treaty on the European Union.23. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economicand Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Progress towards completing the InternalEnergy Market, at p. 9, COM(2014) 634 ﬁnal (13 October 2014).24. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, The European Econ-omic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Energy prices and costs in Europe, atp. 6, COM(2014) 21 ﬁnal (22 January 2014).25. Ibid.26. Ibid.27. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economicand Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Progress towards completing the InternalEnergy Market, at p. 15, COM(2014) 634 ﬁnal (13 October 2014).28. Ibid. at 9.29. Ibid.30. Ibid.31. Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (17 April 2013) on guide-lines for trans-European energy infrastructure.32. Communication from the Commission: Delivering the internal electricity market and making the most ofpublic intervention, at p. 18, C(2013) 7243 ﬁnal (5 November 2013).33. ‘Common rules and Infrastructure needed to complete Energy Market’, available at http://ec.europa.eu/energy/infrastructure/pci/pci_en.htm.34. LNG is a gas (usually methane) which has been cooled to −162°C, where it condenses into a liquidphase. Compared to its gaseous form, LNG’s energy density is 600 times greater, which enablesmarine transportation.Szalai (20 August 2012).35. European Commission, ‘In-depth study of European Energy Security,’ accompanying the documentCommunication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament: European energysecurity strategy, SWD(2014) 330 ﬁnal/3 (2 July 2014), available at http://ec.europa.eu/energy/doc/20140528_energy_security_study.pdf.36. These ﬁgures are calculated based on data as they appear in Gas Infrastructure Europe, Gas LNG EuropeLNG Map, available at http://www.gie.eu/download/maps/2014/GLE_LNG_JUNE2014.pdf.37. Regulation (EU) 994/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20 October 2010) concerningmeasures to safeguard security of gas supply.38. European Commission, ‘A boost for clean and secure energy in Poland: European Commissionapproves more than € 200 million EU regional funds for liqueﬁed natural gas terminal’ press release(16 July 2013), p. 2, available at http://ec.europa.eu/commission_2010-2014/hahn/projects/pdf/pl_2013_07_16_liqueﬁed_natural_gas_terminal.pdf.39. These ﬁgures are calculated based on data as they appear in Gas Infrastructure Europe, GLE LNG Map,available at http://www.gie.eu/download/maps/2014/GLE_LNG_JUNE2014.pdf.40. This information can be accessed in the Excel format of the GLE Map Dataset (version 2014), availableat http://www.gie.eu.com/index.php/maps-data/lng-map.41. International Legal Materials [ILM] (1992, p. 138).18 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 42. ILM (1996, p. 1190).43. http://www.eurasiancommission.org/en/Pages/ses.aspx.44. Euromaidan refers to the wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine, which began in November2013 and whose aim was to bring Ukraine closer to the EU.45. See the proposed text at http://www.encharter.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/document/IEC_ENG.pdf.46. Ibid, p. 1.ReferencesAndoura, S. (2013). Energy solidarity in Europe: From independence to interdependence. Notre Europe, 25–26.Beckman, K. (2014, October 6). Exclusive: “In 2015, The Hague should see the birth of a new global EnergyCharter” Energy Post. Retrieved December 2, 2014, from http://www.energypost.eu/exclusive-2015-hague-see-birth-new-global-energy-charter/Belton, C. (2004). ‘State steps in for Yukos unit’. The Guardian [Online]. Retrieved November 26, 2014,from http://www.theguardian.com/business/2004/dec/23/russia.oilandpetrolBendavid, N., & Norman, L. (2013). Jilting EU, Armenia ties knot with Moscow. The Wall Street Journal[Online]. Retrieved November 19, 2014, from http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887324577304579054931777439514Booz & Company, Newbery, D., Strbac, G., Pudjianto, D., Noël, P., & LeighFisher. (2013). Beneﬁts of anintegrated European energy market (p. 4). Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/energy/infrastructure/studies/doc/20130902_energy_integration_beneﬁts.pdfBrunekreeft, G., & Guliyev, F. (2009). Gas supply security and the competitiveness on the European gasmarket. In C. J. Jepma (Ed.), Gas market trading (pp. 68–123). Groningen: Energy Delta Institute.Brzezinski, Z. (1998). The grand chessboard: American primacy and its geostrategic imperatives.New York: Basic Books.Buchan, D. (2014). Europe’s energy security- caught between short-term and long-term goals. The OxfordInstitute for Energy Studies, 6, 1–11.Butler, W. E. (2013). Russia and the WTO system: Law, regionalism, and politics. The University ofMemphis Law Review, 44, 599–617.De Jong, J., & Egenhofer, C. (2014). Exploring a regional approach to EU energy policies (CEPS SpecialReport No. 84), p. 2. Retrieved from http://www.ceps.eu/publications/exploring-regional-approach-eu-energy-policiesDelors, J., & Nilsson, S. (2012). Energy policy needs more Europe: We call for a European EnergyCommunity. Notre Europe.Delors, J., Nilsson, S., Andoura, S., & Buffetaut, S. (2012). Joint responses to energy challenges through aEuropean Energy Community. Notre Europe, 2.Delors. J., Andoura, S., & Derdevet, M. (2013). France paving the way for a European Energy Community.Notre Europe, 1.Energy Charter. (2014). Negotiating parties agree on the text of the international energy charter. RetrievedDecember 2, 2014, from http://www.encharter.org/index.php?id=21&id_article=568&L=0Energy Charter Secretariat. (2014). “Updated” energy charter: Frequently asked questions (at p. 1).Retrieved from http://www.encharter.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/document/UEC_FAQ.pdfEurasian Commission. (2013). Eurasian economic integration: Facts and ﬁgures [Online]. RetrievedNovember 30, 2014, from http://eurasiancommission.org/ru/Documents/broshura26Body_ENGL_ﬁnal2013_2.pdfEurasian Economic Union countries and Armenia arrange to ratify accession agreement soon. (2014, 10October). ARKA News Agency. Retrieved from http://arka.am/en/news/economy/eurasian_economic_union_countries_and_armenia_arrange_to_ratify_accession_agreement_soon_/European Commission. (2009). President Barroso and Commissioner Piebalgs welcome the signature of theNabucco Intergovernmental Agreement [Online]. Retrieved November 24, 2014, from http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-09–1114_en.htm?locale=enEuropean Commission. (2011). North-South Interconnections in Central-Eastern Europe, [Online].Retrieved November 24, 2014, from http://ec.europa.eu/energy/infrastructure/north_south_east_en.htmEuropean Commission. (2014a, October 13). Common rules and Infrastructure needed to complete EnergyMarket. Press release. Retrieved from http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-1124_en.htmContemporary Politics 19Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 European Commission. (2014b). Internal energy market. Retrieved November 10, 2014, from http://ec.europa.eu/energy/gas_electricity/internal_market_en.htmEuropean Commission. (2015). Projects of common interest (PCI). Retrieved November 10, 2014, fromhttp://ec.europa.eu/energy/infrastructure/pci/pci_en.htmEuropean Union External Action. (2014).Multilateral Platforms 2014–2017 [Online]. Retrieved November26, 2014, from http://eeas.europa.eu/eastern/index_en.htmGarcés De Los Fayos, F. (2014). The signature of the Eurasian Union Treaty: A difﬁcult birth, an uncertainfuture. European Parliament – Policy Department [Online]. Retrieved November 30, 2014, fromhttp://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2014/536391/EXPO_IDA(2014)536391_EN.pdfGoldman, M. I. (2004). Putin and the oligarchs. Foreign Affairs, 83(6), 33–44.Hanson, S. E. (2004). Reform and revolution in the late soviet context. Slavic Review, 63(3), 527–534.International Legal Materials. (1992). Armenia – Azerbaijan – Belarus – Kazakhstan – Kyrgyzstan –Moldova – Russian Federation – Tajikistan – Turkmenistan – Uzbekistan – Ukraine: Agreementsestablishing the commonwealth of independent states. International Legal Materials, 31(1), 138–154.King, C. (2008). The Five-Day War. Managing Moscow after the Georgia Crisis. Foreign Affairs [Online].Retrieved November 17, 2014, from http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/64602/charles-king/the-ﬁve-day-warKrotov, I. (2012). Belarus, the republic of Kazakhstan and the Russian federation within the framework ofthe Eurasian economic community. World Customs Journal, 5(2), 129–137.Leal-Arcas, R. (2008). Theory and practice of EC external trade law and policy, p. 70 (Cameron May).Leal-Arcas, R., & Filis, A. (2013a). The fragmented governance of the global energy economy: A legal insti-tutional analysis. The Journal of World Energy Law & Business, 6(4), 348–405.Leal-Arcas, R., & Filis, A. (2013b). Conceptualizing EU energy security through an EU constitutional lawperspective. Fordham International Law Journal, 36, 1225–1301.Libman, A., & Vinokurov, E. (2012). Eurasian Economic Union: Why now? Will it work? Is it enough? TheWhitehead Journal of Diplomacy and International Relations, 13, 29–44.Mamlyuk, B. N. (2014). Russia and regional trade integration in a historical perspective: Response toWilliam E. Butler. The University of Memphis Law Review, 44, 619–632.ODKB. (2002). Collective security treaty organisation [Online]. Retrieved November 26, 2014, from http://www.odkb.gov.ru/start/index_aengl.htmOlsen, M. (2013). The future of national oil companies and how they may improve their global competitive-ness. Houston Journal of International Law, 35(3), 617–654.Palle, A. (2013). Regional dimensions to Europe’s energy integration. Oxford: The Oxford Institute forEnergy Studies.Poussenkova, N. (2010). The global expansion of Russia’s energy giants. Journal of International Affairs, 63(2), 103–124.Rostowska, M. (2014). Energising TTIP: A step towards better EU energy security. PISM Bulletin 57(652),1–2.Seputyte, M. (2014). “Lithuania grabs LNG in effort to curb Russian dominance”. Bloomberg, 27 October2014. Retrieved November 13, 2014, from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-10-27/lithuania-grabs-lng-in-effort-to-curb-russian-dominance.htmlShanahan Cutts, N. M. (2008). Enemies through the gates: Russian violation of international law in theGeorgia/Abkhazia conﬂict. Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, 44(9), 281–310.Stephan, P. B. (2013). Taxation and expropriation – the destruction of the Yukos oil empire. HoustonJournal of International Law, 13(1), 1–52.Stern, J., Dickel, R., Hassanzadeh, E., Henderson, J., Honoré, A., El-Katiri, L., … Yaﬁmava, K. (2014).Reducing European dependence on Russian gas: Distinguishing natural gas security from geopolitics.The Oxford Institute For Energy Studies, 29, 1–81.Szalai, P. (2012, August 20). Gas in central Europe: From Russia to Qatar and back. V4 Revue. RetrievedNovember 21, 2014, from http://visegradrevue.eu/?p=1016Tarasov, J. D. A. (2011). The making of empires: Russia’s gas-exporting pipelines v Nabucco. The Journalof World Energy law and Business, 4(1), 77–87.de Tinguy, A. (Ed.) (1997). The fall of the soviet empire. Ann Arbor, MI: East European Monographs.Toktogulov, K., & Boudreaux, R. (2010). Kyrgyzstan endorses new constitution. The Wall Street Journal[Online]. Retrieved November 17, 2014, from http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405274870396410457533408390471067820 Rafael Leal-Arcas et al.Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 Vitkine, B. (2014). Vladimir Putin’s Eurasian economic union gets ready to take on the world. The Guardian[Online]. Retrieved November 19, 2014, from http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/28/eurasian-economic-union-russia-belarus-kazakhstanWaltrip, J. M. (2008). The Russian oil and gas industry after Yukos: Outlook for foreign investment.Transnational Law & Contemporary Problems, 17, 575–602.World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). (2000). Treaty on the establishment of the EurasianEconomic Community [Online]. Retrieved November 26, 2014, from http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/regeco_treaties/details.jsp?group_id=24&treaty_id=443Contemporary Politics 21Downloaded by [169.255.160.239] at 08:21 14 July 2015 