ABSTRACT: 
The health field is being subjected to a dictate that policy, practice and research should be informed by evidence. The mere generation of evidence, however, does not mean that policy and practice will act upon it. Utilisation and application of research findings (often equalled with \u27evidence\u27) is a political process following rationalities that are not necessarily similar to those of researchers. In response to this issue that evidence does not naturally finds its way into policy and practice (and back into research), the concept of \u27knowledge translation\u27 is becoming increasingly popular. In this article we demonstrate that \u27translation\u27 can have different meanings, and that current perspectives (both Knowledge Translation and the Actor-Network Theory) do not reflect appropriately on actions that can be taken at the nexus between research, policy and practice in order to facilitate more integration. We have developed seven conceptual categories suggesting different action modalities. Actors and actants in this game should be aware of the complex political nature of these modalities. <br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
this paper presents a conceptual framework for the interaction of research with the social sciences .<n> the framework is based on the social sciences observation that research is a form of interaction with the environment .<n> we demonstrate that the interaction of research with the social sciences is not limited to the reproduction of results , but also includes the reproduction of results .<n> we show that the interactions of research with the social sciences are not limited to the reproduction of results , but also include the reproduction of results .<n> we show that the interactions of research with the social sciences are not limited to the reproduction of results , but also include the reproduction of results . <n> [ [ section ] ] the interaction of research with the social sciences is not limited to the reproduction of results .<n> we demonstrate that the interaction of research with the social sciences is not limited to the reproduction of results .<n> we show that the interaction of research with the social sciences is not limited to the reproduction of results .<n> we demonstrate that the interaction of research with the social sciences is not limited to the reproduction of results .<n> we show that the interaction of research with the social sciences is not limited to the reproduction of results . <n> [ [ section ]  
 
FULL TEXT: 
  This is the published version de Leeuw, Evelyne, McNess, Andrew, Crisp, Beth and Stagnitti, Karen 2008, Theoretical reflections on the nexus between research, policy and practice, Critical public health, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 5-20. Available from Deakin Research Online http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30017400 Reproduced with the kind permission of the copyright owner Copyright: 2008, Taylor and Francis PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE This article was downloaded by: [Deakin University] On: 7 October 2010 Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 907464590] Publisher Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37- 41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK Critical Public Health Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713411440 Theoretical reflections on the nexus between research, policy and practice Evelyne de Leeuwa; Andrew McNessa; Beth Crispa; Karen Stagnittia a Faculty of Health, Medicine, Nursing and Behavioural Science, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia To cite this Article de Leeuw, Evelyne , McNess, Andrew , Crisp, Beth and Stagnitti, Karen(2008) 'Theoretical reflections on the nexus between research, policy and practice', Critical Public Health, 18: 1, 5 — 20 To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/09581590801949924 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09581590801949924 Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material. Critical Public Health Vol. 18, No. 1, March 2008, 5–20 COMMENTARY Theoretical reflections on the nexus between research, policy and practice Evelyne de Leeuw*, Andrew McNess, Beth Crisp and Karen Stagnitti Faculty of Health, Medicine, Nursing and Behavioural Science, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia (Received 18 September 2007; final version received 24 January 2008) The health field is being subjected to a dictate that policy, practice and research should be informed by evidence. The mere generation of evidence, however, does not mean that policy and practice will act upon it. Utilisation and application of research findings (often equalled with ‘evidence’) is a political process following rationalities that are not necessarily similar to those of researchers. In response to this issue that evidence does not naturally finds its way into policy and practice (and back into research), the concept of ‘knowledge translation’ is becoming increasingly popular. In this article we demonstrate that ‘translation’ can have different meanings, and that current perspectives (both Knowledge Translation and the Actor–Network Theory) do not reflect appropriately on actions that can be taken at the nexus between research, policy and practice in order to facilitate more integration. We have developed seven conceptual categories suggesting different action modalities. Actors and actants in this game should be aware of the complex political nature of these modalities. Keywords: evidence; public policy; theory Introduction Since Archibald Cochrane published his seminal ‘Effectiveness And Efficiency: Random Reflections on Health Services’ in 1972, there has emerged the now widely held belief that the notion of evidence has not only entered the health realm, but become firmly entrenched within it. An entire industry generating evidence for health policy and health practice has since emerged. Interestingly, this perspective might suggest that policy and practice before Cochrane (BC) did not take evidence-based stances. This notion at times seems to be substantiated by powerful pronouncements, such as John Maynard Keynes’ observation that ‘There is nothing a Government hates more than to be well-informed; for it makes the process of arriving at decisions much more complicated and difficult’ (Keynes and Moggridge 1982, p. 409). Stone (1997), however, has demonstrated that while to outsiders, policy-making may appear to be irrational or ill-informed, it follows its own logic and knowledge-generation strategies to arrive at decisions. Weiss (1979, 1998, 1999) *Corresponding author. Email: Evelyne.deleeuw@deakin.edu.au ISSN 0958–1596 print/ISSN 1469–3682 online  2008 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/09581590801949924 http://www.informaworld.com D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 has described six models that show how knowledge and evidence are used in political decision-making for different pragmatic and opportunistic reasons. . The knowledge-driven model: new knowledge will lead to new applications, and thus new policies. An example could be fundamental research into nuclear resonance signals, leading to the development of NMR and MRI scanners, the emergence of which led to medical technology assessments to assist governments in deciding where and how the costly new technology could be implemented. . The problem-solving model: research findings are actively sought, and used for pending decisions. In its ideal form, health impact assessments (HIAs) are an instrument in this model; HIAs supposedly are commissioned to guide decision- making related to proposed profound environmental and social change operations. . In the interactive model incremental policy change is interactively driven back and forth by emerging research outcomes. The current Swedish national health policy is an exemplary application of this model, and has taken some 20 years to establish. . The political model leads to research being used to support partisan political positions. Debates around the acceptability of nuclear power demonstrate the different political connections to different research perspectives. . In the tactical model, the fact that research is being undertaken may be an excuse for delaying decisions, or deflect criticism. . In the enlightenment model, concepts and theoretical perspectives that social science research has engendered permeate the policy-making process, rather than single studies or research programmes having a discernable impact on policy priorities. ‘Knowledge’, it is clear, is not a stable or value-free entity, but is manipulated, massaged and moulded to serve strategic, tactical and opportunistic purposes. From complex whole systems to operative theories The Victorian Health Promotion Foundation explicitly places itself at the nexus between research, policy, and practice. It funds and facilitates endeavours in all three areas (VicHealth 2005). In an endeavour to explore efficiencies and synergies at the nexus, the authors of this article were commissioned by VicHealth to produce a review of theories allowing for action. Specifically, we were invited to look beyond health (disciplines) and contribute to broader thinking about the nature, generation and application of knowledge across research, policy and practice. Whereas this article presents an overview and categorisation of such theories, the VicHealth project involved field testing using extensive studies of seven cases, selected on the basis of their apparent reputation and effectiveness of work at the nexus. This material is published elsewhere (De Leeuw et al. 2007) and validates the usefulness of a theory- based evaluation approach. Our theoretical review starts with whole systems perspectives and attempts to identify operative theories explaining specific actions in dealing with complexity. Other authors, notably May (2006), have amalgamated – in an almost grounded-theory fashion – large numbers of empirical studies leading to a theory of normalisation (some authors would refer to this concept as routinisation, cf. Mumford 1999) of previously innovative practice. 6 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 We feel that the two strategies, meeting somewhere in the middle, will have the power to investigate more radically, rationally, and responsively operations of actors such as VicHealth and our seven case studies. Translation of (networks of) knowledge With more than two million articles published annually in biomedical journals alone (Mulrow and Lohr 2001), along with the massive accumulation of evidence since Cochrane’s call for the establishment of effectiveness and efficiency measures for medical operations, has come a recognition that the mere generation of knowledge does not necessarily mean that these new insights will diffuse into policy and practice. Two scientific traditions address this very issue, both using the same word (translation) but with radically different connotations, and stemming from almost opposing world views. ‘Knowledge translation’, as evolving in the medical and health domain, is ‘the effective and timely incorporation of evidence-based information into the practices of health professionals in such a way as to effect optimal health care outcomes and maximize the potential of the health system’ (The Knowledge Translation Programme 2007). The process of knowledge translation, in its various forms, follows a bilateral-stages heuristic; that is, through a number of steps between key stakeholders existing knowledge is supposedly applied in policy and practice. These processes are initiated by the academic community. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR 2004), for instance, distinguish between the following sequential stages in knowledge translation: . research priority setting, . research, . knowledge priority setting, . knowledge synthesis, . knowledge distribution and application, . use, . evaluation of uptake. By way of contrast, Logan and Graham (1998) consider the identification of a number of elements to be important, but these would not seem to commence until the research has already been completed: . practice environment, . potential adopters of the evidence, . evidence-based innovation, . research transfer strategies, . evidence of adoption, . health-related and other outcomes. In terms of research transfer strategies, Lavis and colleagues (2002, 2003) have identified five critical questions which need to be addressed if knowledge translation is not to be left merely to chance: . What should be transferred to decision-makers (the message)? . To whom should research knowledge be transferred (the target audience)? . By whom should research knowledge be transferred (the messenger)? Critical Public Health 7 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 . How should research knowledge be transferred (the KT process and support system)? . With what effect should research knowledge be transferred (evaluation)? Clearly, the knowledge translation approaches emerging from the health and medical sciences have a foundation in an epidemiological paradigm that would allow for the application of relatively straightforward methodologies exploring bivariate causal or final relations. Other approaches, however, from contemporary social and political science, recognise the complexity of the issues at hand. One such example in which ‘translation’ is also a key concept is Actor–Network Theory (ANT) (Callon 1986; Latour 1988). Rather than being a theory in a Popperian manner (that is, allowing for predictions under certain conditions), ANT is a coherent material–semiotic conceptual framework that allows for explanations of how such networks form and act. Material–semiotic networks, according to ANT proponents, link material issues (people, structures) with immaterial or semiotic issues (such as institutions in the sociological sense, communication patterns, and imagery). Both the material and immaterial issues are critical elements in network operations, and are referred to as ‘actants’. ANT suggests that these dynamic networks constantly form and reform, and that certain configurations allow for innovation and permeability of knowledge and agency boundaries. In ANT, ‘Translation’ does not follow linguistic notions (rewording concepts in other languages), but rather the more mathematical concept of moving coordinate systems across axis spaces. In the eyes of Actor–Network theorists and practitioners, the translation effort aims to construct a forum, a central network in which all the actors agree that the network is worth building and defending. Callon (1986) has defined four moments of translation. These four moments consider a problematisation, ‘interessement’, enrolment, and mobilisation of allies. At the problematisation moment the network concerns itself with the problem that needs to be solved: who are the relevant actors? Delegates need to be identified that will represent groups of actors. During problematisation, the primary actor tries to establish itself as an obligatory passage point (OPP) between the other actors and the network, so that it becomes indispensable. At the interessement moment it becomes important to get the actors interested and negotiate the terms of their involvement. The primary actor works to convince the other actors that the roles it has defined for them are acceptable. During enrolment actors accept the roles that have been defined for them during interessement, and finally, in mobilising allies, the question is whether the delegate actors in the network adequately represent the masses. If so, enrolment becomes active support. It is clear from the vast scope of issues and phenomena that have been subjected to ANT analyses (ranging from psycho-analysis, technology studies, history, informatics, anthropology and linguistics to medicine) that there is no simple algorithm that would provide guidance as to how to act in connecting actants in the network. Nexus theories Neither Knowledge Translation frameworks, nor the Actor–Network Theory, formulate theory-based pronouncements on how to act precisely at the nexus between research, policy and practice in order to achieve conditions for effective connections between actors or actants. Following the Theory-Based Evaluation (TBE) framework of Birckmayer and Weiss (2000), we believe that theory serves a series of purposes. Primarily, it helps 8 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 explain how a programme (e.g. policy guidelines, a practitioner action plan or, in our case, a translation strategy) is expected to work, and, in doing so, provides a structure for the analysis of results. Whether the theory is right or wrong is largely irrelevant; its import is in providing a framework for thinking about a program’s effectiveness. Finally, the application of theory or logical conceptual frameworks would allow for an analysis that moves beyond an assessment that an intervention works, into increased recognition of how and why it has (or has not). We have endeavoured to identify theoretical frameworks that posit how the integration of research, policy and practice would best work. Using a variety of search engines and reference databases we compiled all titles that listed ‘research’, ‘policy’ and ‘practice’ in title or abstract. We searched beyond the health domain, and included for instance education, environment, development and aid assistance, social work, agriculture, and political science as theoretical arenas. Nearly 30 different theoretical frameworks specifically dealing with actions at the nexus emerged. For analytical purposes we grouped them into seven categories, which could then be put into three groups (Table 1). All of these, we could assert from the literature, have a noticeable impact on activities at the nexus towards more and better integration and we will now discuss each in turn (see Figure 1). Table 1. Three groups of seven categories theories addressing the nexus between research, policy and practice. Institutional Re-Design ! theories about changing the rules of the game Blurring the Boundaries ! theories about the structural interaction of actors Utilitarian Evidence and how the nature of evidence plays a role in Conduits this interaction Alternative Evidence Narratives ! theories about ways to communicate at the nexus Resonance Figure 1. Institutional re-design models: fixing and changing rules of engagement. Critical Public Health 9 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 The Institutional Re-Design category of theories acknowledges that researchers, policy- makers and practitioners form an intricate web of interactions. The operations of that web are governed by sets of rules, known sociologically as ‘institutions’. As Ahrendt (1970) has said: an institution is a body of people and thought that endeavours to make good on common expressions of human purpose. Klijn and Koppenjan (2006), arguing from a policy network theoretical foundation, find that these rules are amenable to change: actors in the network can endeavour to change rules or set new rules. Klijn and Koppenjan find that actors engaged in policy networking may at times want to change the rules that formally or informally apply to the network, thus influencing their policy outcomes. Actors may try to influence network composition (by changing or consolidating actor positions, adding or changing access rules, or modifying external determinants of actor positions through, for instance, regulation), network outcomes (by changing performance indicators or professional codes of conduct), and network interactions (by laying down rules on conflict regulation, the governance of interaction, or hierarchical relations). Nutley, Walter and Bland (2002) also see a ‘hardware’ function of institutional arrangements (for instance, physical proximity between researchers, policy-makers and practitioners) and in an empirical review of such arrangements in the UK Drug Misuse arena have come up with the following propositions: 1. Evidence use will be greater when the system is open to evidence and argument. 2. Evidence use is encouraged by a climate of rationality. 3. Evidence use is more likely when the nature of the issue on the policy agenda does not kindle popular or official passions. 4. Evidence use may be facilitated when the makers of policy are specialised experts in the substance of the policy domain. 5. Evidence use needs a thriving social science community to supply evidence for the policy process. 6. Evidence use is facilitated by institutions that bridge the academia–government gap. 7. Evidence use is facilitated by mechanisms for bringing together government analytical staff with their policy counterparts. 8. Evidence use is facilitated by institutions that provide easy access to a comprehensive evidence base and translate the implications of this evidence into guidance for service providers. The normalisation process model by May (2006), referred to above for its interesting theory-generation approach, proposes two endogenous (interactional workability, relational integration) and two exogenous (skill-set workability, contextual integration) processes that have, among others, a bearing on game rules. Although some of these factors seem colloquial, they form an interpretive basis for the next six categories which appear to address ‘how’ questions for each of these propositions (Figure 2). The Blurring the Boundaries model resists the notion that communities of researchers, policy-makers and practitioners are essentially separate from each other in terms of values, goals, timelines and ‘jargon’ employed. This is not to say that the model denies the existence of differences between the ‘communities’. However, to improve the interactions between researchers, policy-makers and practitioners, Blurring the Boundaries highlights the value of each community recognising the values, demands and pressures that the other adheres to experiences. Ideally, understanding ‘the other’ facilitates the development of shared understandings between the communities. 10 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 For example, the Boundary Management framework (van Buuren and Edelenbos 2004) promotes researcher/policy-maker/practitioner interaction from the outset of a research project. It follows the logic that researchers’ engagement is more likely if they have been involved in the original priority setting (Hanney 2004; IDRC 2004); they are less willing to work on an agenda with which they disagree (Kogan and Henkel 1983). As De Leeuw (2006) argues, ‘collaboration should ideally start from a joint recognition of a problematic issue, and not from an ideology that dictates partnerships’. Also, shared priority-setting befits the development of basic conditions which aid the sharing of knowledge between organisations; conditions include the development of trust and the establishment of a collective language and vocabulary (Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998). In another example, the focus of Sustained Interactivity (Huberman 1990) upon stakeholder interaction (even beyond the duration of a particular research project) provides stakeholders’ insight and understanding into the research process. This, in turn, provides a more realistic stakeholder view of the research project (Hanney 2004). Also, through continued interaction, researchers become more informed of variation in organisational set-ups (Hargreaves 1996). When a range of practitioner experiences/ ‘contexts’ are reflected in the research, practitioner receptiveness toward evidence is more likely (Hargreaves 1996). By design, Sustained Interactivity is facilitative of the finding that ‘Research utilisation is more likely where steps are taken to encourage policy makers to: absorb and learn from interaction with researchers, commission and learn from systematic reviews and policy analysis; base some policies on appraisal of evidence; and balance research with other factors (industry, media, public, etc.)’ (Hanney 2004). Blurring the Boundaries promotes trust, understanding and confidence between researchers, along with enhancing opportunities for research uptake. However, the understandings that emerge through the ‘Blurring the Boundaries’ approach need to extend to an understanding of power differentials between the communities Figure 2. Blurring the Boundaries models: there are no real boundaries between research, policy and practice. Critical Public Health 11 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 (Springett 2001). For instance, even when collaboration between the communities has occurred, if the researcher ultimately sets the research agenda, the representativeness of the research for practitioner and policy-maker experience is limited. Thus the potential wide- ranging influence of research is undermined (see Figure 3). In the Utilitarian Evidence model, the core idea is that research should be ‘useful’ in order to be applied in policy and practice. It recognises that the underlying principles informing the decision-making of policy-makers and practitioners are often not the same principles informing researchers. In this regard, research needs to be ‘pitched’ in such a manner that it is clearly of use to policy and practice communities (e.g. the research outcomes are articulated in a manner that reflects current political concerns/agendas, and/ or the research suggests how the outcomes can be applied on a practical level). As alluded to in the Blurring the Boundaries model, the interaction of researchers with policy-makers and practitioners can provide researchers with insight into how to most effectively direct new knowledge at policy-makers and practitioners. One framework, Utility-Driven Evidence (de Leeuw and Skovgaard 2005) follows the thought that knowledge should be generated in such a way that it is made relevant to stakeholders. Other frameworks within the ‘utilitarian’ paradigm assume that utility is created through relatively autonomous processes and events (Kingdon 2002). One of them is the ‘Multiple Streams’ idea, where a policy entrepreneur tries to connect perceptions about policies, problems and politics. Another, the ‘Percolation’ idea, assumes that new evidence slowly seeps into the realities of politicians and practitioners (Overseas Development Institute, n.d.) (Figure 4). The ‘conduit’ is a person or agency who acts as a link between research, policy and practice. The ‘conduit’ informs different communities – policy communities, practice communities, the ‘general’ community – of research developments and outcomes through developing ‘user-friendly’ language and presentations. Whereas a journal article uses dense academic terminology to report on research outcomes, the ‘conduit’ works to Figure 3. Utilitarian Evidence models: research, policy and practice are interconnected through the utilities of evidence of effectiveness. 12 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 disseminate new knowledge in a format that is more widely accessible (e.g. using more common, every-day terms, utilising tables and graphs, avoiding jargon). The ‘conduit’ figure facilitates collaboration between the communities in that clear communication during various research decision-making processes ‘fosters the ongoing engagement of the partners in the research activity’ (Bernier et al. 2006): in working between the various communities, the ‘conduit’ provides a platform for communities to express their concerns, in particular those who have fewer material and symbolic resources (e.g. resources such as skills and knowledge of specific disciplines). Also, in disseminating new knowledge in an accessible manner, ‘conduits’ anticipate that at some point a demand for the application of the evidence is created (Figure 5). What if research projects and research outcomes are perceived as running counter to current political agendas or are believed to contradict current organisational practice? Alternative Evidence follows the notion that if research does counter current political agendas/paradigms, its immediate impact will be muted. However, there will likely come a time where the mass of counter evidence can no longer be ignored – or at least not without undermining present policy positions or inviting criticism from opposing parties and/or practitioners (Hanney et al. 2003; Nutley 2003). In any event, researchers should also keep in mind that ‘at the end of the day, policies . . . are constantly framed and reframed in response to changing contexts’ (Choi et al. 2005). Alternative Evidence suggests that the impact of research outcomes on policy and practice communities is, in line with the Enlightenment function of research (Weiss 1977), gradual and often subtle. That is, it can contribute toward a more gradual paradigm shift (Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith 1993; Krastev 2000; Neilson 2001). This contrasts with the three previous models, which suggest that research can have a relatively direct and immediate impact, depending on how appropriately research is ‘pitched’ at policy-makers and practitioners. In the case of ‘alternative evidence’, the utilisation of research as political ammunition has integration value if evidence is consequently ‘distributed more Figure 4. Conduit models: persons or agencies are acting as conduits between research, policy and practice. Critical Public Health 13 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 widely among members of policy and practice communities than is presently the case’ (Nutley 2003). This model also demonstrates the aforementioned value of research in providing ‘wisdom’; that is, building upon the evidence-base with critical commentaries and alternate perspectives (Hanney et al. 2003). As Hanney et al. (2003) emphasise, ‘there is no monopoly of wisdom and those who wield enormous power do well to foster their own critics and counter-analysis’. Furthermore, ‘alternate evidence’ connects with political theory that says that in the reality of policy-making there are always groups of stakeholders that negotiate and try to connect with each other to advance their ideas (e.g. the ‘advocacy coalition framework’) (Abrar et al. 2000) (Figure 6). Research Narrativeswork to ‘humanise’ the presentation of research aims and outcomes with the inclusion of personal stories. Through using personal stories, they inject ‘common man’ (sic) experience into research outcomes (Sutton 1999). The narratives humanise the research, but can also bring a sense of immediacy to the research topic that a ‘dry’ presentation of results might otherwise lack. Given policy-makers’ valuing of experience and common sense (over esoteric science) in their ‘selection’ of evidence (Booth 1988), the inclusion of narratives in the overall presentation of research would appear a wise one. The narratives support the research, and they potentially highlight practitioner experiences. Furthermore, they can function to both illustrate research findings and simplify complicated findings (Stone 2002, Roe 1991). Connecting Research Narratives con- scientiously with models two through five – where actors try to blur boundaries, demonstrate usefulness, act as conduits, or generate alternate evidence – would likely have higher impact on the integration of research, policy and practice (Figure 7). The Resonance model works on the idea that researchers – or their ‘conduits’ – should have their ‘finger on the pulse’ of contemporary cultural belief systems. In doing so, they can link their research outcomes with popular or emergent belief systems (e.g. ‘social inclusion’, a ‘safe environment for all individuals’). Therefore, the receptivity of the intended audience to their research should be increased. An example of resonance is found in the ability of the Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health and Society (ARCSHS) (Hillier and Mitchell 2004) to attract greater than Figure 5. Alternative evidence models: stakeholders in research, policy and practice maintain in readiness bits of evidence for use at opportune moments. 14 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 usual organisational and public interest in health issues affecting gay youth. Through crafting a publicity campaign that related the health issues to the theme of individual safety, they increased the receptivity of communities to their health issues compared to their previous campaign, which had focused on the more contentious issue of ‘morality’. Figure 7. The Resonance model indicates that skilful communications (with appropriate usage of metaphors, imagery and symbols) can make research, policy and practice resonate in unison. Figure 6. Narratives models suggest particularly policy-makers are more prone to respond to narratives than to other types of data and evidence representations. Critical Public Health 15 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Similarly, debates around HIV/AIDS, birth control, or euthanasia, have often been framed in the context of morality (derived from religious perspectives). It would not be helpful to argue that the morality is ‘wrong’, as it is very strongly connected to people’s life worlds. However, trying to make the evidence resonate with other belief systems could advance the application of new knowledge. In the Research Resonance model, it is argued that connecting the HIV/AIDS discourse to issues of ‘safety’, and the euthanasia discourse to ‘dignity’, rather than to ‘morality’, is helpful in integrating research, policy and practice. Issues of safety and dignity are issues that any individual, irrespective of their belief system, can identify with. Widdershoven (1999, 2005) demonstrates that notions of ‘autonomy’ in the euthanasia debate in the Netherlands have liberated it largely from religion-based belief systems and subsequent ethical judgements, and enabled an open societal discourse on the desirability and conditions for voluntary active euthanasia. The Research Resonance model displays how the ‘spin’ which promotes research can influence the level of public and organisational interest in the research. Discussion Scholars of the uptake of evidence in medical practice will have missed in the above theoretical review the influential work by Grol and colleagues (e.g. Grol and Grimshaw 2003; Wensing et al. 2006). Indeed, Grol and Grimshaw, in their review of implementation of evidence observe that ‘Research on organisational, economic, and political approaches to change is as yet scarce. [. . .] . . .we need to give more attention to the validation of different theories on changing professional and organisational performance (from health promotion, social sciences, marketing, and economy) to find the crucial determinants of effective change’ (Grol and Grimshaw 2003, p. 1229). In appreciating this observation it is worthwhile to note two issues. First, in this arena of scholarship there is an almost complete absence of application of an abundance of theories from the social sciences, or an attempt to construct new theories. Scholars of the clinical evidence-practice debate (as observed above, in our discussion of knowledge translation perspectives) tend to take a mechanistic/epidemiological approach rooted in a traditional compliance paradigm. This more often than not leads to inappropriate reviews of inappropriate methodologies (where the Randomised Controlled Trial is the Golden Fleece), devoid of theorising, in which core constructs are often haphazardly understood or operationalised. For instance, in their review of organisational interventions, Wensing et al. (2006) consider ‘Knowledge Management’ to be the development and application of computer systems and databases. Our review (De Leeuw et al. 2007) showed that the area of knowledge management is contested, where the observation that ‘knowledge is power’ has profound implications for issues around who manages knowledge to what purpose (McAdam and McCreedy 2000). Precisely theoretical reflections on those issues, and not whether a computer delivers data, would yield better insights into the nexus between research, policy and practice. Second, there is a tendency among the non-initiated to apply one’s own tunnel vision to much broader social phenomena. In our review we found that this is specifically the case for implementation research. At least three scientific disciplines have, over time, developed theoretical or pragmatic insights. The political sciences have evolved their research from the traditional stages heuristic in which a multitude of variables are linked to policy implementation probabilities (Mazmanian and Sabatier 1989) to a post-modern 16 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 constructionist approach much more tuned to Actor–Network perspectives (Hill and Hupe 2002); the classical ‘Diffusion of Innovation’ approach (Rogers 1995), predominantly focused on individual behaviour change, but with interesting sorties into organisational development is a second implementation theory; and finally, the implementation conceptualisation in clinical settings as alluded to above. The first two perspectives (political science, diffusion of innovations) have been included in our theoretical review above. We agree with Grol’s pronouncement above, however, that more theoretical development of the clinical perspective would potentially yield interesting theoretical synergies and the possibility to generate exciting new sets of hypotheses. Conclusion In this paper, we have argued the importance of the often-neglected nexus between research, policy and practice. Individual practitioners may utilise particular research evidence in planning and delivering programmes or services. However, policy directives, practice guidelines and funding agreements can also be based on research evidence and have the potential to improve services and encourage effective outcomes for clients across a wide range of contexts (Campbell et al. 2000). As such, the involvement of policy-makers should not merely be viewed as an added extra to dialogues between research and practice communities. We have identified seven theoretical models as to how this nexus between research, policy and practice can be realised. Each is effective in different contexts, rather than one generally being preferred over all others. What is clear is that it is insufficient for researchers and research organisations to assume that production of research evidence alone is sufficient to ensure uptake by those in the policy and practice spheres. If research evidence is to have the best chance of being utilised, a strong and ongoing nexus between the research, policy and practice communities is essential. Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the Victorian Health Promotion Foundation (VicHealth) for funding the project that led to this paper. Our work with VicHealth staff and the Project Advisory Committee, and the intense discourse we have had with them, has greatly advanced our insight into the nexus between research, policy and practice. We are very thankful to professor Brian Head and Ruth Belben of the Australian Research Alliance for Children and Youth (ARACY) for organising a workshop in which we were able to field test and refine our ideas with researchers, practitioners and policy-makers. References Abrar, S., Lovenduski, J., and Margetts, H., 2000. Feminist ideas and domestic violence policy change. Political studies, 48, 239–262. Ahrendt, H., 1970. On violence. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace and World. Bernier, J., et al., 2006. Structuring an inter-sector research partnership: a negotiated zone – reply to commentaries. Soz Praventiv Medicine, 51, 352–354. Birckmayer, J.D. and Weiss, C.H., 2000. Theory-based evaluation in practice: what do we learn? Evaluation review, 24 (4), 407–431. Booth, T. 1988. Developing policy research. Aldershot: Gower Publishing Company Limited. Critical Public Health 17 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Callon, M. 1986. Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of the scallops and the fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay. In: J. Law, ed. Power, action and belief: a new sociology of knowledge? Sociological Review Monograph No. 32. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Campbell, S.M., Roland, M.O., and Buetow, S.A., 2000. Defining quality of care. Social science and medicine, 51, 1611–1625. Canadian Health Services Research Foundation. 1998. Communication primeri. 1st edn. Available from: http://www.chsrf.ca/knowledge_transfer/pdf/comprimer_e.pdf [Accessed 1 September 2006]. Choi, C.K., et al., 2005. Can scientists and policy-makers work together? Journal of epidemiology and community health, 59, 632–637. CIHR, 2004. Knowledge translation strategy 2004–2009: innovation in action. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Institutes of Health Research. de Leeuw, E., 2006. Connecting the dots. Soc Praventiv Medicine, 51, 1–2. de Leeuw, E. and Skovgaard, T., 2005. Utility-driven evidence for healthy cities: problems with evidence generation and application. Social science and medicine, 61, 1331–1341. de Leeuw, E., et al., 2007. It’s research, Jim, but not as we know it. Acting at the nexus. Integration of research, policy and practice. Final report, August 2007, VicHealth/Deakin University, Melbourne Australia. Grol, R. and Grimshaw, J., 2003. From best evidence to best practice: effective implementation of change in patients’ care. The Lancet, 362, 1225–1230. Hanney, S.R., 2004. Personal interaction with researchers or detached synthesis of the evidence: modelling the health policy paradox. Evaluation and research in education, 18 (1–2), 72–82. Hanney, S.R., et al., 2003. The utilisation of health research in policy-making: concepts, examples and methods of assessment. Health research policy and systems, 1 (2). Available from: http:// www.health-policy-systems.com/content/1/1/2 [Accessed 15 August 2006]. Hargreaves, A., 1996. Transforming knowledge: blurring the boundaries between research, policy and practice. Educational evaluation and policy analysis, 18, 105–122. Hill, M. and Hupe, P., 2002. Implementing public policy. London: Sage. Hillier, L. and Mitchell, A. 2004. Shifting the discourse about same sex attraction from the ‘moral’ to the safety and rights arenas: a collaboration between research in the community and those who liaise between them. Social Change in the 21st Century Conference, Centre for Social Change Research, Queensland University of Technology. Huberman, M., 1990. Linkage between researchers and practitioners: a qualitative study. American educational research journal, 27, 363–391. International Development Research Centre 2004. Making the most of research: research and policy process. Ottawa: IDRC. Available from http://www.idrc.ca/evaluation/policy/ev-67986-201-1- DO_TOPIC.html [Accessed 1 September 2006]. Keynes, J.M. and Moggridge, D., eds. 1982. The collected writings of John Maynard Keynes. Vol. 21. Activities 1931–1939; World crisis and policies in Britain and America. London: Macmillan; New York: Cambridge University Press; for the Royal Economic Society. Kingdon, J., 2002. Agendas, alternatives and public policies. 2nd ed. Boston, Toronto: Little Brown and Company. Klijn, E.-H. and Koppenjan, J.F.M., 2006. Institutional design. Changing institutional features of networks. Public management review, 8 (1), 141–160. Kogan, M. and Henkel, M., 1983. Government and research: the Rothschild experiment in a government department. London: Heinemann. Krastev, I., 2000. ‘Post-communist think tanks: making and faking influence. In: D. Stone, ed. Banking on knowledge: the genesis of the global development network. London: Routledge. Latour, B., 1988. Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through society. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press. Lavis, J.N., et al., 2002. Examining the role of health services research in public policymaking. Milbank quarterly, 80 (1), 125–154. 18 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Lavis, J.N., et al., 2003. How can research organizations more effectively transfer research knowledge to decision makers? Milbank quarterly, 81 (2), 221–248. Lipsky, M., 1980. Street-level bureaucracy. New York, NY: Russell Sage. Logan, J. and Graham, I.D., 1998. Toward a comprehensive interdisciplinary model of health care research use. Science communication, 20 (2), 227–246. May, C. 2006. A rational model for assessing and evaluating complex interventions in health care. BMC health services research, doi:10.1186/1472-6963-6-86. McAdam, R. and McCreedy, S., 2000. A critique of knowledge management: using a social constructionist model. New technology, work and employment, 15 (2), 155–168. Mazmanian, D.A. and Sabatier, P.A. 1989. Implementation and public policy. With a new postscript. Lanham/New York/London: University Press of America. Mulrow, C.D. and Lohr, K.N., 2001. Proof and policy from medical research evidence. Journal of health politics, policy and law, 26, 249–266. Mumford, E., 1999. ‘Routinisation, re-engineering, and socio-technical design. Changing ideas on the organisation of work. In: W. Currie and B. Galliers, eds. Rethinking management information systems. An interdisciplinary perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 28–44. Nahapiet, J. and Ghoshal, S., 1998. Social capital, intellectual capital and the organizational advantage. Academy of management review, 23, 242–266. Neilson, S. 2001. Knowledge utilisation and public policy process: a literature review. IDRC (International Development Research Centre) Evaluation Unit. Nutley, S. 2003. Bridging the policy/research divide: reflections and lessons from the UK. Canberra: National Institute of Governance Conference. Nutley, S., Walter, I., and Bland, N., 2002. The institutional arrangements for connecting evidence and policy: the case of drug misuse. Public policy and administration, 17 (3), 76–94. Roe, E., 1991. Development narratives or making the best of blueprint development. World development, 19, 287–300. Rogers, E.M., 1995. The diffusion of innovations. New York, NY: The Free Press. Sabatier, P., ed. 1999. Theories of the policy process. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Sabatier, P. and Jenkins-Smith, H., eds. 1993. Policy change and learning: an advocacy coalition approach. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Springett, J., 2001. Appropriate approaches for the evaluation of health promotion. Critical public health, 11 (2), 139–151. Stone, D., 1997. Policy paradox. The art of political decision making. New York/London: W.W. Norton. Stone, S., 2002. Using knowledge: the dilemmas of bridging research and policy. Compare, 32 (3), 285–296. Sutton, R. 1999. The policy process: an overview. London: Overseas Development Institute. The Knowledge Translation Programme. 2007. The knowledge translation programme. Toronto: University of Toronto, Canada. Available from: http://www.ktp.utoronto.ca/ whatisktp/definition/ [Accessed 7 September 2007]. Van Buuren, M.W. and Edelenbos, J., 2004. Conflicting knowledge: why is joint knowledge such a problem? Science and public policy, 31 (4), 289–299. VicHealth. 2005. The story of VicHealth. A world first in health promotion. Melbourne: VicHealth (also available at www.vichealth.vic.gov.au/assets/contentFiles/History_Book_Full_Version.pdf [accessed 20 November 2007]). Weiss, C., 1977. Research for policy’s sake: the Enlightenment function of social science research. Policy analysis, 3 (4), 531–545. Weiss, C., 1998. Evaluation: methods for studying programs and policies. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Weiss, C.H. 1979. The many meanings of research utilization. Public administration review, Sep/Oct, 426–431. Weiss, C.H., 1999. The interface between evaluation and public policy. Evaluation, 5 (4), 468–486. Critical Public Health 19 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Wensing, M., Wollersheim, H. and Grol, R. 2006. Organizational interventions to implement improvements in patient care: a structured review of reviews. Implementation science, 1 (2), doi:10.1186/1748-5908-1-2. Widdershoven, G.A.M. 1999. Euthanasia in The Netherlands: some first experiences of evaluation committees. Hastings center report, July–August, 47–48. Widdershoven, G.A.M. 2005. Book review of: Euthanasia, ethics and public policy. An argument against legislation (by J. Keown). Journal of medical ethics, doi 2005;31:e006. 20 E. de Leeuw et al. D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 27 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 