ABSTRACT: 
Why can your brain store a lifetime of experiences but process only a few thoughts at once? In this article we discuss “cognitive capacity” (the number of items that can be held “in mind” simultaneously) and suggest that the limit is inherent to processing based on oscillatory brain rhythms, or “brain waves,” which may regulate neural communication. Neurons that “hum” together temporarily “wire” together, allowing the brain to form and re-form networks on the fly, which may explain a hallmark of intelligence and cognition: mental flexibility. But this comes at a cost; only a small number of thoughts can fit into each wave. This explains why you should never talk on a mobile phone when driving. 
 
PREDICTION: 
this essay is based on a series of lectures given by the author at the summer school on artificial intelligence in cambridge .<n> the author was born and raised in the city of cambridge , ma .<n> he received his a.b.m.s . in physics from the university of cambridge and his m.s . in mathematics from the university of cambridge .<n> he then went on to obtain his ph.d . in mathematics from the university of cambridge and his m.s . in mathematics from the university of cambridge .<n> he then went on to obtain his phd in mathematics from the university of cambridge and his m.s . in mathematics from the university of cambridge . in this essay , we will review some of what is known about the memory capacity and offer our theory of why the memory capacity is limited .<n> we found an intriguing mechanism from underlying limits of studies in monkeys .<n> we examined models from the area of computational neuroscience .<n> we found that the mechanisms from underlying limits of studies in monkeys may explain both the features of the human brain and the properties of the computational brain .<n> we found that the models of the area of computational neuroscience may explain 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  gether, allowing the brain to form and re-form networks on the fly, which may explain a hallmark of intel ligence and cognition: mental flexibility. But this comes at a cost; only a small number of thoughts can ½t into each wave. This explains why you should never talk on a mobile phone when driving. 113144 (1) Winter 2015 cognitive architecture of our brains: re - searchers believe it to be the rea son we have evolved the ability to focus on one thing at a time (to “attend” to something). Despite being well studied, no one has yet con½rmed why working memory is limit- ed. In this essay, we will review some of what is known about working memory capacity and offer our theory of why con- sciousness may have this limit. Though we may feel that we are able to perceive most of the world around us, this sensation is, in fact, an illusion constructed by our brains. In reality, we sense a very small part of the world at any point in time; we “sip” at the outside world through a straw. Our brain takes these small bits of data and pieces them together to present an impression of a coherent and holistic scene. Examples of this limitation are abundant: consider the puzzles in which you must identify ten differences between two similar pictures. The brain requires a surprisingly long time to accom - plish this, despite the two pictures being side by side and the changes often being obvious, such as the total disappearance of a building or tree. This effect is often re - ferred to as change blindness and is a regu- lar occurrence of natural vision. (Another example of change blindness is the large num ber of editing mistakes we fail to no - tice in movies.) The limited bandwidth of consciousness is also apparent in studies of working mem ory capacity. In these experiments, subjects briefly view a screen with a vari- able number of objects (such as colored squares) and then, after a delay of a few sec onds in which they must hold the ob - jects in memory, they are shown another screen of objects, one of which may be dif - ferent from what was previously shown.1 Subjects are then asked whether some- thing has changed, and if so, to identify how it has changed (whether it used to be a different color or shape). When the num - ber of objects on-screen increases beyond a few items, subjects begin to make errors (by missing changes), indicating that their working memory capacity has been ex - ceeded. Experiments such as this have re - vealed that the average adult human can only process and retain four or ½ve objects at a time (similar to the average monkey, as shown below).2 The exact capacity of the brain varies by individual; some can re - member only one or two items and others can remember up to seven.3 Interestingly, an individual’s capacity is highly correlat- ed with measures of fluid intelligence, sug - gesting that individual capacity limits may be a fundamental restriction on high-level cognition.4 This seems intuitive: if you can hold more information in mind at the same time, then more ideas can be combined at once into sophisticated thought. But what is the nature of the capacity limitation? Do we simply miss new items once we have ½lled our thoughts with four or ½ve? Or do we always try to take in as much information as possible, eventually spreading ourselves too thin when there are more than four or ½ve objects present? In fact, both may be true. Models of a strict limit on the number of items you can hold in mind posit that this is because working memory has a lim - ited number of discrete “slots,” each of which can independently hold informa- tion. And once you ½ll those slots, you can no longer store any new information. In contrast, other models predict that our lim ited capacity is due to our spreading our selves too thin. They suggest that work - ing memory is a flexible resource, a neu- ral pool that can be subdivided among ob - jects. You do not stop storing new infor- mation after you reach a ½xed capacity as in the slot model; rather, as new informa- tion is received, the resource pool is con- tinually divided until the information is spread so thin that it can no longer be ac - Earl K. Miller & Timothy J. Buschman 114 Dædalus, the Journal of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences curately recalled (and therefore cannot support behavior). Much evidence has been marshaled on behalf of both models, primarily from studies of the patterns of errors humans make on tests of cognitive capacity. Recently, we examined the neu- rophysiological mechanisms underlying capacity limits in monkeys. We found an intriguing possibility: both the slot and flexible-resource models are correct, albeit for different reasons. The advantages of animal work include tighter control over gaze as well as more precise measurements of neural activity than is possible with human subjects. These advantages allowed us to dig deeper into the phenomenon and led to a surpris- ing discovery. The monkeys, like humans, had an overall capacity of four objects. But the monkeys’ overall capacity was actually composed of two separate capacities of two objects each in the right and left visual hemi½elds (to the right and left of the cen - ter of gaze) that were independent of each other. The processing of objects on the right half of gaze is unaffected by objects in the left half of gaze, regardless of how many ob jects there were on the left (and vice versa). But adding even one object on the same side of gaze as another object re - sulted in a decrement in performance. It was as if the monkeys had two separate brains, each one assigned to the right or left half of vi sion. This right/left independence was sur prising, though research focusing on a dif ferent type of task might have pre- dicted it: humans have independent ca - pacities to track moving objects in the right and left visual hemi½elds.5 This phenomenon is likely related to the fact that the right and left visual hemi - ½elds are respectively processed by the left and right cerebral hemispheres. This sug- gests that the two cerebral hemispheres can operate somewhat independently, at least for the processing required for visual infor - mation to reach awareness. Indeed, the ap - parent split between the two hemispheres recalls some of the initial observations of hu mans who had their cerebral hemi- spheres split to control epilepsy. With out care ful testing, these subjects usually ap - peared normal. Thus, there may be some- thing of a split even in the intact brain: the two visual hemi½elds/cerebral hemi- spheres act like two independent slots for processing and holding visual information. At ½rst blush, this seems to support the slot model, with slots for both the left and right ½elds of vision. But we also found evidence to support the flexible-resource model within each visual hemi ½eld: on each side of visual space, information was shared and spread among ob jects. To show this, we looked more closely at how neurons en - coded the contents of working memory. A pure slot model predicts that encoding an object is all-or-none: if the brain suc- cessfully remembers an object, there should be an equal amount of information about it regardless of how many other ob - jects are in the array. But we found that even when a given object was successfully encoded and retained, neural information about that speci½c object was reduced when another object was added to the same visual hemi½eld, as if a limited amount of neural information was spread between the objects. The slot mod el also predicts that if a subject misses an object, no information about it should be recorded in the brain; either an object ½lls a slot, and is remembered, or not. By contrast, the flexible-resource model suggests that even when a subject misses an object, some information about the object could have been recorded in the brain, just not enough to support conscious perception and mem - ory. This latter prediction is exactly what we found: even when a subject did not consciously perceive the object, the brain still recorded a signi½cant, albeit reduced, amount of information. Working Memory Capacity: Limits on the Bandwidth of Cognition 115144 (1) Winter 2015 In sum, the two cerebral hemispheres (visual hemi½elds) act like discrete re - source slots; within them, neural informa - tion is divided among objects in a graded fashion. A number of recent studies in hu - mans support such a hybrid model, ½nding that there are multiple slots that can store graded information about objects.6 Thus, capacity limits may reflect interplay or blend between different types of underly- ing constraints on neural processing. On the one hand, neural processing on the right and left halves of visual space can be slot-like, akin to buckets that can hold a maximum volume of water (information). But, on the other hand, within each cere- bral hemisphere there is no limit to the num ber of objects (thoughts) in each buck et. The limitation is inherent to the in formation, not the number of objects: if there are too many items in the bucket, only a few can get wet enough (have enough information devoted to them) to reach consciousness. The rest may get a lit - tle damp, but it is not enough to act upon. Whether or not the two cerebral hemi- spheres have independent capacities for information other than vision remains to be determined. It may prove only to be a visual phenomenon, due to the fact that the right and left of gaze are primarily pro - cessed in the left and right cerebral hemi- spheres, respectively. But even if this in - dependence is limited to vision, it has clear practical implications. For example, tak- ing into account the separate capacities of the right and left of gaze can help in the design of heads-up displays, such as on au tomobile windshields, maximizing the amount of information that drivers can glean in each glance, or providing infor- mation without overloading their capacity to fully process important visual scenes, such as the road in front of them. So far we have seen that despite our im - pression that we can store and perceive a signi½cant amount of visual information at once, this is not the case. We can only simultaneously think about a very limited amount of information. Our brains knit together these sips of information to give us the illusion that we have a much larger functional bandwidth. (Again, this is some thing to keep in mind the next time you are driving and have an urge to reach for your mobile phone.) But this still does not explain why there is a capacity limit for conscious thought. What about the brain’s functioning dictates such a small band- width? Why can’t you hold one thousand thoughts in mind simultaneously, or even just one hundred? There is mounting evi- dence that the brain uses oscillatory rhythms (brain waves) for communica- tion, especially for processes underlying high-level cognition. The theory is that the brain forms networks by synchronizing oscillations (rhythmic or repetitive neural activity) of the neurons that make up that network. Neurons that “hum” together form networks, and because only so much information can ½t into each oscillatory cycle, any communication system based on an oscillating signal will naturally have a limitation on bandwidth. But before delv - ing into the content limits of an oscillatory cycle, what is the evidence supporting a role for oscillatory activity in brain func- tion to begin with? It has long been known that the brain has large populations of neurons that oscillate in synchrony. These so-called brain waves occur across a wide range of frequencies from very low (less than once a second, or < 1 Hz) to very high (almost once every 15 ms, or > 60 Hz). Brain waves are not ran- dom: they vary with mental state. For ex - ample, when you are relaxed, your brain tends to show lower frequency waves; but if you suddenly focus on a task, brain re - gions that are needed to perform that task begin to produce higher frequency waves. Earl K. Miller & Timothy J. Buschman 116 Dædalus, the Journal of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences Despite the evidence that brain waves are important for behavior, their exact role in brain function has long been a mystery. Beginning with the pioneering work of physicist and neurobiologist Christoph von der Malsburg, neurophysiologist Wolf Singer, and their colleagues, there has been increasing awareness that synchronizing the oscillations between neurons may be critical in forming functional networks. Synchronized oscillations are useful for increasing the impact of neural impulses (“spikes,” or sharp changes in voltage that neurons use when they signal one anoth- er). Spikes from two neurons that arrive simultaneously at a third neuron down- stream have a greater impact than if the im - pulses arrived at different times.7 Given this, it is easy to imagine how such a mech - anism could be useful to focus mental ef - fort on particular representations (when we pay attention). After all, if synchroniz- ing the rhythms of neurons increases the impact of their spikes, then one way to boost the neural signals associated with an attended object would be to increase syn- chrony between neurons representing it. There is growing evidence that this is ex - actly how attention works. Increased at - ten tional focus increases oscillatory syn- chrony between the visual cortical neurons that represent the attended stimulus. For example, visual cortical neurons that pro - cess a stimulus under attentional focus show increased synchronized gamma band (30–90 Hz) oscillations.8 This higher fre - quency (> 30 Hz) synchrony may result from interactions within local cortical cir - cuits,9 the same interactions that underlie the computations of stimulus features.10 By contrast, sensory cortical neurons rep - resenting an unattended stimulus show in - creased low frequency (< 17 Hz) synchro- nization. A variety of evidence suggests that low frequencies may help deselect or inhibit the corresponding ensembles (pop - ulations of neurons that together underlie a particular thought, perception, memory, or neural computation), perhaps by dis- rupting the higher frequency.11 On a broader scale, synchrony between regions may also regulate communication across brain areas.12 In short, if two dif- ferent networks in different brain areas os - cillate in phase (a particular moment with a neural oscillation, such as a speci½c “piece” of a brain wave) they are more likely to influence one another because both are in an excited and receptive state at the same time. Conversely, if they are out of phase, information will be transmitted poorly. This is supported by observations that in - terareal oscillatory coherence within and between “cognitive” regions and sensory areas has been found to increase with at - tention.13 In other words, if two brain areas are involved in a given cognitive function (such as visual attention), they increase their synchrony during that function. We have discussed how synchronized rhythms can change the flow of informa- tion between neurons and between brain regions. Recent work has begun to suggest that synchrony may not only control com - munication between networks, it may ac - tually form the networks themselves. The classic model suggests that if neurons are anatomically connected, then they are part of the same network; but it may be that anat omy dictates which neurons are capa- ble of forming networks. The actual forma- tion of the networks may instead come through synchrony (Figure 1). In other words, anatomy is like a system of roads; synchrony is the traf½c. Importantly, dy - namic formation of ensembles by oscilla- tory synchrony may underlie cognitive flex ibility: our ability to rapidly change thoughts and behavior from one moment to the next. Consider, for example, what is widely assumed to be the basic element of a thought: a group of neurons that are ac - Working Memory Capacity: Limits on the Bandwidth of Cognition 117144 (1) Winter 2015 tive together. Such an ensemble can form a perception, memory, or idea. But how does the brain form a particular neural ensemble for a speci½c thought? This is not straightforward; there are billions of neurons linked to each other through tril- lions of connections. This is further com- plicated because neurons have multiple func tions, particularly at “higher,” more cognitive levels of the brain.14 Thus, many neurons inhabit many different ensembles and, conversely, ensembles for different thoughts share some of the same neurons. If anatomy were all there were to forming ensembles, then attempting to activate one ensemble would result in activity that extended to other ensembles, and subse- quently a jumble of thoughts. We propose that the role of synchrony is to dynamically “carve” an ensemble from a greater heterogeneous population of neu - rons15 by reinforcing mutual activation be - tween the neurons that form the ensem- ble.16 Because ensemble membership would depend on which neurons are oscil - lating in synchrony at a given mo ment, ensembles could flexibly form, break-apart, and re-form without changing their anatomical structure. In other words, for mation of en - sem bles by rhythmic synchrony endows Figure 1 Synchronous Oscillations Create Neural Ensembles (A) The human brain consists of almost one hundred billion neurons that form a dense network of connections. This network of neurons and their trillions of connections encapsulate all possible behaviors (and their associated sensations, thoughts, and actions). (B) In order to execute a particular behavior, synchrony activates only those neurons and connections relevant to the current task. Source: Figure prepared by authors. Earl K. Miller & Timothy J. Buschman 118 Dædalus, the Journal of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences thought with flexibility, a hallmark of high - er cognition. Humans can quickly adapt and change their thoughts and behaviors in order to tailor them to the constantly changing demands of our complex world. Thus, networks have to be as sembled, de - constructed, and recon½gured from mo - ment to moment as our foci, plans, and goals change. This is not meant to down - play the role of neural plas ticity in chang- ing the weights of connections be tween neu rons and in forming new ana tomical connections; it is always important to build and maintain roads. Through a study in which we trained mon keys to switch back and forth between two tasks, we recently found evidence that synchronized oscillations can provide the substrate for dynamic formation of ensem - bles. As the monkeys switched tasks, dif- ferent sets of neurons in the prefrontal cortex showed synchronous oscillations– one for each task–in the beta band (about 25 Hz) synchrony, as if the neurons were switching from one network to the oth er.17 Importantly, many of the neurons were multifunctional, synchronizing their activ- ity to one ensemble or the other depend- ing on the task at hand. This supports the idea that synchrony can dynamically form (and disassemble) ensembles from ana - tomical networks of neurons that partici- pate in multiple ensembles. Interestingly, one of the two tasks was much easier for the monkeys to perform; and when the monkeys prepared to engage in the harder task, the neurons that formed the network for the easier task showed syn - chrony in a low-frequency alpha range (about 10 Hz). Alpha waves have been as - sociated with suppression or inattention to a stimulus18 and are therefore thought to inhibit irrelevant processes.19 In our ex - periment, alpha oscillation inhibition seemed to be acting to quiet the dominant network (the one needed for the easier task), which would have interfered with the network needed for the current, more challenging task. This suggests that syn- chronous os cillations helped control the formation of ensembles.20 Higher (beta) frequencies de ½ned the two task networks while lower (alpha) frequencies were used to somehow disrupt formation of the stron - ger network (and thus prevent an errone - ous reflexive re action) when the weaker network had to be used. If synchronized rhythms form neural en - sembles, it follows to wonder how it is that the brain can form more than one ensem- ble at a time. After all, would not two rhyth - mically de½ned ensembles inadvertently synchronize to each other, merging togeth- er and distorting the information they rep - resent? In response, some researchers have proposed that the brain forms more than one ensemble at a time by oscillating dif- ferent ensembles slightly out of phase with one another. According to this theory, neurons that are part of a speci½c ensemble do not only synchronize their activity, but they do so by aligning their spikes to speci½c phases of neuronal population oscillations.21 By separating thoughts into different phases of population oscillations, our brain can hold multiple thoughts in mind simulta- neously (Figure 2).22 In other words, the brain prevents ensembles from interfering with one another by juggling them, rhyth - mically activating each in turn (out of phase from each other). We recently reported ev - idence for this multiplexing when infor- mation is held in mind.23 When monkeys hold multiple objects in working memory, prefrontal neurons encode information about each object at different phases of an ongoing (~ 32 Hz) oscillation. Signi½cantly, there were bumps of information at dif- ferent phases, yet in all phases the neu- rons still carried at least some information, supporting a hybrid slot/flexible-resource model. The bumps of information are Working Memory Capacity: Limits on the Bandwidth of Cognition 119144 (1) Winter 2015 some what slot-like in the sense that they are speci½c to certain phases of the oscil- lation; but they are not strict slots because the bump is a relative increase over infor- mation in other phases. The effect was not all-or-none, information-here-but-not- there, as is predicted by a strict slot model. This ½nally leads us to an explanation for the severe limitation of conscious thought. Phase-based coding has an inherent ca - pacity limitation. You have to ½t all the in formation needed for conscious thought within an oscillatory cycle. Consciousness may thus be a mental juggling act, and only a few balls can be juggled at once. Crucial tests of this hypothesis still need to be con - ducted, but these ½ndings and theories collectively suggest that bringing thoughts to consciousness may depend on genera- tion of oscillatory rhythms and the precise temporal relationships between them and the spiking of individual neurons. Figure 2 Phase Coding This ½gure illustrates oscillatory phase-coding. Neural ensembles of the two simultaneous thoughts (thoughts 1 and 2) oscillate at similar frequencies but different phases of the oscillation. In other words, the ensembles line up on different parts of the brain wave. This may explain the severely limited capacity of consciousness; in this model, only a few thoughts can ½t in each wave. Source: Earl K. Miller and Timothy J. Buschman, “Brain Rhythms for Cognition and Consciousness,” in Neurosciences and the Human Person: New Perspectives on Human Activities, ed. Antonio M. Battro, Stanislas Dehaene, and Wolf Joachim Singer (Vatican City: Ponti½cal Academy of Sciences, Scripta Varia 121, 2013). endnotes * Contributor Biographies: EARL K. MILLER is the Picower Professor of Neuroscience at the Mas sachusetts Institute of Technology. His recent publications include articles in such jour- nals as Science, Nature, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, and Neuron. TIMOTHY J.BUSCHMAN is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Psychology at Prince - ton University. He has published articles in such journals as Neuron, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, and Science. 1 Steven J. Luck and Edward K. Vogel, “The Capacity of Visual Working Memory for Features and Conjunctions,” Nature 390 (1997): 279–281. 2 Nelson Cowan, “The Magical Number 4 in Short-Term Memory: A Reconsideration of Mental Storage Capacity,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (1) (2001): 87–114. Earl K. Miller & Timothy J. Buschman 120 Dædalus, the Journal of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences 3 Edward K. Vogel and Maro G. Machizawa, “Neural Activity Predicts Individual Differences in Visual Working Memory Capacity,” Nature 428 (2004): 748–751; and Edward K. Vogel, Andrew W. McCollough, and Maro G. Machizawa, “Neural Measures Reveal Individual Dif- ferences in Controlling Access to Working Memory,” Nature 438 (2005): 500–503. 4 Randall W. Engle, Stephen W. Tuholski, James E. Laughlin, and Andrew R. A. Conway, “Work - ing Memory, Short-Term Memory, and General Fluid Intelligence: A Latent-Variable Ap - proach,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 128 (3) (1999): 309–331; and Keisuke Fukuda, Edward Vogel, Ulrich Mayr, and Edward Awh, “Quantity, Not Quality: The Relationship between Fluid Intelligence and Working Memory Capacity,” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 17 (5) (2010): 673–679. 5 George A. Alvarez and Patrick Cavanagh, “Independent Resources for Attentional Tracking in the Left and Right Visual Hemi½elds,” Psychological Science 16 (8) (2005): 637–643. 6 David E. Anderson, Edward K. Vogel, and Edward Awh, “Precision in Visual Working Mem- ory Reaches a Stable Plateau When Individual Item Limits Are Exceeded,” The Journal of Neuroscience 31 (3) (2011): 1128–1138; and Keisuke Fukuda, Edward Awh, and Edward K. Vogel, “Discrete Capacity Limits in Visual Working Memory,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology 20 (2) (2010): 177–182. 7 A. M. H. J. Aertsen, G. L. Gerstein, M. K. Habib, and G. Palm (with the collaboration of P. Gochin and J. Krüger), “Dynamics of Neuronal Firing Correlation: Modulation of ‘Effective Connectivity,’” Journal of Neurophysiology 61 (5) (1989): 900–917; Rony Azouz and Charles M. Gray, “Dynamic Spike Threshold Reveals a Mechanism for Synaptic Coincidence Detection in Cortical Neurons in vivo,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 (14) (2000): 8110–8115; Emilio Salinas and Terrence J. Sejnowski, “Impact of Correlated Synaptic Input on Output Firing Rate and Variability in Simple Neuronal Models,” The Journal of Neuroscience 20 (16) (2000): 6193–6209; Markus Siegel and Peter König, “A Functional Gamma-Band De½ned by Stimulus-Dependent Synchronization in Area 18 of Awake Behaving Cats,” The Journal of Neuroscience 23 (10) (2003): 4251–4260; and P. H. E. Tiesinga, J.-M. Fellous, J.V. José, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Information Transfer in Entrained Cortical Neurons,” Network: Compu- tation in Neural Systems (13) (2002): 41–66. 8 Pascal Fries, John H. Reynolds, Alan E. Rorie, and Robert Desimone, “Modulation of Oscil- latory Neuronal Synchronization by Selective Visual Attention,” Science 291 (5508) (2001): 1560. 9 Christoph Börgers, Steven Epstein, and Nancy J. Kopell, “Gamma Oscillations Mediate Stim - ulus Competition and Attentional Selection in a Cortical Network Model,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (46) (2008): 18023–18028; and Jessica A. Cardin, Marie Carlén, Konstantinos Meletis, Ulf Knoblich, Feng Zhang, Karl Deisseroth, Li-Huei Tsai, and Christo- pher I. Moore, “Driving Fast-Spiking Cells Induces Gamma Rhythm and Controls Sensory Responses,” Nature 459 (2009): 663–667. 10 Seung-Hee Lee, Alex C. Kwan, Siyu Zhang, Victoria Phoumthipphavong, John G. Flannery, Sotiris C. Masmanidis, Hiroki Taniguchi, Z. Josh Huang, Feng Zhang, Edward S. Boyden, Karl Deisseroth, and Yang Dan, “Activation of Speci½c Interneurons Improves V1 Feature Selectivi- ty and Visual Perception,” Nature 488 (2012): 379–383; John H. Reynolds and David J. Heeger, “The Normalization Model of Attention,” Neuron 61 (2009): 168–185; Nathan R. Wilson, Caroline A. Runyan, Forea L. Wang, and Mriganka Sur, “Division and Subtraction by Distinct Cortical Inhibitory Networks In Vivo,” Nature 488 (2012): 343–348. 11 Timothy J. Buschman, Eric L. Denovellis, Cinira Diogo, Daniel Bullock, and Earl K. Miller, “Syn chronous Oscillatory Neural Ensembles for Rules in the Prefrontal Cortex,” Neuron 76 (4) (2012): 838–846; Satu Palva and J. Matias Palva, “Functional Roles of Alpha-Band Phase Syn - chronization in Local and Large-Scale Cortical Network,” Frontiers in Psychology 2 (2011): 204; William J. Ray and Harry W. Cole, “eegAlpha Activity Reflects Attentional Demands, and Beta Ac tivity Reflects Emotional and Cognitive Processes,” Science 228 (1985): 750; and Sujith Vijayan and Nancy J. Kopell, “Thalamic Model of Awake Alpha Oscillations and Implications for Stim - ulus Processing,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (45) (2012): 18553–18558. Working Memory Capacity: Limits on the Bandwidth of Cognition 121144 (1) Winter 2015 12 Steven L. Bressler, “Interareal Synchronization in the Visual Cortex,” Behavioural Brain Research 76 (1996): 37–49; A. K. Engel, P. Fries, and W. Singer, “Dynamic Predictions: Oscillations and Synchrony in Top-Down Processing,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2 (2001): 704–716; Pascal Fries, “A Mechanism for Cognitive Dynamics: Neuronal Communication through Neuronal Coherence,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9 (10) (2005): 474–480; and Salinas and Sejnowski, “Impact of Correlated Synaptic Input on Output Firing Rate and Variability in Simple Neuronal Models.” 13 Conrado A. Bosman, Jan-Mathijs Schoffelen, Nicolas Brunet, Robert Oostenveld, Andre M. Bastos, Thilo Womelsdorf, Birthe Rubehn, Thomas Stieglitz, Peter De Weerd, and Pascal Fries, “Attentional Stimulus Selection through Selective Synchronization between Monkey Visual Areas,” Neuron 75 (5) (2012): 875–888; Timothy J. Buschman and Earl K. Miller, “Top-Down Versus Bottom-Up Control of Attention in the Prefrontal and Posterior Parietal Cortices,” Science 315 (5820) (2007): 1860–1862; Georgia G. Gregoriou, Stephen J. Gotts, Huihui Zhou, and Robert Desimone, “High-Frequency, Long-Range Coupling Between Pre- frontal and Visual Cortex During Attention,” Science 324 (5931) (2009): 1207–1210; Yuri B. Saalmann, Ivan N. Pigarev, and Trichur R. Vidyasagar, “Neural Mechanisms of Visual Attention: How Top-Down Feedback Highlights Relevant Locations,” Science 316 (5831) (2007): 1612–1615; and Markus Siegel, Tobias H. Donner, Robert Oostenveld, Pascal Fries, and Andreas K. Engel, “Neuronal Synchronization along the Dorsal Visual Pathway Reflects the Focus of Spatial Attention,” Neuron 60 (4) (2008): 709–719. 14 Jason A. Cromer, Jefferson E. Roy, and Earl K. Miller, “Representation of Multiple, Inde- pendent Categories in the Primate Prefrontal Cortex,” Neuron 66 (5) (2010): 796–807; and Mattia Rigotti, Omri Barak, Melissa R. Warden, Xiao-Jing Wang, Nathaniel D. Daw, Earl K. Miller, and Stefano Fusi, “The Importance of Mixed Selectivity in Complex Cognitive Tasks,” Nature 497 (2013): 585–590. 15 Thomas Akam and Dimitri M. Kullmann, “Oscillations and Filtering Networks Support Flex - ible Routing of Information,” Neuron 67 (2) (2010): 308–320. 16 Thilo Womelsdorf, Jan-Mathijs Schoffelen, Robert Oostenveld, Wolf Singer, Robert Desimone, Andreas K. Engel, and Pascal Fries, “Modulation of Neuronal Interactions through Neuronal Synchronization,” Science 316 (5831) (2007): 1609–1612. 17 Buschman et al., “Synchronous Oscillatory Neural Ensembles for Rules in the Prefrontal Cortex.” 18 Ian C. Gould, Matthew F. Rushworth, and Anna C. Nobre, “Indexing the Graded Allocation of Visuospatial Attention using Anticipatory Alpha Oscillations,” Journal of Neurophysiology 105 (3) (2011): 1318–1326; and Saskia Haegens, Verónica Nácher, Rogelio Luna, Ranulfo Romo, and Ole Jensen, “α-Oscillations in the Monkey Sensorimotor Network Influence Dis- crimination Performance by Rhythmical Inhibition of Neuronal Spiking,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (48) (2011): 19377–19382. 19 Wolfgang Klimesch, Paul Sauseng, and Simon Hanslmayr, “eeg Alpha Oscillations: The Inhibition-Timing Hypothesis,” Brain Research Reviews 53 (1) (2007): 63–88; and Kyle E. Mathewson, Alejandro Lleras, Diane M. Beck, Monica Fabiani, Tony Ro, and Gabrielle Gratton, “Pulsed Out of Awareness: eeg Alpha Oscillations Represent a Pulsed-Inhibition of Ongoing Cortical Processing,” Frontiers in Psychology 2 (2011): 99. 20 N. Kopell, M. A. Whittington, and M. A. Kramer, “Neuronal Assembly Dynamics in the Beta1 Frequency Range Permits Short-Term Memory,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (9) (2010): 3779–3784. 21 Pascal Fries, Danko Nikoli, and Wolf Singer, “The Gamma Cycle,” Trends in Neuroscience 30 (7) (2007): 309–316; John J. Hop½eld and Andreas V. M. Herz, “Rapid Local Synchronization of Action Potentials: Toward Computation with Coupled Integrate-and-Fire Neurons,” Pro- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 92 (1995): 6655–6662; Peter König and Andreas K. Engel, “Correlated Firing in Sensory-Motor Systems,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology 5 (4) (1995): 511–519; Gilles Laurent, “Olfactory Network Dynamics and the Coding of Multi - Earl K. Miller & Timothy J. Buschman 122 Dædalus, the Journal of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences dimensional Signals,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3 (2002): 884–895; M. R. Mehta, A. K. Lee, and M. A. Wilson, “Role of Experience and Oscillations in Transforming a Rate Code into a Temporal Code,” Nature 417 (2002): 741–746; and John O’Keefe and Michael L. Recce, “Phase Relationship between Hippocampal Place Units and the eeg Theta Rhythm,” Hippocampus 3 (3) (1993): 317–330. 22 Ole Jensen and John E. Lisman, “Hippocampal Sequence-Encoding Driven by a Cortical Multi-Item Working Memory Buffer,” Trends in Neurosciences 28 (2) (2005): 67–72; and John E. Lisman and Marco A. P. Idiart, “Storage of 7 +/- 2 Short-Term Memories in Oscillatory Subcycles,” Science 267 (5203) (1995): 1512–1515. 23 Markus Siegel, Melissa R. Warden, and Earl K. Miller, “Phase-Dependent Neuronal Coding of Objects in Short-Term Memory,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (50) (2009): 21341–21346. Working Memory Capacity: Limits on the Bandwidth of Cognition 