ABSTRACT: 
This study examines the role of individual- and family-level factors in predicting the length of shelter stays for homeless families. Interviews were conducted with all families exiting one of six emergency family shelters in Worcester, Massachusetts, between November 2006, and November 2007. Analyses, using an ordinary least squares regression model, find that families with a positive alcohol or drug screen in the year prior stay 85 days longer than those without a positive screen; families leaving shelter with a housing subsidy stay 66 days longer than those leaving without a subsidy.Demographic factors, education, employment, health, and mental health are not found to predict shelter stay duration. Consistent with prior research, housing resources relate to families\u27 time in shelter; with the exception of a positive substance abuse screen, individual-level problems are not related to their time in shelter. Efforts to expand these resources at the local, state, and national levels are a high priority. 
 
PREDICTION: 
the structure of the emotional response of a family to its experience of abuse is studied in the case of sexual abuse .<n> the family s emotional response is quantified by its level of attachment to the abuse , its degree of involvement in the abuse and its tolerance of the abuse .<n> the analysis is based on the empirical observation that the response of the family to its experience of abuse depends strongly on its level of attachment to the abuse , its degree of involvement in the abuse and its tolerance of the abuse .<n> the analysis is performed for two cases of abuse : one case in which the family has been experiencing sexual abuse for more than two decades and the other case in which the family has not been experiencing sexual abuse .<n> the results show that the family s emotional response depends on its level of attachment to the abuse , its degree of involvement in the abuse and its tolerance of the abuse .<n> the analysis is used to predict the level of attachment of the family to its experience of abuse . <n> sexual abuse is one of the major problems in contemporary society .<n> it is the most virulent of thecommunicable diseases and the most lethal of the sexually transmitted diseases .<n> it is also one of the reasons for the low vaccination 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 University of Massachusetts Medical School eScholarship@UMMS Family Medicine and Community Health Publications and Presentations Family Medicine and Community Health 2010-1 Exiting shelter: an epidemiological analysis of barriers and facilitators for families Linda F. Weinreb University of Massachusetts Medical School Et al. Let us know how access to this document benefits you. Follow this and additional works at: https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/fmch_articles Part of the Community Health and Preventive Medicine Commons, Preventive Medicine Commons, and the Primary Care Commons Repository Citation Weinreb LF, Rog DJ, Henderson KA. (2010). Exiting shelter: an epidemiological analysis of barriers and facilitators for families. Family Medicine and Community Health Publications and Presentations. Retrieved from https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/fmch_articles/223 This material is brought to you by eScholarship@UMMS. It has been accepted for inclusion in Family Medicine and Community Health Publications and Presentations by an authorized administrator of eScholarship@UMMS. For more information, please contact Lisa.Palmer@umassmed.edu. Exiting Shelter: An Epidemiological Analysis of Barriers and Facilitators for FamiliesAuthor(s): Linda Weinreb, Debra J. Rog, Kathryn A. HendersonSource: The Social Service Review, Vol. 84, No. 4 (December 2010), pp. 597-614Published by: The University of Chicago PressStable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/657108 .Accessed: 09/02/2011 10:15Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unlessyou have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and youmay use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress. .Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printedpage of such transmission.JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range ofcontent in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new formsof scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to TheSocial Service Review.http://www.jstor.orgSocial Service Review (December 2010). 2010 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.0037-7961/2010/8404-0003$10.00Exiting Shelter: AnEpidemiological Analysisof Barriers and Facilitatorsfor FamiliesLinda WeinrebUniversity of MassachusettsDebra J. RogWestat and the Rockville InstituteKathryn A. HendersonWestatThis study examines the role of individual- and family-level factors in predicting the lengthof shelter stays for homeless families. Interviews were conducted with all families exiting oneof six emergency family shelters in Worcester, Massachusetts, between November 2006, andNovember 2007. Analyses, using an ordinary least squares regression model, find that familieswith a positive alcohol or drug screen in the year prior stay 85 days longer than those withouta positive screen; families leaving shelter with a housing subsidy stay 66 days longer thanthose leaving without a subsidy. Demographic factors, education, employment, health, andmental health are not found to predict shelter stay duration. Consistent with prior research,housing resources relate to families’ time in shelter; with the exception of a positive substanceabuse screen, individual-level problems are not related to their time in shelter. Efforts toexpand these resources at the local, state, and national levels are a high priority.One-third of the homeless population in the United States is composedof families. In 2008, 159,000 families and 360,000 children experiencedhomelessness. This represents a 9 percent increase over the prior year(U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2009). For fam-ilies, a homeless spell commonly means staying in a family shelter foranywhere from one night to as long as 18 months (Culhane et al. 2007).598 Social Service ReviewLittle research investigates pathways out of homelessness and into res-idential stability. Much of the literature on homeless families focuses onpathways into homelessness, describing the characteristics and needs ofthese families (Rog et al. 1995; Bassuk et al. 1996; Shinn et al. 1998). Inthe few studies that examine residential stability, receipt of subsidiesemerges as the most common factor in facilitating homeless families’stability (Stretch and Kreuger 1992; Wong, Culhane, and Kuhn 1997;Shinn et al. 1998; Rog and Buckner 2007). Most studies find that race,ethnicity (Wong et al. 1997), and family structure (i.e., families of youngwomen who recently gave birth; Metraux and Culhane 1999) are corre-lated with risk for additional homeless episodes, but the results demon-strate mixed support of the relationship of stability with such other in-dividual factors as depression, domestic violence, and substance abuse(Metraux and Culhane 1999; Bassuk, Perloff, and Dawson 2001; Rog andBuckner 2007).Some guidance emerges from the literature on adult individuals’ tran-sitions into and out of homelessness. Past studies recognize the hetero-geneity of the population and varying patterns of homelessness (Sosin2003). These studies note that both the diverse characteristics of thehomeless population and varying patterns of homelessness can allow formore targeted programs and policies (Sosin 2003). Other research doc-uments the association of chronic, individual homelessness with someform of disability or other behavioral health barrier that limits successfulexit from homelessness and entry into housing stability (Culhane et al.2007). Most homeless adults, however, maintain a stable exit after a shortperiod of homelessness (Culhane et al. 2007). The literature on adulthomelessness points to the limitations of stratification and individual-levelexplanations. It suggests the usefulness of a more complex, situationalexplanation that emphasizes the interaction of resource issues with otherlife circumstances and, indirectly, with personal characteristics. Such aneffort may help to explain most individuals’ transitions into and out ofhomelessness (Sosin 2003). This explanation notes the roles that key lifeevents may play in homelessness (e.g., convergence of job loss, high med-ical expenses, and inadequate supportive relationships). It may also con-sider the interaction of less extreme resource problems with personalcircumstances (e.g., conflicted relationships with family; Sosin 2003).Recent work by Dennis Culhane and colleagues (2007), however, sug-gests that, for families, personal circumstances may have less bearingon the timing of shelter exits than policy and program factors. Culhaneand associates’ (2007) analysis, based on four states’ administrative dataand patterned after previous research involving single homeless adults(Kuhn and Culhane 1998), attempts to understand the distinctionsamong short-term, episodically, and chronically homeless families. Thisresearch suggests that families with long shelter stays do not demonstratemore intensive service needs, disability, or unemployment than thoseExiting Shelter 599with short shelter stays; however, at least one critique of the study (Bassuk2007) notes that families’ experiences may not be adequately capturedin studies that use the same methodology with families as with adults.Information on use of inpatient psychiatric services and other measuresavailable through administrative data sources are likely not sensitive tothe nature of the mental health conditions that families contend with(e.g., depression and posttraumatic stress). Administrative data also maynot capture such family circumstances as credit problems, children’sneeds, legal difficulties, and other issues. Family strengths, such as em-ployment and employability, may also escape notice in administrativedata sets but could potentially relate to homeless exit time. Whereasthe study by Culhane and colleagues (2007) makes an important con-tribution to the understanding of different subgroups of homeless fam-ilies, the results require corroboration and elaboration to fully capturethe range of families’ needs and the extent to which they relate to theirhomelessness experience (Karnas 2007).In fact, interest in developing a typology of homeless families providesthe impetus for the work by Culhane and associates (2007), as well asthat by Debra Rog, C. Scott Holupka, and Lisa Patton (2007). The majorgoal of such a classification system is to improve understanding of home-less families’ characteristics, service needs, and interaction with humanservices systems. Another goal is to clarify how those features relate tothe dynamics of shelter use. Understanding the factors that explainvariations in shelter exits may inform improvements to the allocationof resources and expedite families’ exit.The current study is designed to extend this earlier work. It attemptsto understand the extent to which individual- and family-level factorspredict length of shelter stay. This study collected data directly fromfamilies at the point of exit from shelter. For families, exiting shelter isoften synonymous with exiting an episode of literal homelessness, unlikefor homeless adult individuals, for whom a shelter exit may not resultin an exit from homelessness. The majority of families, when exitingemergency shelter, go to some type of housing arrangement, includingdoubled-up arrangements, market rate housing, subsidized housing, andtransitional housing. Understanding the factors that relate to time inexit from emergency shelter is, therefore, relevant to study for familiesand will allow for more effective service matching at the front end ofhomelessness to families’ needs and specific situations.Study Design and MethodsSampleOf the 278 families entering the six emergency family shelters in Worces-ter, Massachusetts, between November 2006 and November 2007, 91600 Social Service Reviewpercent (n p 253) consented to be contacted for interviews upon theirexit. Families were identified through the shelters and the Central Mas-sachusetts Housing Alliance, the local agency contracted by Massachu-setts Department of Transitional Assistance (DTA) to provide housingsearch services to all homeless families. During the study period, fiveshelters contracted with the state’s DTA and had criteria for determininga family’s eligibility to receive shelter; the sixth shelter offers familiescommunity beds (i.e., not contracted through the DTA) and providesservices similar to those offered by the DTA contract shelters.1During the study period, 184 families exited the six shelters and wereeligible for the exit analysis. Of these families, 76 percent (n p 139)completed an exit interview, and administrative data provide exit datesfor all of these families. As the respondent pool is primarily female andthe analysis focuses on factors (such as mental health and substanceabuse) that likely are sensitive to gender differences, the final sample forthis analysis excludes the small number of father-only families (n p 6).Families that were asked to leave the shelter by staff (n p 12) also areexcluded, as the interest in this analysis lies in factors that explain vol-untary exits. The resulting sample is composed of 121 families.2Data CollectionTrained female interviewers conducted in-person interviews with moth-ers in the sampled families. Interviews generally took place in a privateshelter office, in the family’s new housing arrangement, or at the study’sresearch office within the University of Massachusetts Medical School.Each interview took approximately 60–75 minutes. Interviews were con-ducted either 2 weeks prior to or 2 weeks following shelter exit. Theinterview protocol was modified in light of results from a pilot testconducted with six families. Spanish-language versions of the instrumentwere developed and administered by bilingual interviewers.Participants received $20 per hour for their participation in the in-terviews. They also received provisions for transportation and child care.The study received approval from the University of Massachusetts Med-ical School Institutional Review Board.VariablesThe study’s main dependent variable is the number of days in emergencyshelter. Shelter entry and exit dates are obtained from the study par-ticipants. They are confirmed (or completed, in cases of missing dates)with data from the shelter and the Central Massachusetts Housing Al-liance. For families with consecutive stays in multiple shelters (either inWorcester or in multiple areas), the number of days in a shelter stay iscomputed using the date of entry into the first shelter.The interview included items on demographics, family composition,Exiting Shelter 601household income, and debt (i.e., housing-related debt, including backrent, back utilities, and money owed to housing authority; as well asother sources of debt, e.g., credit cards and cell phone bills), the moth-ers’ education level, employment, health, mental health, experience oftrauma, substance abuse, and criminal and legal involvement. Infor-mation was gathered on whether conflict occurred in the family’s house-hold before the current homeless episode, making it impossible to stay.Standardized measures are used for a number of these domains. A 6-month residential history is assessed through the Residential Follow-Back Calendar (New Hampshire-Dartmouth Psychiatric Research Cen-ter 1995). Additional questions cover experiences with homelessnessover the lifetime and during the 2 years prior to survey.Health functioning is assessed with four selected questions from thephysical component summary (PCS) in the SF-8 Health Survey (Wareet al. 2001). The PCS is standardized, and scores range from zero to100 (average is 50). Scores less than 40 (i.e., one standard deviation ormore below the mean) are considered to fall within the clinical range.Three measures of mental health status are used. The GAD-7, a seven-item scale, screens for general anxiety disorder (Spitzer et al. 2006).Scores between 10 and 14 represent moderate anxiety; scores of 15 orgreater represent severe anxiety.The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) is a nine-item instrumentthat makes criteria-based diagnoses of depression (Spitzer et al. 1999).Items in the questionnaire are concordant with the fourth edition ofthe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (American Psy-chiatric Association 1994). Scores of 10–14 represent moderate de-pression, scores of 15–19 represent moderately severe depression, andscores of 20 or greater represent severe depression. Because the inter-views were conducted in nonclinical, community-based settings, the in-terview did not include the ninth item, which concerns suicidal ideation(for this omission in other studies, see Kroenke and Spitzer [2002]).The Maternal Health-SF-8 Mental Component Summary (MCS; Wareet al. 2001) is derived from the four items measuring mental healthfunctioning. Like the PCS, the MCS is standardized. Scores range fromzero to 100. The average score is 50, and scores less than 40 (i.e., onestandard deviation or more below the mean) are considered to fallwithin the clinical range. Also measured are the number of times awoman was hospitalized for psychiatric or emotional problems in herlifetime and whether she ever attempted suicide.The TWEAK screening test (Chan et al. 1993; Russell 1994), a five-question test originally designed to screen pregnant women for harmfuldrinking habits, is employed to screen for alcohol use.3 Also used toscreen for harmful drinking in general household samples (Chan et al.1993), the test is found to be highly predictive of alcohol abuse anddependence in racially mixed populations (Bradley et al. 1998; Cherpitel602 Social Service Review1999). The maximum score on the test is 7 points; a total score of 2 ormore on the test indicates harmful drinking and the need for furtherevaluation (O’Connor and Whaley 2003). A version of the Drug AbuseScreening Test (DAST), the DAST-10, is a brief iteration of the 28-itemDAST (Skinner 1982). The DAST-10 is designed to identify drug-abuse-related problems in the year prior to interview (Cocco and Carey 1998;French et al. 2001). Scores of 3 or greater represent moderate or severeproblems related to drug use.Exposure to traumatic events is assessed using a four-item traumaindex that is based on the Life Stressors Checklist-Revised (LSC-R) de-veloped by Jessica Wolfe and colleagues (1996). The test was adaptedby the Homeless Families Study (Sacks et al., forthcoming). The indexconsists of items measuring lifetime exposure, exposure as an adult,exposure as a child, and exposure within the 6 months prior to survey,to physical trauma and violence, sexual assault, and sexual abuse.Trauma symptom severity is measured with the Posttraumatic SymptomSeverity Scale (PSS; Foa et al. 1997), a 17-item self-report instrumentthat assesses the three diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic stress dis-order (PTSD), as well as the severity of the symptoms. Scores rangefrom zero to 51; higher scores indicate more stress.Families exiting shelter were also asked a series of questions aboutwhere they were going after exiting. These questions investigate housingtype and location.AnalysisDescriptive analyses provide a summary of the study population’s char-acteristics. Ordinary least squares regression is used to regress selectedindependent variables on length of shelter stay.4 Selection of the initialset of predictor variables is based on theory and findings from pastresearch. Before the final selection of variables, the authors examinedbivariate correlations and checked the variables for normality. Whenappropriate, the authors transformed highly skewed continuous vari-ables into dichotomous measures (e.g., the number of mental healthhospitalizations to a measure of whether the subject was ever hospital-ized for mental health issues). To select the predictor variables for do-mains in which multiple factors (i.e., mental health, substance abuse,and trauma) could potentially be related to the outcome of interest,the authors use those predictors that are identified as most theoreticallyrelevant based on the literature (Rog and Buckner 2007). However, anumber of sensitivity tests determined whether alternate measures ofsimilar concepts (i.e., has a chronic or ongoing health problem vs.physical health summary score) have different effects on the dependentvariable. The results are largely consistent across measures within thevarious domains.Exiting Shelter 603The resulting set of predictors includes the specific shelter the familywas staying in, mother’s age, mother’s race (nonwhite or white), mother’seducation level (high school diploma or general equivalency diploma[GED] and more than high school), number of children in the householdunder 18 years, whether there are other adults in the household, the SF-PCS score, MCS score, whether the mother reported a previous suicideattempt, whether the subject was previously hospitalized for mental health,reported past exposure to trauma, positive screen to the TWEAK, andthe positive screen for the DAST-10. Additional predictors include theamount of housing-related debt; conflict in last household that made itimpossible to stay; previous conviction, jail, or prison stay; previous home-lessness; whether the head of household was employed for at least 1 yearin the past; total household income in the 30 days prior to the interview;and whether the family has a housing subsidy.Sensitivity tests were conducted before the final regression. Each cat-egory of variables (e.g., demographics) was regressed on the dependentvariable, independent of the other measures. Results for these tests aresimilar to those for the full models.ResultsSample CharacteristicsThe vast majority of sampled families are composed of single mothersand their children (table 1). On average, sampled families are reportedto include two children under the age of 18. Approximately 25 percentof the mothers report that they have a child who lives away from them.One-third (34 percent) of mothers are white, 40 percent are Hispanic,and 25 percent are black. Only 13 percent of mothers report that theyare married, but 25 percent report that another adult lives in the house-hold (these adults may be partners, siblings, or parents). Mothers, onaverage, were 30 years old at the time of the interview, and the majorityreportedly has at least a high school diploma or GED. Most (95 percent)report that they have been employed in the past. The reported meanhousehold income during the 30 days prior to the interview is $696. Withrespect to entitlements, 64 percent report that their families receive ben-efits from the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program, and 94percent report receiving food stamps. Only 17 percent of mothers reportthat they were employed just prior to entering shelter, and over a third(37 percent) report that they are unable to work. Sampled families aresimilar to those described in prior studies of homeless families in termsof mothers’ average age, number and ages of children, percent that aremembers of minority groups, employment history, and income levels,though they reported a somewhat greater likelihood of having a GED orhigh school diploma (Rog and Buckner 2007). Families are similar inTable 1Worcester Shelter Family Characteristics at Exit% or MeanDemographic characteristics:Age (years) 29.60 (8.5)Race (%):White 34Black 25Hispanic 40Other race 9Married (%) 13Family composition:No. of children under 18 2.07 (1.4)Percentage with another adult in household 25No. of other adults in household 1.10 (.6)Percentage with child living away 25Percentage with open DSS plan 22Education level (%):Less than high school diploma 33Finished high school or GED 35More than high school diploma 33Current employment status at time of interview (%):Currently employed 24Unable to work 37Employment histories (%):Ever employed 95Employed for more than 1 year 55Employed prior to entering shelter 17Employed while in shelter 17Last place stayed (%):Stayed in own place 19Stayed in parent’s place 17Stayed in doubled-up place 55Stayed in treatment facility 2Homeless prior to entering shelter 6Residential history (%):Previously homeless in last 2 years 19Previously homeless in lifetime 50Experienced conflicts in last household 47Health (%):Pregnant 14Fair or poor health 37Low physical health functioning (SF8-PCS) 12Mental health indicators (%):Attempted suicide 23Hospitalized for mental health 24Moderate or severe depression score (PHQ-9) 36Moderate or severe anxiety score (GAD-7) 37Low mental health functioning (SF8-MCS) 14Received mental health services in shelter* 48Substance abuse (%):Positive screen for alcohol abuse (TWEAK) 33Positive screen for drug abuse (DAST-10) 16Positive screen for alcohol or drug abuse 36Substance abuse contract with shelter 23Received substance abuse services in shelter† 5Physical and sexual abuse (%):Ever experienced trauma (LSC-R) 64Experienced trauma in 6 months prior tointerview 7Exiting Shelter 605Moderate or severe trauma symptoms (PSS) 34Received trauma services in shelter‡ 49Legal and criminal history (%):Convicted of a felony 9Spent time in jail or prison because of aconviction 11Currently dealing with legal problems 39Debt:Percentage with debt upon entering shelter 83Mean amount of debt upon entering shelter ($) 4,063 (5,204)Median amount of debt upon entering shelter ($) 1,665Percentage with debt at time of interview 79Mean amount of debt at time of interview ($) 3,654 (4,759)Median amount of debt at time of interview ($) 1,665Percentage with housing debt 52Mean amount of housing debt ($) 1,182 (2,092)Median amount of housing debt ($) 175Income ($):Mean income in 30 days prior to interview 696 (478)Median income in 30 days prior to interview 492Benefits (%):Has a housing subsidy 42Receives TANF 64Receives food stamps 94Receives WIC 61Receives school lunch 77Receives day care vouchers 35Exit destinations (%):One’s own apartment with a housing subsidy 39One’s own apartment without a housing subsidy 19Doubled-up residence 8Transitional housing program 33Other arrangement 2Note.—N p 121. Standard deviations are in parentheses. DSS p Depart-ment of Social Services; SF8-PCS p SF-8 Health Survey Physical ComponentSummary; PHQ-9 p Patient Health Questionnaire-9 items; GAD-7 p Gen-eralized Anxiety Disorder-7 questions; SF8-MCS p SF-8 Health Survey MentalComponent Summary; TWEAK p Tolerance, Worried, Eye Opener, Amnesia,K/Cut Down; DAST-10 p Drug Abuse Screening Test-10 item; LSC-R p LifeStressors Checklist-Revised; PSS p Posttraumatic Symptom Severity Scale; GEDp General Equivalency Diploma; TANF p Temporary Assistance for NeedyFamilies program benefits; WIC p Special Supplemental Nutrition Programfor Women, Infants, and Children.* Of those 52 with a moderate or severe mental health indicator.† Of those 43 with a positive screen for alcohol or drugs.‡ Of those 41 with a moderate or severe trauma indicator.terms of demographic factors (i.e., maternal age, family composition,racial composition) to housed low-income families headed by women inthe same geographic area (Bassuk et al. 1996).The results suggest that most families (72 percent) lived with parentsor doubled up (i.e., with friends or family) prior to entering the shelter.About half the population (47 percent) cites conflicts in their last house-hold as a reason for their current homelessness, and about 50 percentreport at least one prior episode of homelessness.On average, mothers score in the healthy range on both the mentalhealth (MCS) and health functioning scales (PCS; score of 50 or606 Social Service Reviewgreater). More than half (64 percent), however, report experiencingphysical or sexual abuse, and 34 percent report moderate or severetrauma symptoms. About a fourth of the mothers report that they at-tempted suicide at some point (23 percent), and a similar percentage(24 percent) reports a prior hospitalization for a mental health reason;15 percent report both. Thirty-six percent of the mothers are reportedto have moderate or severe depression, and 37 percent report moderateor severe anxiety. Fourteen percent report a low mental health func-tioning score. Of those mothers with one or more of these three mentalhealth indicators, 48 percent report receiving mental health serviceswhile in shelter. Results from the TWEAK and DAST-10 assessmentssuggest that over one-third of mothers (36 percent) have positive screensfor current alcohol (33 percent) or drug (16 percent) problems, andnearly a fourth (23 percent) of mothers report that they have a substanceabuse contract with the shelter. A substance abuse contract is an agree-ment between the head of household and the shelter. The head ofhousehold agrees to abstain from substance use, but the contract is nota treatment plan, per se. There is substantial variation in the ways thatshelters use such contracts. For example, shelters differ both in termsof which families participate in establishing a contract and in the extentto which the contrast encourages participation in treatment. None ofthe shelters uses a contract that mandates treatment. Only 5 percent ofwomen with a positive drug or alcohol screen report receiving substanceabuse services while in shelter.Thirty-nine percent of mothers report that their families have legalproblems, including housing-related legal problems (e.g., eviction, prop-erty damage), and other legal problems (e.g., bankruptcy, divorce, cus-tody issues, and criminal charges); much smaller percentages reportthat they have a felony conviction (9 percent) or past incarcerationspells (prison or jail; 11 percent). The vast majority of families (83percent) report having had one or more debts upon shelter entrance.Participants indicate that these debts are the same amount at the timeof their exit as at the time of shelter entrance. Over half (52 percent)report that they have housing debt; the average reported housing debtis $1,182. Mothers indicate that the top sources of debt include unpaidutilities, cable bills, and cell phone charges.A sizable percentage of the sampled families reports that they exit totheir own apartment with a housing subsidy (39 percent) or to a tran-sitional housing program (33 percent). Smaller percentages report ex-iting to their own apartment without a housing subsidy (19 percent) orto a doubled-up situation, such as a parent’s or partner’s residence (8percent). Very few families, less than 2 percent, report exiting to anotherarrangement such as a substance abuse treatment center or a mentalhealth facility.Exiting Shelter 607Table 2Mean Days in Shelter by ShelterNMean Daysin Shelter SD Minimum MaximumShelter A 19 258.16* 163.15 56 831Shelter B 43 221.77 131.99 33 548Shelter C 24 174.75 109.12 31 414Shelter D 17 193.59 95.48 75 472Shelter E 9 119.22* 88.50 21 259Shelter F 9 120.44* 72.83 15 212Total 121 197.24 128.17 15 831* p ! .05.Explaining Length of Shelter StayTable 2 displays data on the number of days families spend in shelter.Overall, the average reported shelter stay for sampled families is a littlemore than 6 months (197.24 days), though there is wide variation byfamily. Eleven percent of the families report staying less than 2 months(59 days or fewer), whereas 20 percent report staying over 10 months(314 days or more), with nearly half of those (9 percent of the totalsample) staying over a year. Because the lengths of shelter stays aresubject to shelters’ distinct policies and practices, either stated or un-stated, it is important to understand how average stays vary across shel-ters. The results suggest that there are differences among the shelters,though the differences are not statistically significant. Two shelters, shel-ters E and F, are found to have average stays of about 4 months (about120 days), whereas the average stay in shelter A is found to be longerthan 8 months (258.16 days). Stays at the other three shelters are es-timated to average between 6 and 7 months (174.75–221.77 days).Table 3 presents the results for the ordinary least squares equationsmodeling length of shelter stay for families that exited shelter. The modelis estimated to explain 45 percent of the variance in the dependent var-iable. Among the families of mothers with a positive alcohol or drug screenin the 12 months prior to interview, shelter stays are estimated to be 85days longer than the stays of families whose mother does not have apositive screen. Those who report leaving shelter with a housing subsidyare estimated to stay 66 days longer than those who exit without a subsidy.The results suggest that the number of children in the household ispositively related to the length of shelter stay. Having another adult inthe household is found to be negatively associated with the length ofshelter stay. The findings suggest that age, race, education, current orhistorical measures of health and mental health, criminal history, conflictin the last household, monthly income, and whether one has a workhistory of a year or more are not statistically significant predictors of lengthof stay.608 Social Service ReviewTable 3Predictors of Time to Shelter Exitb SEIntercept 129.96 100.16Shelter (D is reference):Shelter A 69.98 39.52Shelter B 41.19 33.80Shelter C 15.00 37.23Shelter E 31.59 46.57Shelter F 16.66 49.90Demographic characteristics:Age .68 1.28Nonwhite (white is reference) 26.70 24.66High school diploma or higher 21.16 24.33No. of children 17.10* 8.39Has another adult in household 52.46* 25.77Health and well-being:Summary physical health score .89 1.07Summary mental health score 1.24 .92Attempted suicide 35.17 31.77Ever hospitalized for mental health 46.20 31.74Ever experienced trauma 48.15 25.55Positive alcohol or drug screen 85.44*** 23.62Barriers:Amount of housing debt (in hun-dreds of dollars) 1.12* .52Conflicts in last household 14.42 21.42Criminal history 33.13 35.61Previously homeless 23.70 21.11Assets:Worked for at least 1 year in past 32.89 23.71Total monthly income (in hun-dreds of dollars) 4.79 2.44Has a housing subsidy 66.25** 21.81R2 .45Note.—N p 121.* p ! .05.** p ! .01.*** p ! .001.DiscussionThis study provides an important opportunity to understand the factorsrelated to the length of stay in family shelters and adds to the literaturein a number of ways. First, the study sample represents a census offamilies exiting shelter rather than a sample of convenience or a samplethat has defined needs and is selected as part of an evaluation study.Second, the study focuses on needs and experiences of families as theyexit shelter. Most of the literature on homeless families focuses eitheron pathways into homelessness or on housing, supports, and other fac-tors associated with residential stability. Little research considers thefactors associated with time spent in shelter and those that hinder orfacilitate exit. Finally, this study builds on the work of Culhane andothers (2007) by incorporating detailed and standardized measures ofExiting Shelter 609the range of needs and strengths that families have. These measuresare included in order to examine the relationship of these variables toshelter length of stay.Overall, the findings suggest that few individual-level variables havepredictive value, alone or together. Interestingly, the two main predictorsof shelter stay, having a positive alcohol or drug screen and exiting witha housing subsidy, seem to suggest that multiple forces are at work.Families headed by a mother with a positive alcohol or drug screen arefound to stay statistically significantly longer (nearly 3 months longer)than those headed by mothers whose screen is not positive. There maybe several explanations for this. Mothers who are using substances maybe less able to find housing on their own and may not have family orfriends willing to take them. It is also possible that shelter providers donot actively encourage a mother to exit until she is engaged in a treat-ment program. They may believe that the shelter stay provides an op-portunity for families to get their needs met and to become stable beforereturning to their own housing.The results concerning housing subsidies suggest the possibility thatfamilies hold out in shelter until a subsidy becomes available. About 42percent of the families in the sample report that they exited shelter witha housing subsidy, and the majority (97 percent) moved to their ownapartment (3 percent [n p 5] that had a subsidy chose to move to adoubled-up situation rather than an apartment with the subsidy). Theestimates suggest that they exit, on average, nearly 2 months later thanother sampled families. Anecdotal evidence provided to the authors byshelter workers suggests that families remain in shelter, and are oftenbelieved to enter shelter in the first place, in order to obtain a housingsubsidy. Prior studies report that policies in some locales require a familyto have an extended shelter stay before they will grant the family ahousing subsidy (Wong et al. 1997). The wait for housing subsidies canbe quite substantial, however, and the costs of using shelters as holdingplaces are high; the system incurs monetary costs, and the family incursinstability. In addition, using shelters in this way likely extends unnec-essarily the length of stays for families that may have relatively few bar-riers to exit (Culhane et al. 2007). However, given the strong relationshipbetween housing stability and having a subsidy (Wong et al. 1997; Shinnet al. 1998; Rog and Buckner 2007), the financial cost of an extendedshelter stay may be offset by savings realized through reductions in therates of future homeless episodes (Wong et al. 1997). Despite this, studyresults suggest the need for strategies that provide early housing supportto families.Other variables that are found to predict length of stay include thenumber of children in the household, the number of adults in the house-hold, and the amount of housing debt. The number of children canprovide a barrier to exiting shelter because it can be challenging to find610 Social Service Reviewaffordable housing with the bedrooms needed for large families. Thisfinding is consistent with earlier research (Wong et al. 1997). The resultssuggest that the number of adults in a household can act as a protectivefactor. Prior research on residential stability also finds that, among familieswith incomes at or below 50 percent of the federal poverty level, havingone or more other adults (in addition to the household head) helps keepthe family in stable housing (Rog et al. 2007). It is possible that havinganother adult in the household contributes to income levels, thus im-proving the chances of a quick exit from shelter. Another adult mayadd tangible resources, such as child care or transportation, resourcesthat may aid in job or housing search activities by the other adult. Otheradults may also provide emotional support. All of these contributionsmay hasten the family’s shelter exit. Alternatively, families with morethan one adult in the household may be separated while in shelter; theymay therefore look desperately for alternatives to shorten their shelterstays.Finally, the results suggest that housing debt is negatively associatedwith the length of shelter stay, with longer stays observed among thosefamilies with less housing debt. This relationship is difficult to explain.It may represent families that have some type of subsidized housing andno source of income. Such conditions might make it necessary for thesefamilies to stay in shelter long enough to receive a subsidy.What are the implications of these findings? First, much as it is difficultto predict which families will become homeless, it is difficult to predictwhich families will exit homelessness early and which will exit late. Theresults identify few individual-level predictors of shelter stay. Althoughfamilies with substance use issues are an exception, the needs of familieswith long shelter stays are not found to be that distinct from the needsof families with shorter ones. This provides additional support for previousfindings (Culhane et al. 2007), which suggest that families with long staysdo not demonstrate more intensive service needs, disability, or unem-ployment than those with shorter stays. The estimated relationship be-tween subsidy receipt and length of stay suggests that families’ length oftime in shelter is less a function of their needs and characteristics thanof resource factors.Second, the observed relationship between substance use and shelterstay is consistent with prior work and warrants further study. In contrastto prior studies that measure the presence of substance use disorder,this study measures substance-use-related vulnerability and need for fur-ther evaluation. Although this measure lacks the specificity of othermeasures of disorder, it is likely to have more sensitivity, identifying boththe range of individuals likely to have substance use disorders and thoseat risk for such disorders. Measures that examine risk of substance useand problem substance use correlate well with clinical measures andExiting Shelter 611can predict relevant concerns that relate to functioning (Schmidt, Weis-ner, and Wiley 1998).Prior studies find that substance use among low-income women, andparticularly those who are homeless, is associated with housing insta-bility. Much like results in this study, those findings relate to difficultyexiting homelessness and to prolonged episodes of homelessness (Gre-goire 1996; Zlotnick, Tam, and Robertson 2003). One reason for theassociation between substance abuse and prolonged housing instabilitymay be that homeless women’s substance use often goes untreated(Zima et al. 1996; Robertson, Zlotnick, and Westerfelt 1997; Zerger2002). Among homeless women with a substance use disorder, only one-third report contact with any treatment services during the prior year(Zlotnick et al. 2003). A critical step in helping this subgroup of womento exit homelessness may be the development of accessible and effectiveways to provide them with treatment for problem alcohol and drug use.Finally, the possibility that families wait to leave shelter until theyreceive housing subsidies raises an important question: how might onebroaden the nature of housing resources available to families? The re-sources spent on each sheltered family are not inconsequential. In citieslike New York, shelter costs far exceed the cost of housing (Spellmanet al. 2010). The current study’s findings support the move by systemsacross the country to consider a broad range of supports for families,including shallow subsidies to time-limited subsidies, as well as othermeans of support, as a way to help families exit shelter (Rog and Buckner2007).A few limitations in this study should be noted. First, the study in-terviewed families at the point of shelter exit, and any background orhistory variables were measured at that time. Some recall issues and theexperience of being in shelter could influence the data provided, es-pecially the reports of residential history and knowledge of services.Further, there are potential trade-offs involved in using measures forcurrent status at exit rather than measures for status at shelter entrythat may have limited the predictive power of some variables. Some ofthe study measures (e.g., mental health functioning) may be less pre-dictive of length of stay than they would be if assessed at shelter entry.Other measures, such as substance use, may be more accurately assessedat or near the time of exit than at the time of entry, because honestresponses at the beginning of a shelter stay might increase families’vulnerability. Despite this concern, however, many of the study’s vari-ables measure lifetime and historical events and therefore are not de-pendent on the timing of the interview. Finally, the number of familiestracked is relatively small, although the number represents a year’s cen-sus in one middle-sized city. To achieve statistical significance, predictorvariables’ relationship with the length of stay must be relatively strong.612 Social Service ReviewIn particular, if the sample includes a small subset of families with spe-cific types of situations that affect their length of stay, the analyses areunlikely to recognize that group.In summary, the current findings suggest that many of the factorspreviously found to relate to families’ risk for homelessness (Shinn etal. 1998; Rog and Buckner 2007) do not predict duration of shelterstays. A positive substance abuse screen, however, is found to relate tothe length of stay and warrants additional investigation. However, otherindividual-level factors are not statistically significant predictors of timeto shelter exit for families. Although this study does not examine a rangeof program and policy factors, having a housing subsidy is estimated tobe statistically significantly related to the length of time a family staysin shelter. The results of this study, bolstered by the strengths in mea-surement and sampling, add support to the finding that families’ timein shelter likely has less to do with their constellation of needs andstrengths than with the housing resources available. Efforts to broadenthese resources therefore should be a priority at the local, state, andnational levels.ReferencesAmerican Psychiatric Association. 1994. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.Bassuk, Ellen L. 2007. “Comment on Dennis P. Culhane et al.’s, ‘Testing a Typology ofFamily Homelessness Based on Patterns of Public Shelter Utilization in Four U.S.Jurisdictions: Implications for Policy and Program Planning.’” Housing Policy Debate18 (1): 29–41.Bassuk, Ellen L, Jennifer N. Perloff, and Ree Dawson. 2001. “Multiply Homeless Families:The Insidious Impact of Violence.” Housing Policy Debate 12 (2): 299–320.Bassuk, Ellen L, Linda Weinreb, John C. Buckner, Angela Browne, Amy Salomon, andShari S. Bassuk. 1996. “The Characteristics and Needs of Sheltered Homeless andLow-Income Housed Mothers.” Journal of the American Medical Association 276 (8): 640–46.Bradley, Katharine, Jodie Boyd-Wickizer, Suzanne H. Powell, and Marcia L. Burman. 1998.“Alcohol Screening Questionnaires in Women: A Critical Review.” Journal of the Amer-ican Medical Association 280 (2): 166–71.Chan, Arthur W. K., Edward A. Pristach, John W. Welte, and Marcia Russell. 1993. “Useof the TWEAK Test in Screening for Alcoholism/Heavy Drinking in Three Popula-tions.” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 17 (6): 1188–92.Cherpitel, Cheryl J. 1999. “Screening for Alcohol Problems in the U.S. General Population:A Comparison of the CAGE and TWEAK by Gender, Ethnicity, and Services Utiliza-tion.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol 60 (5): 705–11.Cocco, Karen M., and Kate B. Carey. 1998. “Psychometric Properties of the Drug AbuseScreening Test in Psychiatric Outpatients.” Psychological Assessment 10 (4): 408–14.Culhane, Dennis P., Stephen Metraux, Jung Min Park, Maryanne Schretzman, and JesseValente. 2007. “Testing a Typology of Family Homelessness Based on Patterns of PublicShelter Utilization in Four U.S. Jurisdictions: Implications for Policy and ProgramPlanning.” Housing Policy Debate 18 (1): 1–28.Foa, Edna B., Laurie Cashman, Lisa Jaycox, and Kevin Perry. 1997. “The Validation of aSelf-Report Measure of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Posttraumatic DiagnosticScale.” Psychological Assessment 9 (4): 445–51.French, Michael T., M. Christopher Roebuck, Kerry Anne McGeary, Dale D. Chitwood,and Clyde B. McCoy. 2001. “Using the Drug Abuse Screening Test (DAST-10) toExiting Shelter 613Analyze Health Services Utilization and Cost for Substance Users in a Community-Based Setting.” Substance Use and Misuse 36 (6–7): 927–46.Gregoire, Thomas K. 1996. “Subtypes of Alcohol Involvement and Their Relationships toExits from Homelessness.” Substance Use and Misuse 31 (10): 1333–57.Karnas, Fred. 2007. “Comment on Dennis P. Culhane et al.’s ‘Testing a Typology of FamilyHomelessness Based on Patterns of Public Shelter Utilization in Four U.S. Jurisdic-tions: Implications for Policy and Program Planning.’” Housing Policy Debate 18 (1):59–67.Kroenke, Kurt, and Robert L. Spitzer. 2002. “The PHQ-9: A New Depression Diagnosticand Severity Measure.” Psychiatric Annals 32 (9): 509–15.Kuhn, Randall, and Dennis P. Culhane. 1998. “Applying Cluster Analysis to Test a Typologyof Homelessness by Pattern of Shelter Utilization: Results from the Analysis of Ad-ministrative Data.” American Journal of Community Psychology 26 (2): 207–32.Metraux, Stephen, and Dennis P. Culhane. 1999. “Family Dynamics, Housing, and Re-curring Homelessness among Women in New York City Homeless Shelters.” Journalof Family Issues 20 (3): 371–96.New Hampshire-Dartmouth Psychiatric Research Center. 1995. Residential Follow-Back Cal-endar. Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University Medical School.O’Connor, Mary J., and Shannon E. Whaley. 2003. “Alcohol Use in Pregnant Low-IncomeWomen.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol 64 (6): 773–83.Robertson, Marjorie J., Cheryl Zlotnick, and Alex Westerfelt. 1997. “Drug Use Disordersand Treatment Contact among Homeless Adults in Alameda County, California.”American Journal of Public Health 87 (2): 221–28.Rog, Debra J., and John C. Buckner. 2007. “Homeless Families and Children.” Paperpresented at Toward Understanding Homelessness: The 2007 National Symposiumon Homelessness Research, March 1–2, Washington, DC. http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/homelessness/symposium07/rog/.Rog, Debra J., C. Scott Holupka, and Lisa C. Patton. 2007. Characteristics and Dynamics ofHomeless Families with Children. Report (contract no. 233-02-087 TK14). Washington,DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretaryfor Planning and Evaluation, Office of Human Services Policy.Rog, Debra J., Kimberly L. McCombs-Thornton, Ariana Gilbert-Mongelli, M. ConsueloBrito, and C. Scott Holupka. 1995. “Implementation of the Homeless Families Pro-gram: 2; Characteristics, Strengths, and Needs of Participant Families.” American Jour-nal of Orthopsychiatry 65 (4): 514–28.Russell, Marcia. 1994. “New Assessment Tools for Risk Drinking during Pregnancy: T-ACE,TWEAK, and Others.” Alcohol Health and Research World 18 (1): 55–61.Sacks, Joanne Y., Linda Weinreb, John Ford, Debra J. Rog, Lorraine McMullen, C. ScottHolupka, and Pamela Fischer. Forthcoming. “Trauma in the Lives of Homeless Moth-ers: Findings from the CMSH/CSAT Homeless Families Program.” American Journalof Community Psychology.Schmidt, Laura, Constance Weisner, and James Wiley. 1998. “Substance Abuse and theCourse of Welfare Dependency.” American Journal of Public Health 88 (11): 1616–22.Shinn, Marybeth, Beth C. Weitzman, Daniela Stojanovic, James R. Knickman, LucilaJiménez, Lisa Duchon, Susan James, and David Krantz. 1998. “Predictors of Home-lessness among Families in New York City: From Shelter Request to Housing Stability.”American Journal of Public Health 88 (11): 1651–57.Skinner, Harvey. 1982. “The Drug Abuse Screening Test.” Addictive Behaviors 7 (4): 363–71.Sosin, Michael R. 2003. “Explaining Adult Homelessness in the US by Stratification orSituation.” Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology 13 (2): 91–104.Spellman, Brooke, Jill Khadduri, Brian Sokol, Josh Leopold, and Abt Associates. 2010.Costs Associated with First-Time Homelessness for Families and Individuals. Report, March.Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.Spitzer, Robert L., Kurt Kroenke, Janet B. W. Williams, and Bernd Löwe. 2006. “A BriefMeasure for Assessing Generalized Anxiety Disorder: The GAD-7.” Archives of InternalMedicine 166 (10): 1092–97.Spitzer, Robert L., Kurt Kroenke, Janet B. W. Williams, and the Patient Health Question-naire Primary Care Study Group. 1999. “Validation and Utility of a Self-Report Version614 Social Service Reviewof PRIME-MD: The PHQ Primary Care Study.” Journal of the American Medical Association282 (18): 1737–44.Stretch, John J., and Larry W. Kreuger. 1992. “Five Year Cohort Study of Homeless Families:A Joint Policy Research Venture.” Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare 19 (4): 73–88.U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Community Planningand Development. 2009. The 2008 Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress. Report,July. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Officeof Community Planning and Development.Ware, John E., Mark Kosinski, James E. Dewey, and Barbara Gandek. 2001. How to Scoreand Interpret Single-Item Health Status Measures: A Manual for Users of the SF-8 HealthSurvey. Lincoln, RI: Quality Metric.Wolfe, Jessica, Rachel Kimerling, Pamela J. Brown, Kelly R. Chrestman, Karen Levin. 1996.“Psychometric Review of the Life Stressor Checklist-Revised.” 198–200 in Measurementof Stress, Trauma, and Adaptation, edited by B. Hudnall Stamm. Lutherville, MD: Sidran.Wong, Yin-Ling Irene, Dennis P. Culhane, and Randall Kuhn. 1997. “Predictors of Exitand Reentry among Family Shelter Users in New York City.” Social Service Review 71(3): 441–62.Zerger, Suzanne. 2002. “Substance Abuse Treatment: What Works for Homeless People?A Review of the Literature.” Report, June. National Health Care for the HomelessCouncil, Nashville, TN.Zima, Bonnie T., Kenneth B. Wells, Bernadette Benjamin, and Naihua Duan. 1996. “MentalHealth Problems among Homeless Mothers: Relationship to Service Use and ChildMental Health Problems.” Archives of General Psychiatry 53 (4): 332–38.Zlotnick, Cheryl, Tammy Tam, and Marjorie Robertson. 2003. “Disaffiliation, SubstanceUse, and Exiting Homelessness.” Substance Use and Misuse 38 (3): 577–99.NotesThe study was funded by the Commonwealth Medicine Division of the University ofMassachusetts Medical School. We would like to thank Dorothy St. Cyr for providingoversight to a complex field operation, Amy Grassette and Lorna Chiasson for their input,and a committed team of interviewers. We would also like to acknowledge Grace Carmark,John Wagner, Julia Kehoe, Bob Pulster, Tina Brooks, Worcester shelter directors, andother officials and staff at the Massachusetts Department of Transitional Assistance for theinsights provided throughout all phases of this study.1. Eligibility criteria used by the five shelters include eligibility for emergency assistance.At that time, families were eligible for emergency assistance if the family’s income was ator below 130 percent of the federal poverty line and the family’s assets did not exceed$2,000. The sixth shelter is a community shelter, with broader entry criteria; families fromthis sixth shelter contribute 7 percent to the sample.2. The study is also interested in barriers to shelter exit for families. Therefore, familiesthat reached 6 months in their shelter stay (the average shelter stay in central Massachu-setts) were also interviewed. However, this article’s analysis only includes those familiesthat exited shelter during the study’s data collection period.3. The acronym TWEAK stands for Tolerance, Worried, Eye Opener, Amnesia, K/CutDown.4. Event history analysis was considered because it is typically the preferred analyticmethod for time-measured dependent variables and is the appropriate choice if there arecensored cases (i.e., cases for which the date of shelter exit is unknown). It is not usedfor this analysis because there is complete information for the sample on the time ofshelter exit.