ABSTRACT: 
The recent debate on cognitive phenomenology has largely focused on phenomenal aspects connected to the content of thoughts. By contrasts, aspects pertaining to their attitude have often been neglected, despite the fact that they are distinctive of the mental kind of thought concerned and, moreover, also present in experiences and thus less contentious than purely cognitive aspects. My main goal is to identify two central and closely related aspects of attitude that are phenomenologically salient and shared by thoughts with experiences, namely the rational role that they play in our mental lives and their determination by factors external to them, such as external objects or reasons. In particular, I aim to defend Phenomenal Rationalism about judgemental thoughts and perceptual experiences: the view that their phenomenal character reflects their rational role, that is, their capacity to provide and/or respond to reasons. I conclude with some remarks about how this view may be extended to other kinds of th.. 
 
PREDICTION: 
in the study of the theory of superconductivity , superconductivity of electrons , and superconductivity of photons , the concept of superconductivity is introduced , along with the notion of superconductivity of photons .<n> it is argued that the superconductivity and the superconductivity of photons are related by the theory of superconductivity .<n> the theory of superconductivity , along with the theory of superconductivity of electrons , and the theory of superconductivity of photons are related by the theory of superconductivity of photons .<n> the theory of superconductivity , along with the theory of superconductivity of electrons , and the theory of superconductivity of photons are related by the theory of superconductivity of electrons .<n> the theory of superconductivity , along with the theory of superconductivity of electrons , and the theory of superconductivity of photons are related by the theory of superconductivity of electrons .<n> the theory of superconductivity , along with the theory of superconductivity of electrons , and the theory of superconductivity of photons are related by the theory of superconductivity of electrons .<n> the theory of superconductivity 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 The Phenomenology of Attitudes and the Salience of Rational Role and DeterminationFabian Dorsch*Department of Philosophy, University of Fribourg, SwitzerlandForthcoming in: Philosophical Explorations, 2016.The recent debate on cognitive phenomenology has largely focused on phenomenalaspects connected to the content of thoughts. By contrasts, aspects pertaining to theirattitude have often been neglected, despite the fact that they are distinctive of the mentalkind of thought concerned and, moreover, also present in experiences and thus lesscontentious than purely cognitive aspects. My main goal is to identify two central andclosely related aspects of attitude that are phenomenologically salient and shared bythoughts with experiences, namely the rational role that they play in our mental lives andtheir determination by factors external to them, such as external objects or reasons. Inparticular, I aim to defend Phenomenal Rationalism about judgemental thoughts andperceptual experiences: the view that their phenomenal character reflects their rationalrole, that is, their capacity to provide and/or respond to reasons. I conclude with someremarks about how this view may be extended to other kinds of thought and experience;and about how the phenomenological salience of the specific rational role of individualjudgemental thoughts may in fact be used to formulate also an argument for thephenomenological salience of their particular propositional contents.Keywords: judgement; perception; thought; experience; belief; attitude; cognitive phenomenology; phenomenal character; determination; rational role; reasons1. IntroductionThe focus of the recent debate on cognitive phenomenology has been primarily on the questionof whether the content of thoughts (i.e. how they present things as being) is phenomenologicallysalient. In particular, it has been asked whether it makes a phenomenal difference whichpropositions are thought, and which concepts employed.1 By contrasts, the issue of whether theattitude of thoughts (i.e. which stance or standpoint they adopt towards their content) isphenomenologically salient is often neglected.2 This is surprising for at least two reasons.One is that the attitudinal aspects of thoughts are more significant and fundamental than thepresentational ones. For while attitudinal aspects pertain to the general kind of thought or mentalepisode at issue (e.g. whether it is a judgemental or an imaginative thought, say), thepresentational aspects concern only specific differences among instances of one kind of thoughtor episode (e.g. whether a given judgement is about a green tree or about a red planet).The other reason arises from the fact that attitudinal aspects are not only involved inintellectual thoughts, but also in sensory experiences.3 For instance, while perceptual experiencespresent their objects as being part of our actual environment and also purport to present them as1 they really are, imaginative experiences do neither.4 If perceptual experiences fail to be veridical,there is something wrong with them. The same is typically not true of imaginative experiences. 5This shows that thoughts and experiences may share exactly the same attitudinal aspects. Inparticular, both may be concerned with reality (in the case of perception, episodic memory orjudgement), or not (in the case of imagining); and both may provide us with reasons for belief, ornot (with the same division of cases). The main attitudinal difference between thoughts andexperiences is that only thoughts can be responsive to epistemic reasons – and, for that matter,only thoughts with a judgemental attitude, which include occurrent (or conscious) beliefs andsemantic memories – but not experiences.6But that thoughts and experiences may share the same attitudinal aspects indicates that therelated part of cognitive phenomenology cannot be discussed independently of experientialphenomenology. More specifically, any arguments that support skepticisim solely with respect tothe existence of cognitive phenomenology, but not with respect to experiential phenomenology,are not applicable to attitudinal aspects. This is the second reason for studying attitudinal aspects– at least for defenders of cognitive phenomenology – since it renders many objections tocognitive phenomenology ineffective.7The same strategy cannot be applied to presentational aspects because thoughts andexperiences involve distinct forms of presentation. For example, while solely experiences areperspectival and connected to a sense modality, only thoughts allow for negation and similarlogical operations (e.g. Crane 2009). There is an ongoing debate about how best to describe thisdifference in presentation.8 But its mere existence is already enough to ensure that it is possibleto question the phenomenological salience of presentational aspects in the case of thoughts,while accepting their phenomenological salience in the case of experiences.In this article, I aim to defend the phenomenological salience of two particular attitudinalaspects of thoughts (as well as of experiences): their rational role and their determination. Mymain focus is thereby on the presentation and motivation of Phenomenal Rationalism – or, as Icalled it in Dorsch 2011, Experiential Rationalism – concerning thoughts. What this view claimsis that their rational role is phenomenologically salient:Phenomenal Rationalism about Thoughts The rational role of thoughts is constitutive of, or otherwise reflected in, their phenomenal character.The phenomenal character of mental episodes – such as conscious thoughts or experiences – isidentical with what they are like from the inside for the subject who has them. 9 It thus comprisesall those aspects or features of the mental episodes that are accessible to the subject throughintrospection.10 If two mental episodes differ in which properties they introspectively seem tohave, then they differ in phenomenal character.The rational role of mental episodes, on the other hand, consists in their capacity to respond toreasons provided by other mental episodes or states, as well as in their capacity to provide – or atleast contribute to the provision of – reasons for other mental episodes or states (or, indeed,actions).11 The rational role of mental episodes can be rather complex. For example, the rationalrole of (not self-justifying) judgemental thoughts – or judgements, for short – exhibits at leastthree elements, each of them linking judgemental thoughts to epistemic reasons (or evidence) in2 a distinct way:12(SENS) Judgemental thoughts are sensitive to, or responsive to, certain epistemic reasons.(BASE) Judgemental thoughts are based on, or responses to, certain epistemic reasons.(PROV) Judgemental thoughts provide us with certain epistemic reasons, whether on their own or in conjunction with other mental episodes or states.Phenomenal Rationalism about judgemental thoughts is thus the claim that their phenomenalcharacter reflects them as possessing a rational role that can be characterised by means of(SENS), (BASE) and (PROV); while the rational role of other thoughts or mental episodes needsto be spelled out in different ways. One specific motivation behind the endorsement ofPhenomenal Rationalism – which I do not aim to defend here any further – is that, if the rationalrole of mental episodes were not phenomenologically salient, then the reasons concerned mightnot count as our reasons. They become reasons for us (i.e. reasons that speak with normativeauthority to our rational faculties) only in so far as their presence and rational impact isaccessible to us from the inside, that is, from our first-person perspective. 13 The considerations inthis article are thus centred around the idea of consciousness being shot through and throughwith rationality.Of course, not all judgemental thoughts actually show each, or even any, of the three elements(SENS), (BASE) and (PROV). If one of our judgemental thoughts is causally induced by anintense emotional feeling (e.g. when an eruption of jealousy lets us falsely judge that our rival,who is otherwise unknown to us, is a mean person), it is not based on reasons and perhaps alsonot responsive to them (e.g. open to counterevidence). And because of its merely causal origin,our judgemental thought is also deprived of any justificatory power with respect to furtherjudgements and beliefs. But, if everything works normally, judgemental thoughts are bothresponses to – and, hence, also responsive to – and providers of epistemic reasons. Ourjudgement that the streets are wet, for instance, may be grounded in our perception of the wetstreets, may be open to new evidence (e.g. if we come to learn that the streets are just paintedwith a special kind of pigment that makes them look wet) and provides support for the furtherjudgement that it has rained, as well as many other judgements.What examples like these also illustrate is that rational role is closely linked to determination.Which content and attitude our mental episodes involve is determined by factors external tothem, as well as at which moment in time they occur and how long they stay in existence. In thefirst example, the determinant of our judgemental thought is an emotion, and its influence on ourjudgement is merely causal. As a result, our judgemental thought lacks justificatory power andperhaps also any sensitivity to counterevidence. By contrast, our second judgemental thought isrationally determined by perceptual evidence and, as such, responsive to epistemic reasons andable to ground further beliefs. This connection between rational role and determination is crucialfor my argument in support of Phenomenal Rationalism. More specifically, I intend to argue that3 the rational role of thoughts (and experiences) is phenomenologically salient in virtue of thephenomenological salience of how they are normally determined. That is, judgemental thoughtsare phenomenally marked as being responsive to, and providing us with, epistemic reasonsbecause they are phenomenally marked as being determined by such reasons (even if theyhappen to be merely causally determined).In addition to this introduction, the article comprises three more sections. In the first, I presenta long argument in favour of the view that judgemental thoughts are phenomenally marked asreasonable (even if they are in fact unreasonable), and that this involves the phenomenologicalsalience of (SENS) and (BASE). The second section then defends the view that the phenomenalcharacter of judgemental thoughts also reflects them as conforming to (PROV). My defense isthereby introduced by an extended discussion of the parallel case of perceptual experiences,which also seem from the inside to be providing us with epistemic reasons. In the third and finalsection, I briefly discuss how specific the introspectively accessible rational role of judgementalthoughts is (e.g. whether two judgements may differ phenomenally with respect to their rationalrole), and how this might bear on the issue of whether the content of thoughts isphenomenologically salient in addition to their attitude. In addition, I suggest how to extend mycase for Phenomenal Rationalism to imaginative thoughts and experiences (i.e. by understandingthem as responses to special practical reasons), as well as to episodic memories, pictorialexperiences and other mental episodes.2. The responsiveness to reasonsIn this section, I aim to present a complex argument for the claim that judgemental thoughts arephenomenally marked as having a rational role that includes (SENS) and (BASE). The parallelclaim with respect to (PROV) is then to be defended in the following section. But before Iengage with the argument in support of the claim that (SENS) and (BASE) arephenomenologically salient, it is worthwhile to point out that self-justifying judgements (e.g. ‘Iam here now’ or ‘I am thinking that it rains’) might be an exception to this specific claim –although not to Phenomenal Rationalism in general.Examples of self-justifying judgements are judgements that are conceptually true (e.g. ‘I amhere now’) or self-verifying (e.g. ‘I am thinking that it rains’), but perhaps also (self-)evident orcertain judgements (e.g. ‘I experience redness’ or ‘I exist’). The reasonableness of suchjudgements is the result of one of their other salient features which is independent of their originor mental context – for instance, their necessity, infallibility or obviousness. Because of theirpossession of such a special feature, they end up justifying themselves, without the need for, orinvolvement of, any external support. But this means also that they enter into a reflexive rationalrelation, the two relata of which are one and the same judgemental thought (i.e. the self-justifying judgements themselves). Whether (SENS) and (BASE) are true of self-justifyingjudgements thus depends on whether, by entering into these self-reflexive rational relations,these judgements count as reasons for themselves. I do not see why not.14 But even if it shouldturn out that (SENS) and (BASE) do not apply to self-justifying judgements, the followingargument for the phenomenological salience of the rational role and, in particular, thereasonableness of judgements is still valid for all kinds of judgemental thought, independently ofwhether their reasonableness is due to their self-justifying power or to epistemic reasons externalto them.4 The argument that I have in mind – an earlier version of which I already presented in Dorsch(2009a) – argues that the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts reflects theirreasonableness and, as a consequence, also the aspects (SENS) and (BASE) of their rational role(or their self-justifying power, if applicable). In other words, it is my contention that it makes aphenomenal difference to judgemental thoughts (e.g. in contrast to imaginative thoughts) thatthey have the rational role to be based on, and to be responsive to, epistemic reasons. Horgan andTimmons (2007) agree that (BASE) is phenomenologically salient in the case of judgementalthoughts (or occurrent beliefs); and Kriegel (2015, ch. 1) puts forward the same claim withrespect to (BASE) and (PROV). But they do not provide any argument for this view, apart fromsome anecdotal introspective reflections. My aim in this section is to remedy this situation.The argument starts with the assumption that we normally take our judgements to bereasonable (or, if one prefers, formed in a reasonable manner). Indeed, we typically assume themto be occurrent instances of knowledge, which includes that we take them not only to bereasonable, but also to be non-accidentally true. If this were not the case, we would not have anytendency to rely on our judgements in belief and agency, nor any tendency to revise them oncewe come to suspect that they might be unreasonable or false (e.g. when encounteringcounterevidence). But we do have these and similar tendencies, at least if we are fairly rational –which means that we do take our judgements to be reasonable (as well as non-accidentally trueand instances of knowledge).That we normally take our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable becomes manifest in thefact that we form a respective higher-order judgement when considering the issue. That is, whenwe ask ourselves (or are asked by someone else) whether one of our judgements is reasonable,we typically end up judging that it is. This raises the issue of how to account for the occurrenceof this higher-order judgement and, in particular, of the ascription of the property of beingreasonable.15 There are basically three options of how we can get from questioning whether agiven lower-order judgement is reasonable to forming the higher-order judgement that thislower-order judgement is reasonable:The Inference Model The higher-order judgement is the conclusion of a conscious inference that we engage with in response to asking the question.The Prompting Model Considering the question prompts the higher-order judgement in a phenomenologically spontaneous and immediate manner.The Awareness Model The higher-order judgement is the result of the conscious abstraction from, and conceptualisation of, a non-conceptual awareness of the reasonableness of the lower-order judgemental thought – an awareness that we pay special attention to in response to asking the question.The Inference Model maintains that we judge that our lower-level judgemental thought isreasonable in conscious response to introspectively recognising that it is a judgement, and tobelieving that judgements generally are reasonable (at least if they are based on standard kind ofevidence, and unless we are aware of defeating circumstances). But this account5 overintellectualises the formation of the higher-order judgement. Usually, we need not engage inany form of conscious inference in order to judge that one of our judgemental thoughts isreasonable. We arrive at our higher-order insight in a phenomenologically more immediate way.Furthermore, small children, too, rely on their judgements when forming beliefs and intentionsand thus should count as taking their judgements to be reasonable, even though many of themlack the conceptual apparatus required for engaging in the kind of inference posited by theInference Model. A proponent of the Inference Model might reply that the inferences in question need not beconscious. However, this move does not help with the case of small children, given that theywould still lack the required conceptual capacities. In addition, the proposal faces a dilemmawith respect to the objection concerning phenomenological immediacy. On the one hand, thenon-conscious inferences might be such that we are still able to render them conscious. But thiswould not cover all possible cases, given that we certainly can form higher-order judgementsabout the reasonableness of our judgemental thoughts even when we are unable to produce anyconscious inferences that conclude in those higher-order judgements. On the other hand, the non-conscious inferences might instead be such that they are incapable of becoming manifest inconsciousness. But, then, we should treat them as purely causal rather than as rationalinferences, given that responding to reasons (whether they are inferential or not) is a deliberativeor personal, and not a subpersonal, phenomenon (see endnote 13 for references). Accordingly,the Inference Model would simply reduce to the Prompting Model.The Prompting Model faces its own difficulties, however. It suggests that our higher-orderjudgement occurs in direct and automatic response to wondering whether our lower-orderjudgemental thought is reasonable. In some cases, the higher-order judgement might simplymanifest an already existing higher-order belief about the reasonableness of the lower-orderjudgemental thought. But not only are there many cases in which there is no such prior higher-order belief. We also need an explanation of how we have acquired this higher-order belief –presumably by means of some initial higher-order judgement that is no manifestation of anyprior belief. Hence, the spontaneous and immediate formation of higher-order judgementspostulated by the Prompting Model cannot be accounted for simply in terms of beliefmanifestation.Similarly, it cannot be understood as the result of some constitutive link between the lower-order judgemental thought and the higher-level judgement. Some philosophers have argued that,if we are rational and possess the required concepts, having the (occurrent) belief that p issufficient for inclining us to judge that we believe that p. Indeed, they maintain that this is part ofwhat it means to be rational and have beliefs (Shoemaker 1994; Burge 1998, 1996), or to berational and possess the concept of ‘believing’ (Peacocke 1996, 1999). Irrespective of whethertheir argument is successful with respect to higher-order ascriptions of the property of being abelief, it cannot be extended to higher-order ascriptions of the property of being reasonable.Having a judgemental thought – plus being rational and possessing the relevant concepts – issimply not sufficient for having the higher-order belief that this judgemental thought isreasonable. In particular, it is not a condition on our possession of the concept ‘reasonable’ (or‘reasonable judgement’) that rational agents are disposed to judge that one of their judgementalthoughts is reasonable whenever that judgemental thought is indeed reasonable. In other words,while there might indeed be a constitutive link between believing that p and being inclined to6 judge that one is believing that p, there is no such link between judging that p and being disposedto judge that (this instance of) judging that p is reasonable. Alternatively, proponents of thePrompting Model may assume that a merely causal process is the source of the higher-orderjudgements. According to this proposal, having a judgemental thought and wondering whether itis reasonable normally causes us to judge that it is reasonable. The problem for this view is,however, to explain why this kind of causation occurs. That judgemental thoughts are morelikely to be reasonable than not can at best account for the content of the resulting higher-orderjudgement (as well as for the content of the triggering question), but not for its occurrence. Thereis nothing to the property of being formed in a reasonable manner that could explain why itsinstantiation by a judgemental thought inclines us to form the respective higher-order judgement.So, the account should generalise from the case at issue and assume that introspection is a causalprocess across the board, independently of whether the ascribed property is reasonableness oranother property. Moreover, in order to ensure that introspection can still lead to knowledge, thecausal process said to be at its heart is presumably best taken to be reliable (O’Brien 2003).16But there are good reasons to resist such a causal-reliabilist model of introspection. Sincemany of these reasons are well known, I merely list two of them here. First, the view faces thegeneral problems of reliabilist accounts of knowledge, such as the generality problem or the newevil-demon problem (Goldman and Beddor 2015). Indeed, in the case of introspection, theseproblems might be even more pressing since we have no clear understanding of the causalprocesses involved in the formation of higher-order judgements and thus cannot specify anynormal conditions under which the causation of such judgements ensures them to be true.17Second, assuming merely a causal link between the lower- and higher-order states does notconnect them intimately enough in order to account for some central features of theirrelationship. One such feature is that the higher-order judgements have an immediate rationalimpact on the lower-order thoughts. For instance, assuming that we are rational, our conclusionthat one of our judgemental thoughts (or beliefs) is unreasonable will always move us to changethe latter accordingly. But the mere causation of the higher-order state by the lower-order onecould not ensure the inevitability of this rational impact, not only because the causal influenceoperates in the wrong direction, but also because causal connections can break down even underconditions of rationality. Indeed, while perception and other causal processes allow for bruteerror (i.e. error that is not due to the irrationality or malfunctioning of the subject), introspectiondoes not (Shoemaker 1994; Burge 1996, 2003; Siewert 1998). This feature is closely linked tothe fact that we cannot specify normal conditions for the causal processes said to be central tointrospection, given that brute error can occur only under non-normal conditions.Partly because of difficulties like these, Peacocke (1998) assumes that the link between thelower- and the higher-order states is not merely causal, but also rational in nature (see alsoMartin 2000a). However, he accounts for this rational connection in terms of the mental conceptsinvolved (e.g. ‘judging’ or ‘believing’): the lower-order state is a reason for forming the higher-order state because it is part of our possession of the relevant concepts that we normally applyexactly that concept to the lower-order state that correctly picks out its kind (e.g. judgementalthought or belief). Hence, despite not assuming the link between the lower- and higher-orderstates to be constitutive, Peacocke believes that, if we are rational and possess the requiredconcepts, having a lower-order state of a certain kind (e.g. a belief) is sufficient for beinginclined to form the higher-order judgement that the lower-order state is of that kind. As a result,7 he face the same problem as those who take the link to be constitutive, namely to motivate theextension of their view to higher-order judgements about the reasonableness of the lower-orderstates.18Because both the Inference Model and the Prompting Model fail to provide a satisfactoryaccount of why we normally judge our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable, we should lookfor a better alternative. The only remaining plausible option is to endorse the Awareness Model,according to which our higher-order judgements are conceptual endorsements of a correspondingnon-conceptual awareness of reasonableness. In other words, we judge our judgemental thoughtsto be reasonable because we are non-conceptually aware of them as reasonable (and have noreason not to take this awareness at face value).The awareness in question is not perceptual or even perception-like, for the same reasons thatintrospection is not a matter of inner observation (Shoemaker 1994; Martin 1997; Dorsch 2013).Rather, it is a kind of phenomenal awareness. 19 It is part of what judgemental thoughts are likefor us from the inside that they seem to us to be reasonable. And this phenomenological salienceof their reasonableness is, of course, partly the result of the fact that judgemental thoughts arenormally reasonable.20 In this respect, judgemental thoughts differ introspectively fromimaginative thoughts. We do not take imaginative thoughts to be based on sufficient evidence(nor to be true or to constitute knowledge) precisely because their phenomenal character does notinvolve an aspect that marks them as reasonable.That the reasonableness of standard judgemental thoughts is reflected in their phenomenalcharacter entails that both (SENS) and (BASE) are phenomenologically salient. Thatjudgemental thoughts are reasonable just means – at least if they are not self-justifying – thatthey are actually based on sufficient epistemic reasons (whichever they are). Hence, taking themto be reasonable involves taking them to be actual responses to some epistemic reasons, whichagain entails taking them to be generally responsive to (a certain kind of) epistemic reasons. So,the kind of awareness that grounds our higher-order judgements about reasonableness needs tobe rich enough to be able to permit and support higher-order judgements about actual andpotential responsiveness to epistemic reasons, too. But this implies that it is an awareness ofresponsiveness to epistemic reasons. In other words, that judgemental thoughts are normallybased on, and sensitive to, epistemic reasons is part of their phenomenal character, that is, ofwhat they are like from the inside.21 Depending on whether (SENS) and (BASE) apply to self-justifying judgements, they either involve exactly the same kind of awareness of reasonablenessas standard judgemental thoughts, or this awareness consists just in the phenomenal awareness oftheir self-justifying power.It is important to note that the phenomenal awareness of responsiveness to epistemic reasonsdoes not by itself put us into a position of being able to identify the reasons concerned (unless,perhaps, the judgemental thoughts justify themselves).22 Indeed, we are often unable toremember on the basis of which reasons we have formed our beliefs; and this ignorance extendsto the judgemental thoughts that manifest those beliefs in consciousness. But even if we stillknow in response to which reasons we have formed a given judgemental thought (e.g. we maystill enjoy the perceptual experience on which it is based), our recognition of the identity of thesereasons has to go beyond our phenomenal awareness of our judgemental thought (e.g. it has toinclude our phenomenal awareness of our perceptual experience as well).Similarly, that the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts marks them as reasonable8 or reflects them as having a certain rational role neither involves, nor requires concepts –especially not normative concepts like ‘reasonable’, ‘reasons’ or ‘rational role’. In short,phenomenal awareness is non-conceptual, despite the fact that it certainly allows for a process ofabstraction and conceptualisation that leads to corresponding thoughts – for instance, when weemploy the concept ‘reasonable’ in response to our phenomenal awareness of reasonableness of agiven judgemental thought and come to judge that thought to be reasonable. 23 All that is impliedby saying that we are phenomenally aware of some mental episode as having a certain propertyis that having this property makes a phenomenal difference for the subject concerned – that is, itinfluences what the episode is like for the subject from the inside and thus distinguishes itphenomenally from episodes that lack the property in question (Dorsch 2013, 2017a).3. The provision of reasonsWith respect to the defense of Phenomenal Rationalism concerning judgemental thoughts, thisleaves the task of supporting the claim that their phenomenal character reflects aspect (PROV) oftheir rational role. To see why judgemental thoughts are phenomenally marked as contributing tothe provision of epistemic reasons (and not only as being responsive to them), it is helpful tocompare judgemental thoughts with perceptual experiences. In both cases, we get clearer aboutthe phenomenal character of the experiences or thoughts concerned, once we reflect on theintrospective indistinguishability of non-veridical instances from veridical ones, as well as ontheir phenomenal contrast with imaginative experiences or thoughts. But since the introspectiveindistinguishability of hallucinations (and illusions) from veridical perceptions is betterunderstood and easier to characterise than its cognitive counterpart, it is helpful to develop theline of argument first with respect to perceptual experiences, before adopting more or less thesame argumentative strategy to judgemental thoughts.Let me begin with the epistemology of perception. Conscious veridical perceptual experiencesmake us aware of perceivable features of external (i.e. experience-independent) objects in ouractual surroundings. More specifically, how they present their objects as being is fullydetermined by how those objects really are. For instance, a veridical perception makes us awareof a book as blue and rectangular just in case, and because, the book concerned is indeed blueand rectangular.24 This relation of determination is epistemologically significant in so far as wecould not be in any better epistemic position with respect to the perceivable properties ofexternal objects. Having a conscious experience of which it is true that how it presents things asbeing is contingent solely on how they really are provides us with the best – that is, the mostconclusive or truth-conducive – access to the external world possible. 25 Hence, if perceptualexperiences do not provide us with reasons for beliefs about the perceivable aspects of theexternal world, nothing will do (which, of course, is why perception has always been at thecentre of skepticism concerning the external world). Now, I argue elsewhere (Dorsch 2017a) that the determination of veridical perceptualexperiences by their objects is phenomenologically salient and, in fact, introspectively seems topertain to all perceptual experience, not only veridical ones. Perceptual experiences arecharacterised by the fact that they are introspectively indistinguishable from veridicalperceptions.26 This is trivially true of veridical perceptions, but also applies to (perfect) illusionsand hallucinations. For even when we have a non-veridical perceptual experience, we still take itto be veridical – unless, of course, we have evidence to the contrary from the outside (e.g.9 evidence delivered by testimony or further perceptual observation). In other words, from theinside, the non-veridicality of our illusions and hallucinations is not apparent to us. If it were, wewould not – as we actually do – rely on our perceptual experiences by default when formingbeliefs and perfoming actions, even if they happen to be non-veridical. Only when ourexperiences are contradicted by further observations or by what others say do we start toquestion their veridicality and possibly cease to take them at face value. What this asymmetricintrospective indistinguishability of non-veridical perceptual experiences from veridical onesreveals is that the phenomenal character of perceptual experiences marks them as veridical –even if they are not.27It is here that the previous considerations about the epistemologically significantdetermination of veridical perceptual experiences by their external objects become important.For veridical and non-veridical perceptual experiences differ precisely in whether theirpresentation of our surroundings is fully determined by the actual nature of our surroundings.When we misperceive a white book to be blue or even hallucinate a blue book, which colour weexperience to be instantiated before our eyes is not a function of which colour is in factinstantiated before our eyes. Hence, that the phenomenal character of both veridical and non-veridical perceptual experiences reflects them as being veridical means, at least in part, that itreflects them as presenting how things are contingent on how they actually are. In other words, itis part of what perceptual experiences are like for us from the inside that their presentation ofperceivable properties seems to be fully determined by perceivable properties instantiated in ourenvironment.There are two central aspects to the phenomenological salience of the (apparent)determination by external objects: that the objects experienced seem to be external (i.e.experience-independent); and that they seem to be determinants of how the experience inquestion presents things as being. It has often been observed or mentioned that perceptualexperiences are transparent in the sense that, whenever we are attending to them from the inside,we end up noticing the objects and features that they make us aware of, and which seem to bepart of our surroundings.28 But we do not merely notice the (apparent) presence of those objectsand their features. We also notice their (apparent) externality or experience-independence(McDowell 1998; Siegel 2006; Dorsch 2017a). This means that, from the inside, the objects ofour perceptual experiences seem to exist and to instantiate their perceivable propertiesindependently of being experienced by us. As Tye, for example, notes: ‘In turning one’s mindinward to attend to [an] experience, one seems to end up concentrating on what is outside again,on external features or properties’ (Tye 1995, 30).29More specifically, we have the impression that the objects of our perceptual experiences didalready enjoy their existence and their perceivable properties before the occurrence of ourexperiences, and will continue to do so after we stop experiencing them. And this impression isaccompanied by a sense of their being public objects and features that are accessible throughperception to others, too. In this respect, perceptual experiences differ phenomenologically fromexperiences of after-images. When we are experiencing a yellow after-image, say, theexperienced yellow spot does not seem to be part of our actual environment (e.g., it ‘movesaround’ in accordance with our eye movements, and completely disconnected from the objects inour surroundings); and it also does not appear to exist independently of our experience of it, noras a public entity open to further observation by others.10 What matters, when we turn to the aspect of determination, is not our impression of what willhappen to the objects experienced if our perceptual experiences change, but rather ourimpression of what will happen to our perceptual experiences if their objects change. When weattend from the inside to our perceptual experiences, their transparency ensures that we come tonotice the various perceivable properties that the objects of our experiences seem to instantiate.But, crucially, we do not distinguish from the inside between how the experiences present theirobjects as being and how those objects really are. Of course, we are aware that our perceptualexperiences might be non-veridical. But, as already mentioned, unless we have reason to doubttheir veridicality, we take them to be veridical. As a result, we expect our perceptual experiencesto change if the perceivable properties of their objects should change. For instance, when we areperceiving a white and rectangular canvas, we anticipate that, if the canvas is painted green orcut to a square shape, our experience will stop presenting it as blue and rectangular and startpresenting it as green and square.30 The preceding considerations reveal that both the externalityand the determining role of the objects of our perceptual experiences are phenomenologicallysalient: it is part of what our perceptual experiences are like that their objects appear to beexternal and to determine how the experiences present them as being. But, as argued at thebeginning of this section, being determined by aspects of the external world just amounts toproviding us with the best possible access to that world. Hence, our introspective impression thatour perceptual experiences are determined by their objects renders that feature of the experiencesphenomenologically salient, in virtue of which the experiences provide us with epistemicreasons. It is in this sense that their role as reason-providers (PROV) is accessible to us from theinside. This rational aspect of their phenomenal character distinguishes perceptual experiencesfrom their imaginative counterparts. How we visualise objects as being, say, is not determined bythe visible properties of the objects in our surroundings.31 Correspondingly, it is not part of whatour imaginative experiences are like to us from the inside that they seem to be determined byexternal objects. Instead, they typically are – and appear to be – determined by the relevantpractical reasons or goals that we are aware of by way of our conscious intentions or desires toimagine certain things.32 We visualise a very tall person, for instance, because this is what acertain novel or thought experiment, with which we intend to engage, requires us to do. In otherwords, we are usually aware of our imaginative experiences as being part of, or the result of,actions of imagining. The phenomenologically salient difference in how perceptual andimaginative experiences are determined thus concerns also their link to mental agency. For whileimaginative experiences normally seem to us to be determined in an active manner, theirperceptual counterparts appear to be determined in a passive manner – at least, with respect tohow they present things as being.The main point of introducing this complex argument to the effect that the phenomenalcharacter of perceptual experiences reflects their capacity (PROV) to provide us with reasons isthat we can develop a very similar line of reasoning with respect to judgemental thoughts. Letme again begin with some epistemological considerations. Judgemental thoughts usually giverise to beliefs if certain conditions are met (e.g. if their subject matter is important enough andthey remain undefeated). Moreover, if the judgemental thoughts concerned are reasonable andnon-accidentally true, they typically lead to beliefs that constitute knowledge (or, if one assumesthat knowledge cannot be further analysed, are implied by a corresponding state of knowledge).For want of a better term, we may call judgemental thoughts that put us into a position to acquire11 knowledge knowledgeable. Typically, judgemental thoughts cannot ground knowledge on theirown, but require the help of additional judgements or beliefs. The reason for this is thatjudgemental thoughts provide primarily inferential reasons, and that most inferences involvemore than one premiss.33 For instance, once we come to knowledgeably judge that the streets arewet, we can infer that it has raised only conditional on the ancillary belief that rain is the bestexplanation for the wetness of the street.Now, knowledgeable judgemental thoughts are reasonable because they are formed on thebasis of sufficiently good or strong epistemic reasons – reasons which may be provided byperception, inference or any of the other sources of knowledge. The epistemic reasons concernedthereby play a triple role.34 First, they determine that the thoughts concerned involve ajudgemental attitude towards their propositional contents (i.e. the attitude of taking the respectivepropositions to be true for the sake of truth), rather than some other attitude. That we judge(rather than imagine or desire, say) something to be the case is due to the fact that our relevantreasons are reasons for belief, that is, epistemic reasons. Second, they determine whichpropositions are judged to be true as part of the judgements. That is, the epistemic reasonsdetermine how the knowledgeable judgemental thoughts present things as being. For instance,that we judge – and come to know – that a book is red (rather than yellow) is due to the fact thatour judgement is suitably based on a veridical perception of the book’s redness; or, alternatively,on a sound inference starting from the known premisses that the book’s surface reflects light of awavelength of about 650 nanometres, and that surfaces with this reflectance property are red.Second, the epistemic reasons ensure that the judgemental thoughts turn out to be non-accidentally true. Of course, not all reasonable judgements are true, let alone non-accidentally.But if they are non-accidentally true and knowledgeable, their truth is due to the determinationof their propositional content by the epistemic reasons in questions. Our judgement that the bookis red is non-accidentally true because its content is determined solely by how the underlyingveridical perception presents the book as being; or solely by how the true premisses of theunderlying sound inference entail the book as being.35Parallel to the argument concerning perceptual experiences, the main claim is now that therational determination of knowledgeable judgemental thoughts is phenomenologically salientand, furthermore, that this aspect of phenomenal character is also present in the case of non-knowledgeable (i.e. unreasonable or at best accidentally true) judgemental thoughts. It isdistinctive of judgemental thoughts (or occurrent beliefs) that they are introspectivelyindistinguishable from knowledgeable judgemental thoughts (or occurrent propositionalknowledge). As already noted in section 2, we take all our judgemental thoughts to beknowledgeable – which includes taking them to be reasonable and non-accidentally true – unlesswe have evidence to the contrary (in which case we tend to revise or give up our judgements ifwe are sufficiently rational). Moreover, as also argued earlier, our awareness of thereasonableness of our judgements forms part of what they are like for us from the inside. Exactlythe same argument applies to our awareness of them as non-accidentally true and, hence, asknowledgeable. We take our judgemental thoughts to be non-accidentally true andknowledgeable neither as the result of some inference about them, nor due to some causal-reliable or constitutive link between having a judgemental thought and being inclined to judge itto be non-accidentally true and knowledgeable. Instead, all judgemental thoughts areintrospectively indistinguishable from knowledgeable judgemental thoughts because their12 phenomenal character marks them as knowledgeable – even if they are not.36If we combine this phenomenological observation with the epistemological one that theknowledgeability of judgemental thoughts is due to their determination by sufficient epistemicreasons, we can get a clearer idea of what it means for judgemental thoughts to seem to beknowledgeable from the inside. Whether a judgemental thought counts as knowledgeabledepends essentially on whether it is determined by sufficient epistemic reasons. Hence, thatjudgemental thoughts are phenomenally marked as knowledgeable means minimally that theyare phenomenally marked as being determined by sufficient epistemic reasons. More specifically,it is part of what judgemental thoughts are like for us from the inside that both their attitude andtheir content seem to be determined by sufficient epistemic reasons – again with the proviso thatthis does not require that we are also aware of the specific identity of the reasons that thejudgemental thoughts are based on (if any).It is here that the analogy with perceptual experiences breaks down to some extent. For ourawareness of the reasons that (seem to) determine our judgemental thoughts differs greatly fromour awareness of the objects that (seem to) determine our perceptual experiences. While theimpression of the rational determination of judgemental thoughts is as such devoid of anyspecificity with respect to the nature of the reasons concerned, the impression of the externaldetermination of perceptual experiences is always accompanied by a presentation of some of theperceivable features of the objects in question (indeed, it is determined how those objects arepresented as being). As a result, judgemental thoughts – unlike perceptual experiences – are nottransparent to those entities that determine them. If at all, judgemental thoughts are transparent tothe propositions that they are attitudes towards.37But this phenonmenological difference does not prevent the property of being determined by(otherwise unidentified) sufficient epistemic reasons to be as phenomenologically salient as theproperty of being determined by external objects (with certain perceivable properties). For, inboth case, we expect our experiences or thoughts to change in relevant ways in response tochanges in their determinants; and we have this expectation primarily because, from the inside,we do not distinguish between how those determinants are and how they seem to be according toour experiences or thoughts. In the case of judgemental thoughts, this means that we do notdifferentiate between having (had) sufficient epistemic reasons for forming the judgement andhaving a reasonable judgement, that is, a judgement based on sufficient epistemic reasons. Inother words, by being phenomenally marked as reasonable (or, indeed, knowledgeable),judgemental thoughts ‘present’ the relevant reasons as sufficient for grounding knowledgeablejudgements; and we do not distinguish between how the reasons are ‘presented’ and how theyreally are. We certainly know that we are not infallible with respect to our stance concerning thesufficiency (and existence) of the epistemic reasons that our judgemental thoughts seem to bebased on. But, by default, we take our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable, that is, groundedin and determined by sufficient epistemic reasons.Indeed, if this were not the case, it could not be explained why we anticipate that ourjudgemental thoughts will change if our reasons change – for instance, if they cease to besufficient for judgement, or if they start to support a different judgement than before. Thisexpectation is furthermore heightened by our recognition that epistemic reasons usually obtainindependently of the judgements that they support. For the fact that we take our judgementalthoughts to be essentially connected to epistemic reasons, but also know them not to be13 determined by our judgements (or some third factor which simultaneously influences ourjudgements), already entails that we take our judgements to be determined by the relevantreasons (whichever they are). That is, given the judgement-independence of epistemic reasons,the assumed relation of dependence has to run in the opposite direction. But our phenomenalawareness of the (apparent) sufficient rational determination of our judgemental thoughts rendersthat feature phenomenologically salient that is responsible for the status of our judgementalthoughts as (seeming) providers of epistemic reasons. Judgemental thoughts provide us withreasons for further beliefs precisely because they are rationally determined by sufficientepistemic reasons. And this connection, together with our phenomenal awareness of rationaldetermination, provides us with access from the inside to the aspect (PROV) of the rational roleof judgemental thoughts.Like in the case of perceptual experiences, the rational dimension of their nature andphenomenal character differentiates judgemental thoughts from their imaginative counterparts.The attitude and content of imaginative thoughts are not determined by epistemic reasons, but bypractical reasons (or perhaps also by non-rational factors – see endnote 32). We imagine that theEarth is flat because we want to engage in a thought experiment of how life might be on a flatdisk, say; or we imagine that Sherlock Holmes lives in Baker Street 221b because we aim toproperly engage with Conan Doyle’s stories, and this requires imagining what is fictional inthose stories (Walton 1990). That imaginative thoughts are not formed in response to epistemicreasons implies that they cannot lead to knowledge and contribute to the provision of reasons forbelief, as revealed by the fact that imagined premisses can solely provide support for imaginedconclusions (Dorsch 2016a). Moreover, their lack of the capacity to respond to and provide uswith epistemic reasons is phenomenologically salient: it is part of what imaginative thoughts arelike for us that they are outside of the net of epistemic rationality.4. Extending the scope of Phenomenal RationalismThe preceding considerations have made the case for the claim that the phenomenal character ofjudgemental thoughts (or occurrent beliefs) reflects the three aspects of their rational roledescribed by (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV). In addition, I have argued that perceptualexperiences are phenomenally marked as sharing the last aspect (PROV) with judgementalthoughts. Before concluding this article, I would like to briefly consider two further issues: howspecific the salient attitude and, especially, rational role of judgemental thoughts is and what thismeans for the salience of their content; and how Phenomenal Rationalism may be applied tomany, if not all, other kinds of mental episode.The first issue concerns the question of whether there are phenomenologically salient aspects ofthe rational role of judgemental thoughts that – unlike (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV) – maydiffer between distinct judgemental thoughts. The three elements of rational role discussed so farspecify that judgemental thoughts provide us with, and are responsive to, certain epistemicreasons – that is, epistemic reasons that are variable (i.e. may differ between distinct judgementalthoughts) and particular (i.e. accessed by us in virtue of particular mental episodes or states, suchas individual beliefs or perceptual experiences). But (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV) remain silenton the different identities, or more determinate natures, of the reasons that figure in the distinctrational roles of specific judgemental thoughts. For example, the judgement that the sky is14 cloudless – but not the judgement that today is Sunday – is sensitive to the perceptual orinferential recognition that it has started to rain. Similarly, the two judgements make itreasonable to infer that there will be many people at the zoo, say, only in conjunction with verydifferent ancillary beliefs about when people normally like to visit the zoo (namely, respectively,on sunny days or on Sundays).Such differences in rational role are intimately connected to the fact that both thereasonableness and the justificatory power of judgemental thoughts are relative to theirpropositional contents. It is never just reasonable to judge, but to judge that p (where ‘p’ denotesthe specific propositional content of the judgement concerned); and knowledgeable judgementalthoughts – together with other mental episodes or states – never just provide us with a reason toinfer, but to infer that q (where ‘q’ picks out the specific inferentially supported conclusion). Thequestion is now whether judgemental thoughts, in being phenomenally marked as reasonable andas contributing to inferential reasons, are also phenomenally marked as responsive to reasons forjudging that p or as providing rational support for judging that q. If so, it seems possible toformulate an argument for the phenomenological salience of the varying propositional contentsof judgemental thoughts on the basis of the phenomenological salience of their attitudes and, inparticular, their distinct specific rational roles.38In parallel to the argument presented in section 2, the crucial observation is that ourjudgemental thoughts incline us to judge not only ‘our judgement is reasonable’, but also ‘ourjudgement that p is reasonable’ (or, alternatively, ‘it is reasonable for us to judge that p’). Forexample, when we entertain the judgemental thought that it rains, say, and ask ourselves whetherthis judgemental thought is reasonable, we normally end up forming the higher-order judgementthat our judgement that it rains is reasonable – and not merely that this judgement is reasonable,irrespective of which propositional content it has. In short, taking our judgemental thought to bereasonable involves taking it to be reasonable for us to judge that it rains (and not, say, that thesun is shining).Moreover, this higher-order judgement is not inferentially derived from the simpler higher-order judgement that our judgemental thought is reasonable and the additional belief that thejudgemental thought concerned has the propositional content that it rains. We need not engage ininferences of this kind in order to conclude that, as part of judging that p, we take it to bereasonable for us to judge that p. Nor is the higher-order judgement simply thephenomenologically spontaneous result of some constitutive link or reliable causal process, forthe reasons already rehearsed in section 2. This leaves, again, the Awareness Model as the bestoption, according to which we are inclined to take our judgemental thoughts reasonable relativeto their particular propositional contents because we enjoy some non-conceptual – and,presumably, phenomenal – awareness of this relativised reasonableness.As a consequence, we should extend Phenomenal Rationalism from the general rational rolecommon to all judgemental thoughts to some of the more specific differences between thedistinct rational roles of the individual judgemental thoughts. In other words, the what isphenomenologically salient is not just the determinable rational role shared by all judgementalthoughts, but also the various content-specific determinations of this role by particularjudgements. For taking the judgement that p to be reasonable means taking it to be based on –and, hence, also sensitive to – sufficient reasons for judging that p. And this certainly implies thephenomenological salience of the propositional content p of the judgemental thought itself. The15 salience of attitude is thus, in this way, intimately linked to the salience of content.Moreover, once it is established that our judgement that p introspectively seems to be well-supported by reasons for judging that p, it is not difficult to show that the judgemental thoughtmay also be phenomenally marked as contributing to the provision of a reason for judging that q(rather than just some unspecified epistemic reason) – for instance, when the judgement that p isconsidered in conjunction with the judgement that, if p, then q. Of course, the resultingimpression of having a reason for judging that p pertains to the phenomenal character of themental complex that comprises both the judgement that p and the judgement that, if p, then q.But this just suggests that there is a contextual or holistic dimension to the phenomenal characterof judgemental thoughts: namely that which specific aspects of its reason-giving power happento be phenomenologically salient may partly depend on which other mental episodes occurconcurrently, notably in the context of conscious reasoning.The second issue still to be addressed concerns the applicability of Phenomenal Rationalism toother kinds of mental episode. Let us consider imaginative experiences and thoughts first. Thatthey introspectively seem to lack the same rational role as their cognitive counterparts does notmean that they possess no phenomenologically salient rational role at all. Given that imagining istypically a conscious mental action, it comes with the phenomenal awareness of agency which,as I have argued elsewhere (Dorsch 2009a), is best understood as the phenomenal awareness oftheir response – and responsiveness – to some practical reasons (e.g. those presented orembodied by intentions, desires, normative judgements, and the like). Moreover, acts ofimagining differ from other instances of mental agency in at least three phenomenologicallysalient ways.First, while episodes of imagining are themselves presentational, other mental actions are notand, at best, merely operate on presentational – and usually non-imaginative – experiences orthoughts (e.g. when we actively try to recall something, to calculate a sum in our head, or tochange our mood by meditating). Given that many presentational differences give rise tophenomenal differences (e.g. with respect to how things are presented as being, or in whichsensory modality), this should also be true of the basic presense or absence of presentationality.Second, imagining differs from other forms of mental agency in that it is rationally responsiveonly to a certain subset of practical reasons, namely those reasons that speak in favour of activelyand directly forming experiences of, or thoughts about, specific objects and features (Dorsch2009a, 2012, ch. 13). Although probably not all differences in practical rationality are open tointrospection, this particular difference is very likely to be phenomenologically salient because itconcerns the fundamental distinction between what is under our active control and what is not.For while it is not up to us what we are perceiving, judging, remembering, feeling, and so on (butat best when we do so), we have active and direct control over how imaginative experiences andthoughts present things as being.Third, imaginative (and other) mental actions differ phenomenally from consciousmotivational episodes – such as occurrent intentions, desires or normative judgements – in thatthey introspectively seem to be active, but mediated reponses to practical reasons, while themotivational episodes appear to respond to practical reasons in a passive, but immediate way(Dorsch 2009a). In particular, while reasons directly compel us to form motivational episodes,their impact on actions is merely indirect in so far as it is mediated by the relevant motivational16 episodes. We come to intend to visualise something in response to recognising that we havereason to do so; and our resulting episodic act of imagining is determined by, and remainssensitive to a change in, our practical reasons in so far as it is motivated and guided by ourrelevant intention (or intention-in-action), which itself continues to be rationally influenced byour practical reasons, whether they are changing or not. Next are veridical episodic memorieswhich differ from veridical perceptual experiences in that they are not determined by objects inour present surroudings, but rather by objects in our past surroundings (or, if one prefers, by ourpast veridical perceptions of those objects, which were again determined by those objects). Thisdifference in object determination is clearly phenomenologically salient, giving rise to what havebeen often called impressions of the ‘presence’ or of the ‘absence’ from our environment of theobjects concerned.39 More important, it also establishes a comparable difference in rational role,meaning that while perceptual experiences provide us with reasons for beliefs about the present,episodic memories provide us with reasons for beliefs about the past. And a similar line ofreasoning as the one employed above in section 3 should suffice to motivate the conclusion thatthis rational difference contributes to what the respective experiences are like from the inside.Another interesting kind of experience are pictorial experiences, not the least because theyseem to combine elements of seeing with elements of visualising. 40 Pictorial experiences make usvisually aware of two things: the canvas and its visible properties; and the depicted object orscene and its visible properties. Our visual awareness of the canvas is certainly perceptual innature and, as such, phenomenally marked as being determined by the visible properties of thecanvas, and as providing us with reasons for perceptual beliefs about those properties (as well asfor introspective beliefs about this perceptual aspect of the pictorial experience concerned).Interestingly, how our pictorial experience presents the depicted object as being is alsodetermined by an external object in our current environment (which lets this aspect of pictorialexperience resemble perception). But the determining object is of course not identical to thedepicted object, given that the latter is normally not part of our external surroundings. Rather, thedeterminant of our visual awareness of the depicted is again the canvas. In particular, anychanges in how we experience the depicted object as being can be traced to back changes in thevisible properties of the canvas (e.g. in the shape, colour, location and texture of the marks ofpaint on it). And we may become aware of this fact once we reflect on our pictorial experiencesfrom the inside. Pictorial experience is thus special in that it involves the phenomenologicallysalient determination of two presentations – one perceptual, the other not – by one and the sameobject.Finally, even mental episodes that do not play any role in epistemic or practical reasoning andin same-order attitude formation – for instance, because they are non-presentational (e.g. moods)or causally originate in the brain in a completely passive and non-rational manner (e.g. after-images) – may still possess at least one particular rational role, namely to provide rationalsupport for their own self-ascription in the shape of introspective higher-order judgements.Assuming that it is right to say that all mental episodes are open to introspection, and that ourknowledgeable introspective judgements about our mental episode are rationally grounded inthose episodes (see, again, the discussion of Peacocke’s view in section 2), it follows that allmental episodes turn out to provide epistemic reasons for introspective judgements. And if it isaccepted that the reason-giving power of perceptual experiences and judgemental thoughts isphenomenologically salient, it seems difficult to deny the same with respect to other mental17 episodes.What all these cases illustrate is that the phenomenological salience of rational role isinseparably linked to the phenomenological salience of determination, just as rational role isinseparably linked to determination. There are several basic differences in how distinct kinds ofmental episodes are determined, notably with respect to whether the determinants are reasons orexternal objects and their features, and with respect to whether what is determined concernsprimarily how the episodes present things as being or also which commitment or attitude theyadopt towards what they present as being the case. For instance, reasons determine both contentand attitude, while the impact of objects and their features seems to be largely limited to content(and possibly also time and duration of occurrence).Moreover, these differences in determination affect which rational role the respective mentalepisodes possess and, hence, also what they are like from the inside. Veridical perceptualexperiences, for instance, are not sensititve – and thus not phenomenally marked as beingsensitive – to epistemic reasons because how they present things as being is determined byexternal objects and their perceivable features. Similarly, imaginative experiences and thoughtsplay no role in the motivation and justification of judgements and beliefs (other thanintrospective ones) precisely because they are determined by practical reasons (or perhaps alsosome non-rational causes).41To sum up, both rational role and determination are prominent attitudinal aspects of thephenomenal character of judgemental thoughts and other mental episodes. This shows that whatmental episodes are like from the inside is not exhausted by their presentation of objects as beinga certain way. In other words, some aspects of phenomenal character pertain to attitude orcommitment, rather than to content. The debate about whether thoughts possess a phenomenalcharacter should therefore address not only the issue of whether it makes a phenomenaldifference which concepts or propositions are involved in thinking, but also the issue of whetherit makes a phenomenal difference whether the thoughts concerned are judgemental, imaginative,and so on.Central to the discussion of the last issue is whether differences in rational role anddetermination are part of what thoughts are like from the inside.The arguments that I presented insections 2 and 3 indicate that we should endorse Phenomenal Rationalism, which affirms thephenomenological salience of rational role. In particular, judgemental thoughts are phenomenallymarked as having the rational role described by (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV) (at least if theyare not self-justifying). But it is arguably also phenomenologically salient which particularproposition(s) the rational role of a given judgemental thought is concerned with – and, hence,which particular content the thought possesses. A crucial step in my line of reasoning to thisconclusion has been the defense of the additional claim that the phenomenal character of mentalepiodes – including that of judgemental thoughts – reflects the way how the episodes concernedare determined in cases where everything goes well. Indeed, this phenomenal impression ofdetermination is essential to our related phenomenal awareness of rational role, irrespective ofwhether the mental episodes concerned are experiences or thoughts.AcknowledgementsFor comments on earlier drafts and related discussions, I am very grateful to Davor Bodrozic,18 Berit Brogaard, Elijah Chudnoff, Julien Dutant, Lucy O’Brien, Adrian Haddock, Anders Nes,Declan Smithies, Gianfranco Soldati, Matthew Soteriou, Gian-Andri Toendury, and twoanonymous referees. I would also like to thank the editors, Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran, forgiving me the opportunity to be part of this special issue. My research on this chapter wasgenerously funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (PP00P1_139004) and theFundación Séneca (18958/JLI/13).Notes on contributorFabian Dorsch is SNSF Research Professor at the University of Fribourg (Switzerland). He isauthor of The Nature of Colours (de Gruyter 2009), The Unity of Imagining (de Gruyter 2012)and the forthcoming Imagination (Routledge 2017) and has published articles on various topicsin the philosophy of mind, epistemology, metaphysics, aesthetics, and the philosophy ofnormativity. He founded the European Society for Aesthetics and is editor of the journal Estetika– The Central European Journal of Aesthetics.ReferencesArmstrong, D. M. 1993. A Materialist Theory of the Mind. Rev. ed. London: Routledge.Bayne, Tim, and Michelle Montague, eds. 2011. Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Budd, Malcolm. 1992. “Review of “Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of theRepresentational Arts” by Kendall L. Walton.” Mind 101: 195–98.Burge, Tyler. 1996. “Our Entitlement to Self-Knowledge.” Proceedings of the AristotelianSociety 96: 91–116.Burge, Tyler. 1998. “Reason and the First Person.” In Knowing Our Own Minds, edited byCrispin Wright, Barry C. Smith, and Cynthia Macdonald, 243–70. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Burge, Tyler. 2003. “Perceptual Entitlement.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 67(3): 503–48.Carruthers, Peter. 2000. Phenomenal Consciousness. A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Carruthers, Peter, and Benedicte Veillet. 2011. “The Case Against Cognitive Phenomenology.”In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Timothy Bayne and Michelle Montague, 35–56. Oxford:Oxford University Press.Crane, Tim. 2009. “Is Perception a Propositional Attitude?” The Philosophical Quarterly 59(236): 452–69.Dorsch, Fabian. 2009a. “Judging and the Scope of Mental Agency.” In Mental Actions, editedby Lucy O’Brien and Matthew Soteriou, 38–71. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Dorsch, Fabian. 2009b. Die Natur Der Farben. Berlin: De Gruyter.Dorsch, Fabian. 2010a. “The Unity of Hallucinations.” Phenomenology and the CognitiveSciences 9 (2): 171–91.Dorsch, Fabian. 2010b. “Transparency and Imagining Seeing.” Philosophical Explorations 1319 (3): 173–200.Dorsch, Fabian. 2011. Experience and Reason. Lausanne: Rero Doc.Dorsch, Fabian. 2012. The Unity of Imagining. Berlin: De Gruyter.Dorsch, Fabian. 2013. “Experience and Introspection.” In Hallucination, edited by FionaMacpherson and Dimitris Platchias, 175–220. Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press.Dorsch, Fabian. 2016a. “Knowledge by Visualisation –- How Imaginative Experiences CanGround Factual Knowledge”. Teorema, forthcoming.Dorsch, Fabian. 2016b. “Perceptual Acquaintance and the Seeming Relationality ofHallucinations.” Journal of Consciousness Studies, forthcoming.Dorsch, Fabian. 2017a. “The Phenomenal Presence of Reasons.” In Phenomenal Presence,edited by Fiona Macpherson, Martine Nida-Ruemelin, and Fabian Dorsch. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Dorsch, Fabian. 2017b. Imagination. London: Routledge.Goldman, Alvin, and Bob Beddor. 2015. “Reliabilist Epistemology.” Edited by Edward N.Z a l t a . S t a n f o rd E n c y c l o p e d i a o f P h i l o s o p h y ( 2 0 1 5 Wi n t e r E d i t i o n ).http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/reliabilism/.Harman, Gilbert. 1990. “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience.” In Collection, 4:31–52.Hopkins, Robert. 1998. Picture, Image and Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Hopkins, Robert. 2011. “Imagination and Observation.” Unpublished manuscript.Horgan, Terry, and John Tienson. 2002. “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and thePhenomenology of Intentionality.” In Philosophy of Mind: Classical and ContemporaryReadings, edited by D. Chalmers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Horgan, Terry, and Mark Timmons. 2007. “Moorean Moral Phenomenology.” In Themes fromG. E. Moore, edited by Susana Nuccetelli and Gary Seay, 203–26. Oxford: Oxford Univ Press.Hume, David. 2007. A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition . Edited by David FateNorton and Mary J Norton. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Husserl, Edmund. (1901) 1984. Logische Untersuchungen. Den Haag: Nijhoff.Kolodny, Niko. 2005. “Why Be Rational?” Mind 114: 509–63.Kolodny, Niko. 2007. “How Does Coherence Matter?” Proceedings of the AristotelianSociety 107 (1): 229–63.Kriegel, Uriah. 2015. The Varieties of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Lycan, William G. 1996. Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Martin, M. G. F. 1997. “Self-Observation.” European Journal of Philosophy 5 (2): 119–40.Martin, M. G. F. 2000a. “An Eye Directed Outward.” In Knowing Our Own Minds, edited byCynthia Macdonald, Barry C. Smith, and Crispin Wright, 99–123. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Martin, M. G. F. 2000b. “Beyond Dispute: Sense-Data, Intentionality, and the Mind-BodyProblem.” In History of the Mind-Body Problem, edited by Tim Crane and Sarah Patterson, 195–231. Routledge.Martin, M. G. F. 2002. “The Transparency of Experience.” Mind and Language 17 (4): 376–425.Martin, M. G. F. 2004a. “Uncovering Appearances.” Oxford: Oxford University Press.Martin, M. G. F. 2004b. “The Limits of Self-Awareness.” Philosophical Studies 120: 37–89.20 Martin, M. G. F. 2006. “On Being Alienated.” In Perceptual Experience, edited by TamarGendler and John Hawthorne, 354–410. Oxford: Oxford University Press.McDowell, John. 1998. “Values and Secondary Qualities.” In Mind, Value, and Reality, 110–29. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.McHugh, Conor. 2012. “Reasons and Self-Knowledge.” In The Self and Self-Knowledge,edited by Annalisa Coliva. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Nagel, Thomas. 1974. “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” The Philosophical Review 83: 435–50.Owens, David. 2000. Reason Without Freedom: The Problem of Epistemic Normativity .London: Routledge.O’Brien, Lucy. 2003. “On Knowing One’s Own Actions.” In Agency and Self-Awareness:Issues in Philosophy and Psychology, edited by Johannes Roessler and Naomi Eilan, 358–82.Oxford: Clarendon Press.Peacocke, Christopher. 1992. A Study of Concepts. Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press.Peacocke, Christopher. 1996. “Entitlement, Self-Knowledge and Conceptual Redeployment.”Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society.Peacocke, Christopher. 1998. “Conscious Attitudes, Attention and Self-Knowledge.” InKnowing Our Own Minds, edited by Crispin Wright, Barry C. Smith, and Cynthia Macdonald,63–98. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Peacocke, Christopher. 1999. Being Known. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Peacocke, Christopher. 2012. “Conscious Events and Self-Ascriptions: Comments on Healand O’Brien.” In The Self and Self-Knowledge, edited by Annalisa Coliva. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Pitt, David. 2004. “The Phenomenology of Cognition or What Is It Like to Think That P?”Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 69 (1): 1–36.Sartre, Jean P. (1940) 2004. The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of theImagination. London: Routledge.Scanlon, Thomas. 2008. Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Shields, Christopher. 2011. “On Behalf of Cognitive Qualia.” In Cognitive Phenomenology,edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 215–35. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Shoemaker, Sidney. 1994. “Self-Knowledge and ‘Inner Sense’.” Philosophy andPhenomenological Research 54 (2): 249–314.Siegel, Susanna. 2006. “Subject and Object in the Contents of Visual Experience.”Philosophical Review 115 (3): 355–88.Siegel, Susanna. 2008. “The Epistemic Conception of Hallucination.” In Disjunctivism:Perception, Action, Knowledge, edited by Adrian Haddock and Fiona Macpherson. Oxford:Oxford University Press.Siegel, Susanna. 2015. “The Contents of Perception.” Edited by Edward N. Zalta. TheS t a n f o r d E n c y c l o p e d i a o f P h i l o s o p h y ( S p r i n g 2 0 1 5 E d i t i o n ).http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/perception-contents/.Siewert, Charles P. 1998. The Significance of Consciousness. Princeton: Princeton UniversityPress.Smithies, Declan. 2011. “What Is the Role of Consciousness in Demonstrative Thought?:”Journal of Philosophy 108 (1): 5–34.21 Soldati, Gianfranco. 2009. “Transparenz Der Gefühle.” In Emotionen Interdisziplinär, editedby Barbara Merker. Paderborn: Mentis.Soteriou, Matthew. 2009. “Mental Agency, Conscious Thinking, and Phenomenal Character.”In Mental Actions, edited by Lucy O’Brien and Matthew Soteriou. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Speaks, Jeff. 2009. “Transparency, Intentionalism, and the Nature of Perceptual Content.”Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 79 (3): 539–73.Travis, Charles. 2004. “The Silence of the Senses.” Mind 113: 59–94.Tye, Michael. 1995. Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press.Velleman, David. 2000. The Possibility of Practical Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Walton, Kendall. 1990. Mimesis as Make-Believe. Harvard: Harvard University Press.Williamson, Timothy. 1990. Identity and Discrimination. Oxford: Blackwell.22 * Email: fabian.dorsch@unifr.ch1 See, for instance, Siewert (1998) and Pitt (2004) for optimism and Carruthers (2000) for pessimism about the existenceof content-related cognitive phenomenology. Most of the contributions to Bayne and Montague (2011) continue thisdebate.2 Some notable exceptions are Horgan and Tienson (2002), Horgan and Timmons (2007), Shields (2011) and Kriegel(2015, ch. 1). Note also that, in what follows, I use ‘content’ and ‘attitude’ in very wide senses. In particular, saying thata mental episode has a content is not meant to imply that it has correctness conditions (see Martin (2002, 382) fordiscussion). As a result, instances of perceptual acquaintance count as having a content in my sense since they presentthings as being a certain way – and despite the fact that their relationality deprives them from the possibility of beingnon-veridical. See Siegel (2015) for a narrower definition of ‘content’ in terms of correctness conditions, and Travis(2004), among others, for the claim that perceptual acquaintance does not involve content in this narrower sense.Similarly, talk of the attitude of a mental episode is not intended to entail that the episode in question has a propositionalcontent or is a propositional attitude. According to my usage, even non-propositional and non-conceptual experiencesmay involve attitudes, such as the attitude of perceiving or the attitude of imagining. For example, perceptualexperiences need not be identified with judgement-like propositional attitudes in order to claim that they purport topresent parts of our actual surroundings (rather than merely possible or fictional situations) – as Husserl’s idea of‘leibhaftiger Gegenwart’ (manifest presence; Husserl [1901] 1984, B 441f.) and Sartre’s idea of perceptions as ’[positingtheir] object as existing’ illustrate (Sartre [1940] 2004, 12).3 By which I mean experiences linked to one of the five outer senses, such as episodes of visual (auditory, tactile, etc.)perceiving, hallucinating, recalling or imagining. Whether similar considerations apply to bodily sensations, emotionalfeelings, moods or other kinds of non-intellectual episodes or ‘experiences’ is a further issue that needs to be addressedseparately, as pointed out by one of the referees.4 At least not intrinsically or by themselves (Dorsch 2012, ch. 2).5 See Dorsch (2012, ch. 4) and Dorsch (2016a) for discussions of a notable exception, namely instances of visualisingmeant, and able, to ground knowledge.6 I assume here that beliefs and semantic memories become occurrent, or manifest in consciousness, in the shape ofthoughts with a judgemental attitude, that is, an attitude of taking the respective proposition to be true for the sake of, orwith the aim of, getting it right (Velleman 2000, chs. 5 and 11). But, of course, not all judgemental thoughts aremanifestations of already existing beliefs or semantic memories.7 A good example among very many is the critical discussion of cognitive phenomenology in Carruthers and Veillet(2011).8 Among the possible distinctions are: the sensory vs. the intellectual; the objectual vs. the propositional; the unstructuredvs. the structured; the non-conceptual vs. the conceptual; the merely causal vs. the rational; or the non-cognitive vs. thecognitive.9 The locus classicus is Nagel (1974). But see also the very helpful discussions in Williamson (1990) and Martin (2004a,ch. 2).10 Introspection is understood here simply as the special form of access that we – and only we – enjoy to our ownconscious mental episodes from our first-person (or subjective) perspective, and by means of which we are capable offorming higher-order judgements and beliefs about those episodes. Introspection is thus contrasted with third-personways of acquiring knowledge about the conscious mind, such as observing the behaviour, speech and bodily expressionof people, or studying their brains with the help of experiments and machines. But it is left open what the concretenature of introspection is – for instance, whether it is a ‘reflective act of consciousness’ revealing what is certain aboutthe conscous mind (Sartre [1940] 2004, 4), say, or just ‘a self-scanning process in the brain’ that may go wrong(Armstrong 1993, 324). Similar considerations apply to phenomenal character. By characterising it epistemologically asbeing identical with those aspects of mental episodes, that are accessible to us from our first-person perspective, I do notintend to presuppose any particular view about the nature of those aspects (e.g. how they are related to features of thebrain) or of our phenomenal awareness of them (e.g. whether it is reflexive, objectual, higher-order, and so on).11 The discussion here is meant to stay neutral on whether the reasons provided are identical with the mental episodesthemselves, or rather with the (seeming) facts that they make us aware of.12 Note that the term ‘judgement’ is ambiguous (Soteriou 2009). It may refer either to the instantaneous act of judging (orof triggering the occurrence in consciousness of an already existing belief or semantic memory), which constitutes theonset of an episode of entertaining a proposition with a judgemental attitude; or to the resulting judgemental episode ofentertaining, namely a temporally extended judgemental thought (or occurrent belief or semantic memory). If nototherwise noted, when I speak of ‘judgements’, I have episodic judgemental thoughts in mind.13 See Dorsch (2009a, 2017a) for further discussion of what it means for the rational role of mental episodes to bephenomenologically salient; and Owens (2000), Scanlon (2008) and Kolodny (2005, 2007) for detailed descriptions ofthe nature and first-person character of reasons and our responses to them.14 Note that conformity to (SENS) does not require that judgements are responsive to reasons other than those provided bythemselves. In particular, self-justifying judgements can count as responsive to reasons even though their justificationcannot be defeated by any external or new evidence. Being based on self-provided reasons is already sufficient for beingresponsive to (some) reasons.15 In what follows, I ignore how the warranted application of the concepts ‘I’ and ‘judgemental thought’ should beexplained. But I suggest elsewhere (Dorsch 2011, Introduction) that they are also grounded in phenomenal awareness.16 Armstrong (1993) and Lycan (1996) are among the proponents of the causal-reliabilist model of introspection.17 See Martin (2000a, 2006) and Dorsch (2013). By contrast, our knowledge of how perceptual experiences – and thus alsoperceptual judgements – are caused enables us to formulate normal conditions for them (Dorsch 2009b, ch. 3.3).18 It is unclear whether Peacocke (at least in his earlier writings) endorses the Prompting Model. In Dorsch (2009a), I readhis view as such. But McHugh (2012) argues that Peacocke’s – as well as his own – view goes beyond the PromptingModel, and Peacocke (2012, footnote 1) seems to acknowledge that this is the correct interpretation of what he believes.In any case, it is possible that a proponent of the Prompting Model follows Peacocke in taking the link between thelower- and the higher-order states to be neither constitutive, nor merely causal, but instead rational.19 McHugh (2012) puts forward an alternative version of the Awareness Model, which maintains that the non-conceptualawareness in question is not phenomenal, but practical in nature. It is, however, unclear what this practical awareness ismeant to amount to, or how it can underwrite and lead – via abstraction and conceptualisation – to theoretical higher-order judgements. In addition, it is unclear why McHugh resists taking the awareness of the reasonableness ofjudgemental thoughts (or perceptions) to be part of their phenomenal character, especially since it is difficult to see howhe could otherwise account for the phenomenal difference between judgemental and imaginative thoughts (as well asperceptual and imaginative experiences). See also Dorsch (2009a) and Dorsch (2012, 13) for discussions of thesephenomenal differences.20 See Williamson (1990, ch. 4), Martin (2000b, 2004b, 2006) and Dorsch (2010b, 2013) for discussions of why it is notonly unproblematic, but in fact very plausible to assume that phenomenal awareness can be misleading.21 In Dorsch (2009a), I discuss how the phenomenal awareness of responsiveness to epistemic reasons differs from thephenomenal awareness of responsiveness to practical reasons, which pertains, for instance, to conscious (mental)agency.22 See Dorsch (2009a, 50f.) and Dorsch (2011, Introduction) for further discussions. There, I also discuss that thephenomenal awareness in question is fallible and does not presuppose the possession of concepts like ‘I’, ‘reason’ or‘judgement’, allowing that small children and perhaps even higher animals can enjoy it, too.23 The underlying idea is that the possession conditions of concepts like ‘reasonable’ include a clause stating that rationalsubjects feel rationally compelled to employ the concept if they are phenomenally aware of the reasonableness of one oftheir thoughts and consider the issue of whether their thought is reasonable. See Peacocke (1992) for a general theory ofconcept possession along these lines, and McHugh (2012) for a discussion of the non-conceptuality of the awarenessconcerned (although he takes it to be practical rather than phenomenal).24 This statement – as well as the corresponding one further below about the phenomenological salience of thisdetermination relation – needs perhaps to be qualified. For other factors – such as the subject’s attention, interests, pastexperiences or training – might, too, influence how veridical perceptions present things as being (I am grateful to one ofthe referees for raising this point). But it should be clear that the impact of such additional factors can at best be limited.First of all, they can influence only which of those properties, that the object in question in fact has, it is experienced ashaving (e.g. which of them the subject attends to or is sensitive towards). Otherwise, the resulting experiences would notbe veridical anymore. Then, at least some of these factors may enjoy only some indirect impact on how we experiencethings, namely by determining which perceivable response-dependent properties the objects possess, and thus can beseen, in the first place. This may be the case, for instance, with attention-dependent Gestalt properties, or with certain‘artificial’ functional properties (e.g. something may become a table because we start to see it as a table in response toour need for a table). Finally, even if our interests or past experiences let us focus on some perceivable properties of theobjects rather than others, this does not amount to a case of practical (i.e. non-epistemic) determination, where how weexperience things as being is a matter of what we want, or of which practical reasons are available to us (as, say, in thecase of imagining).Independently of this, it is worthwhile pointing out that the determination of veridical perceptions by their objects mightextend beyond the qualities that we experience the objects as having. For perhaps the numerical identity of the veridicalexperiences depends on the numerical identity of the objects experienced, so that veridical perceptions of distinct bluebooks, say, differ even if we are not aware of any qualitatively differences between the books or, in fact, the experiencesthemselves (see, for instance, Martin 2002, and Dorsch 2016b). But nothing in what follows depends on whetherveridical perceptual experiences are indeed relational in this strong sense.25 It is important to note that what matters is that the experience concerned is conscious (Smithies 2011). We might alsohave subpersonal mental representations, the content of which is determined by how the world is like. But these wouldnot put us into an equally good epistemic position as our conscious experience (if they would put us in a position toacquire knowledge, or form justified beliefs, about the external world at all) precisely because they are non-consciousand thus do not have any bearing on our rational, personal deliberations about what to believe.One referee has pointed out to me that we are in an even better epistemic position if, in addition to our conscious veridicalperception, we also know that it is a veridical perception (rather than an indistinguishable hallucination). This is true andcaptured by my view since it assumes that veridical perceptions (as well as hallucinations) are phenomenally marked asbeing veridical, meaning that enjoying a conscious veridical perception implies being in a position to come to know thatit is veridical (see the next paragraph). That is, under normal conditions, we acquire knowledge when we endorse inbelief the phenomenal impression of veridicality that comes with undergoing a veridical perception.26 See Martin (2004b, 2006), Siegel (2008) and Dorsch (2010a, 2013) for more detailed discussions. Dorsch (2010a)locates the observation about the phenomenological salience of the determination of perceptual experiences by theirobjects in the broader context of providing a comprehensive description of their phenomenal character.27 Some relationalists about perception deny that non-veridical perceptual experiences possess the same phenomenalcharacter as veridical ones (e.g. Martin 2002, 2004b, 2006). But they agree that the two kinds of experience stillresemble each other in what they are like for the subject. More specifically, non-veridical experiences possess aphenomenal character that is introspectively indistinguishable from the phenomenal character of veridical experiences.See Dorsch (2016b) for discussion.28 This is a fairly minimal characterisation of the transparency of experience, which is compatible with the idea thatintrospective reflection also reveals certain features of the experiences themselves, such as their rational role ordetermination (Martin 2002). Some philosophers add the claim that we do not come to notice anything but the objects ofexperience and their features. This implies, in particular, that we cannot become attentively aware of aspects of ourexperiences other than what they present us with.29 See also Harman (1990) and Speaks (2009), among many others. One of the few dissenting voices is Hume (2007, sec.1.4.2) who – as discussed in Martin (2000b) – believed that the phenomenal character of our perceptual experiences isneutral on whether they make us aware of external or internal objects. But there is, of course, the doubt that his beliefwas more influenced by this theoretical convictions concerning sense-data than by his introspective reflections about hisown perceptual experiences.30 This expectation is especially pronounced because (though does not necessarily require that) the objects of ourperceptual experiences seem to us to be external. Assuming that the objects are not dependent on our experiences, thetwo kinds of entity would be completely unrelated to each other if our experiences were also not dependent on theirobjects (or, at least, on their perceivable properties). Hence, the fact that we do take our perceptual experiences to beintimately linked to their experience-independent objects reveals that these objects seem, from the inside, to bedeterminants of our experiences.31 Or at least not in a direct manner. We may of course act on our intention to visualise something as having exactly thesame colour and shape as the book that we see in front of us. But, in this case, the direct determinant of our imaginativeexperience is our intention, and not (our perception of) the external book. See Dorsch (2009a) and Dorsch (2017b, pt. 2)for discussion.32 The formulation chosen in the main text leaves open the possibility that imaginative experiences might also sometimesappear to occur in a spontaneous and seemingly arbitrary way, or as the causal effects of some non-rational factors. But,in Dorsch (2012, ch. 13f.), I argue at length that imagining is always an instance of mental agency, and thatspontaneously or otherwise causally occurring imaginative experiences or thoughts belong to a third category of mentalepisodes. I discuss the various option of how imaginative experiences and thoughts might be said to be determined inDorsch (2017b, pt. 2).33 The main exception are trivial inferences of the form ‘if p and q, then p’. Besides, I ignore here that judgementalthoughts may perhaps also provide reasons for introspective judgements (see the discussion of Peacocke’s position insection 2).34 See Dorsch (2016a) for more on the two aspects of rational determination and, especially, their relative independence.35 I ignore here that the underlying perceptions or beliefs might have to be veridical or true in a non-accidental manner aswell in order for the resulting judgements to count as knowledgeable.36 Again, if someone endorses a form of disjunctivism (or non-conjunctivism) which denies that knowledgeable and non-knowledgeable judgemental thoughts possess the same phenomenal character, the claim will rather be that non-knowledgeable judgemental thoughts possess a character that is introspectively indistinguishable from (though notidentical with) the character of knowledgeable judgemental thoughts.37 See Hopkins (2011) and Dorsch (2017b, ch. 4). The considerations that follow in the next paragraph might still be readas suggesting that judgemental thoughts are transparent to the sufficiency of the epistemic reasons on which they arebased, even though they are not transparent to the identity of those reasons.38 This line of reasoning was suggested to me by one of the anonymous referees.39 See, for instance, the references to Husserl’s and Sartre’s writings in endnote 2, as well as Martin’s idea of the‘immediacy’ of perception (Martin 2002) and the discussion of Husserl’s view in Soldati (2009). I provide a detaileddescription of the phenomenology of perceptual, mnemonic and imaginative experiences in Dorsch (2010a).40 Although it should be kept in mind that they do not involve an instance of visualising, nor are a fusion of seeing andvisualising (Budd 1992; Hopkins 1998, ch. 1).41 This is not completely true. With respect to the rational determination of propositional content, certain episodes ofvisualising can ground knowledge in the same way as perceptual experiences. But the imaginative experiencesconcerned need the help of higher-order judgements about their non-accidental veridicality in order to give rise to anattitude of belief rather than an attitude of imagining. See Dorsch (2012 ch. 4) and Dorsch (2016a) for detaileddiscussions.