ABSTRACT: 
In this article, we explore the implications of contemporary populist challenges to established forms of expertise in the UK, USA and elsewhere. Drawing on a Foucauldian conception of knowledge and power as always articulated, we argue for a conjunctural approach to understanding the ways in which formations of expertise become stabilized and de-stabilized, vulnerable to challenge and contestation. We trace the role of economic expertise in defining the limits of political and policy “realism” before and after the crash of 2007–8. We then consider the rise of nationalist-populist political mobilizations which challenged existing “expertise” in the name of popular wisdom. In the context of de-stabilized forms of expertise, we ask about emergent attempts at reconfiguring knowledge, power and politics in different ways. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we present a method for determining the state of the art in the field of nanophotonics .<n> the method is based on the idea of the  state of the art '' in nanophotonics .<n> we show that the state of the art in the field of nanophotonics is determined by two quantities : the state of the material used to create the photon , and the state of the material that is used to produce the photon .<n> we demonstrate that the state of the art in the field of nanophotonics is determined by the state of the material that is used to create the photon and the state of the material that is used to produce the photon .<n> we show that the state of the art in the field of nanophotonics is determined by the state of the material that is used to create the photon and the state of the material that is used to produce the photon .<n> we show that the state of the art in the field of nanophotonics is determined by the state of the material that is used to create the photon .<n> we demonstrate that the state of the art in the field of nanophotonics is determined by the state of the 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttp://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ciej20Innovation: The European Journal of Social ScienceResearchISSN: 1351-1610 (Print) 1469-8412 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ciej20The instabilities of expertise: remaking knowledge,power and politics in unsettled timesJanet Newman & John ClarkeTo cite this article: Janet Newman & John Clarke (2018) The instabilities of expertise: remakingknowledge, power and politics in unsettled times, Innovation: The European Journal of SocialScience Research, 31:1, 40-54, DOI: 10.1080/13511610.2017.1396887To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13511610.2017.1396887Published online: 01 Nov 2017.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 130View related articles View Crossmark dataThe instabilities of expertise: remaking knowledge, power and politicsin unsettled timesJanet Newman and John Clarke *Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA,UK(Received 14 June 2017; ﬁnal version received 23 October 2017)In this article, we explore the implications of contemporary populist challenges toestablished forms of expertise in the UK, USA and elsewhere. Drawing on aFoucauldian conception of knowledge and power as always articulated, we argue fora conjunctural approach to understanding the ways in which formations of expertisebecome stabilized and de-stabilized, vulnerable to challenge and contestation. Wetrace the role of economic expertise in deﬁning the limits of political and policy“realism” before and after the crash of 2007–8. We then consider the rise ofnationalist-populist political mobilizations which challenged existing “expertise” inthe name of popular wisdom. In the context of de-stabilized forms of expertise, weask about emergent attempts at reconﬁguring knowledge, power and politics indifferent ways.Keywords: expertise; power; knowledge; conjuncture; populism; austerity; articulationIn this paper we challenge the idea of expertise as formed of distinct and coherent sets ofknowledges, capacities and skills. Rather we view it as a condensate in which particularformations of knowledge and power are conﬁgured. Further, we explore the complexand shifting relationships between this conception of expertise and the ﬁeld of politics.Drawing on the recent trajectory of the United Kingdom (UK), though with referencesto other settings, we trace the dominance of particular modes of expertise – articulatedaround the economy – as central to the construction of the policy and politics of austerity.We then consider contestations of this dominant framing, in particular the outbreaks ofpopulist disaffection visible in the UK, parts of Europe and North America. Such mobil-izations seek to install understandings of “the people” as a collective moral subject, creat-ing a politics played out through differently articulated claims to authority. These populistchallenges have identiﬁed “experts” as the embodiment of elite power and domination, tobe challenged in the name of popular sentiment and wisdom. We argue that this points tothe value of a conjunctural understanding of expertise. In this, we draw on a form of analy-sis developed in cultural studies that treats speciﬁc forms of expertise as articulated for-mations active – both activated and activating – in particular conﬁgurations of time–space. Such formations move between moments of stabilization as the dominant modesof knowing and instability as they become vulnerable to challenge and contestation(see, inter alia, Clarke 2010a; Clarke and Newman 2017; Grossberg 2010; Hall and© 2017 The European Association for the Advancement of the Social Sciences*Corresponding author. Email: john.clarke@open.ac.ukInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research, 2018Vol. 31, No. 1, 40–54, https://doi.org/10.1080/13511610.2017.1396887Massey 2010). We show how conﬁgurations of knowledge and power are always contin-gent and contested, producing conditions of instability. We consider to what extent chal-lenges to established expertise displace them, and ask whether there are emergentformations that might constitute new alignments of knowledge, power and politics.This paper works with a Foucauldian view of knowledge as always entangled withpower, rather than a conception of expertise as a free-ﬂoating cluster of knowledge,capacities and skills. Foucault insisted that knowledge is never separate from the dynamicsof power, and never able to transcend the social formations in which it is active. In Disci-pline and Punish, he argued that: “There is no power relation without the correlative con-stitution of a ﬁeld of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does not presuppose andconstitute at the same time power relations” (1991, 27). This provides a foundation forcritical work on forms of expertise and here we take up its promise for thinking aboutthe current political conjuncture in which economic expertise has occupied a central role–most evidently providing the legitimating rationale for the politics and policies of auster-ity. However, as we show, since 2008 the power-knowledge nexus of economic expertisehas been characterized by a series of instabilities and contestations that predated the currenteruptions of populist styles of politics. To this Foucauldian conception of power/knowl-edge, we add our conjunctural view of formations of expertise, recognizing that such for-mations are always particular to speciﬁc moments of time–space, rather than beinguniversal in either dimension (Clarke forthcoming a). Such formations are constructed,acquire their legitimacy, and become institutionalized in assemblages of agents, practices,and technologies. But their claims to universality – to being viewed as natural or normal –also come to be challenged or contested at particular times and in particular places. Onesuch moment was the populist challenge to the seemingly hegemonic power of the econ-omic expertise in the period of austerity governance in the UK.Conﬁguring knowledge and power: the expertise of austeritySince the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–8, the governmental space of the EU has been dominatedby austerity policies, marking the triumphant recovery of neoliberal economic expertisefrom brief challenges to its legitimacy (see, inter alia, Davies 2016; Evans and McBrideforthcoming; Forkert 2017; Varoufakis 2016). Economics, economists and economicexpertise-centred institutions (from credit ratings agencies to the International MonetaryFund) had failed to anticipate the crisis of the ﬁnancial sector and its global effects.This produced a brief moment in which political denunciations of capitalism appeared.But “austerity”, rather than challenging conventional economic wisdom, marked itsreturn: national governments and supra-national institutions insisted that a crisis ofpublic debt, largely engendered by “bailing out” failing ﬁnancial institutions, requiredtough measures to restore ﬁnancial and ﬁscal conﬁdence. Like many others, we viewthis neoliberal dominance of the “economic” as a distinctive formation of knowledgeand power; other versions of economic expertise, for example those that acknowledgedquestions of care, environmental harm or the costs of inequality, were subordinated orerased. It was a stripped down form of economics – one readily aligned with austerityas a political project – that became institutionalized in diverse apparatuses, from thinktanks to popular media (see, inter alia, Brown 2015; Davies 2016; Mirowski andPlehwe 2009; Peck 2010).Establishing this space of “the economic” creates the conditions for things called“economies” to be imagined in ways that subordinated of the ﬁeld of “the social” to theeconomy’s projected needs, logics and dynamics. Appeals to economic necessity wereInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 41combined with claims about moral virtue, presenting austerity as a means of combining theeconomic necessity of discipline (and self-discipline) with a moral economy of “fairness”(Clarke forthcoming b; Clarke and Newman 2012). This separation of the economy – whatPolanyi called its “disembedding” – is the result of political-cultural work, and is pro-foundly signiﬁcant for how social formations are imagined and acted upon (Grossberg2010; Peck 2013; Polanyi 1944). What is signiﬁcant is the de-politicizing character ofthis discourse of economic necessity: the insistence that economic imperatives (recovery,growth, competitiveness, etc.) override or even short-circuit political calculation or choice.For example, Davies argues that thebasic assumption that all action is principally economic action is common to all neoliberalstyles of theory… . This effects a collapse of the separate logics of market, society andstate, using the language and techniques of the former to enact a blanket economic audit ofall three. (2016, 21–22; see also Brown 2015)Neoliberalism in this sense is both anti-democratic and anti-political, seeking to substitutean apparently neutral logic of decision-making (market-like in its calculations) for politicalcontest and debate. In the process, party political competition came to centre on the ques-tion of economic management: who could be trusted to best manage the economy and itsneeds? Dominant voices belonged to central banks, investment brokers, and supranationalorganizations – all understood as apolitical – who could simultaneously advise on, judgeand evaluate governmental action.This knowledge/power nexus was enshrined in the workings of the International Mon-etary Fund (IMF), World Trace Organization (WTO), Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development (OECD), the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Euro-pean Union (EU), most visibly in the imposition of austerity policies on so called “debtor”nations such as Greece. It was also visible in the ways in which national governments –particularly the Cameron/Osborne regime in the UK – sought to legitimize austerity as afundamental priority of governing. This inculcated a particular conception of “realism”as a disciplinary political and policy device that attempted to control the boundaries ofthe “thinkable”. It underpinned the proclaimed “necessity” of particular courses ofaction (e.g. public spending cuts, service closures and the rolling back of state-providedwelfare). And it was associated with a particular form of technocratic governance – amode of governing that emphases the primacy of “expert” interventions rather than inﬂu-ence by political parties and the citizens they seek to represent. This conception of“realism” was not new: for instance, in the UK, Thatcherite conservatism was oftenexpressed in the TINA claim (There Is No Alternative) while the Blair governmentswere noted for their emphasis on “what counts is what works”, an approach that promiseda new science of policymaking that privileged research-based notions of “evidence” andthat instituted a plethora of managerial technologies, audit regimes, action plans and“expert” templates (see, for example, Cabinet Ofﬁce 1999; Clarke and Newman 1997;Davies, Nutley, and Smith 2000; Newman 2001).Critical work has tended to elide such practices into more generalized and generalizingnarratives – of globalization, neo-liberalism and de-politicization. We have some reser-vations about the totalizing character of such accounts: they tend to underestimate theamount of political work necessary to de-politicize governing in this way; they tend to arather narrow (and established) view of politics and the political, and they tend to arather unilinear and epochal view of historical development (Dean 2014; Newman2017). More particularly, we have been troubled by rather deterministic accounts of the42 J. Newman and J. Clarkerelationship between the hegemonic power of economic expertise and the “depoliticiza-tion” of citizens (e.g. Brown 2015; Crouch 2014; Gill, Johnstone, and Williams 2012;Wilson and Swyngedouw 2015). The post-2008 restoration of the authority of this knowl-edge-power complex went alongside, rather than overcoming, considerable popular scep-ticism about “bankers”: the “fat cats” who caused the crash and walked away from it; theunregulated or under-regulated “Masters of the Universe” whose hubris wrecked homes,lives and economies, and (in the UK particularly) the “posh boys” who wove elite net-works linking the City, commerce and government. Such strands of popular scepticismformed part of the disaffections that made up what Jeremy Gilbert, writing about theUK and the rise of UKIP (the anti-EU and anti-immigration United Kingdom Indepen-dence Party), has called “disaffected consent”:The very real sense of democratic and political disenfranchisement… ﬁnds expression in oneof two ways: as simple apathy and non-participation; or as organised opposition to UK mem-bership of the EU and support for the virtual ending of mass immigration. This combination ofpolicies propelled UKIP into third place in the national vote, and represents a complex set ofimplicit and explicit demands, which are not solely motivated by old-fashioned racism, xeno-phobia and conservative authoritarianism. Hostility to the EU, and to patterns of migrationwhich appear to transform their communities and localities without any consultation withthem, can also be understood as, in part, expressions of frustration with the lack of meaningfuldemocratic participation. (2015, 39–40)Although we would argue that the dynamics of disaffection were more heterogeneous thanthis, Gilbert’s analysis speaks powerfully to the profoundly unstable character of the formof consent that prevailed in the UK before 2016, whose fragility was dramatically exposedby the Referendum on membership of the EU in June 2016. And, in that moment, expertisecame to be dramatically re-politicised.Experts, elites and establishments: the populist interruptionRecent political movements broadly described as “populist” have unsettled the establishedpolitical order of several European countries and the USA, in the process challenging thedominance of neoliberal economic expertise. There are, of course, many varieties of popu-lism: as Samet and Schiller argue, “It is necessary to understand how, and on whose behalf,‘the people’ – democracy’s vital ﬁction – is constructed, contested and performed” (2017).Here our main focus is on the summoning of a particular notion of “the people” during theUK 2016 Referendum on membership of the European Union. In particular, this campaignrepresented the people as disdained and disenfranchized by a liberal elite of experts. Thoseleading the campaign to remain in the EU put forward powerful “expert” claims about thedamage to the UK economy that would result from Brexit. These were roundly dismissed:The big guns of the international liberal order were wheeled out to stop us going headlong forthe Puerto Rican option [defaulting on national debt payments, JN&JC]: the IMF, the WTO,the OECD. Ten Nobel economists added to the din; Obama wagged a ﬁnger; Clinton too. ThenSoros. In reply a forest of ﬁngers was stuck in the air. (Harding 2016)The Leave movement dismissed “expert” claims as an orchestrated attempt by “the estab-lishment” to induce fear among “ordinary people”:“I think people in this country,” declared Vote Leave’s Michael Gove, “have had enough ofexperts.” His fellow Brexiteers were quick to back him up. “There is only one expert thatInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 43matters,” said Labour MP Gisela Stuart, also of Vote Leave, “and that’s you, the voter.” NigelFarage, the leader of Ukip, suggested that many independent experts were actually in the payof the Government or the EU. All three reminded voters of occasions when “the so-calledexperts” had made mistakes. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/10/michael-goves-guide-to-britains-greatest-enemy-the-experts/The Leave campaign in the UK, and the subsequent Trump presidential campaign in theUS, drew on critiques of expertise as technocratic, de-politicizing and disempowering.In the process, they sought to establish a very different form of power – one in whichleaders could speak in the name of the people. Particular tendencies were articulated in pol-itical campaigns that used demotic language – the language of “ordinary people” (Clarke2010b; Turner 2010) – to distinguish themselves from conventionalized “political speak”.This demotic style invoked – and claimed to be at one with – “ordinary people” in addres-sing their anxieties and fears.While there are many differences between the formations of politics and power in theUK and US (Grossberg 2018; Watkins 2016), both campaigns drew their success in partfrom their capacity to depict “the people” as a singular national entity whose lives hadbeen damaged by expert elites. Such representations connected the elite, the establishmentand experts as forming an “out of touch” political class who failed to understand, or recog-nize, the damage done to “ordinary people” by (variously) Europeanization, globalizationand the loss of national sovereignty (on the “establishment”, see, inter alia, Jones 2014;Van Hollen 2016). The revolt against “expertise” in the moment of Brexit thus refractedquestions of both class (antipathy to ruling elites, the very architects of austerity) andnation (expertise symbolized “elsewhere”; international institutions, EU bureaucrats andthose seeking to protect global free trade). They also identiﬁed the nation – as the placewhere the people live – against the capital, London, as the home of the metropolitan/cos-mopolitan elite (echoed in Trump’s attacks on “Washington insiders”).These populist discourses sought to unlock apparently settled conﬁgurations of knowl-edge and power by offering distinctive representations of expertise. In place of authoritybeing grounded in scientiﬁc or legitimate knowledge, expertise was reframed as asymbol of rule, inseparable from the experiences of being ruled. Expertise was thus embo-died authority – and embodied in the wrong sorts of people: global elites, state institutions,ﬁnanciers, consultants and so on. It is of course dangerous to read the sayings of Trump,Farage and other populists as representing the truth of their position: these are, rather, ﬂeet-ing fragments of political rhetoric that may, or more probably do not, add up to a coherentview. Nevertheless, such challenges reveal the contingent authority of existing forms ofexpertise: their legitimacy is always conditional, always in the process of being claimed,acceded to, or contested. We think it possible to trace three core discursive themes thatdelineate the terrain on which the contemporary struggle over power, knowledge and auth-ority is being conducted.First, “expertise” can be made to symbolize very different things – from the objectiveand authoritative judgements of the wise, to the overbearing arrogance of out of touchelites. As a rhetorical device it can thus be mobilized for a range of purposes in andbeyond political campaigns. In the UK, populist politicians targeted judges, politiciansand some media outlets, denouncing them as “enemies of the people” (see, for example,The Daily Mail, 3 November 2016). The “Leave” campaign castigated members of the“liberal” and “progressive” elites for being out of touch and for having installed – and ben-eﬁtted from – a particular form of state power. The disaffected were spoken to, and for,through language that demonized elite governance, including politicians, judges,44 J. Newman and J. Clarkebankers and welfare professionals. The campaign targeted migrants, liberals and those con-cerned with “identity politics”: a shorthand for feminists, antiracists, gays, queers, trans-sexuals and others viewed as threatening the “normal” lives of the “people”. It drewimplicitly on long standing left, feminist and other radical political critiques of expertiseas undemocratic, disempowering, and elitist. Such critiques were appropriated and mobi-lized to support a new populist project, articulated through a binary between expertise andthe inherent wisdom of the people. In the process, critical aspects of what some have calledan “epistemological populism” were developed (Patten 2017; Saurette and Gunster 2011).Patten, for example, has agued that key features of this disposition include: the articulationof an “anti-elitist common sense”, a rejection of the intellectual classes and an insistence ona libertarian notion of the right to “judge facts for myself”. In a new media ecology thatallows for new forms of political and cultural segmentation, Patten suggests that this strat-egy divides “the heartland from the rest” and identiﬁes commonsense wisdom as emergingfrom the heartland – embodied in “the people”.Second, then, the conjunctural signiﬁcance of expertise was shaped through a politicalpractice of establishing a binary distinction between authenticity and expertise. The auth-enticity of the people is constituted through racialized and nationalized understandings ofwho “belongs” and who does not. The “real” people are to be empowered, not throughpolicy innovations or improvements in the democratic process, but by having a leaderwho can voice the “common sense” of the common people, expressing their instinctiveunderstanding of what is right. Only he (more rarely she), it is claimed, can speak withthe authentic voice of the people, a voice that has been silenced and suppressed by the col-lusion of “expert power” with political-cultural elites. Those elites shaping state policy, themedia and the wider “liberal culture” are charged with “discriminating” against thoseespousing “traditional” moral values that embody the “common sense” of the people.As Müller argues, “Populists do not just criticise elites; they also claim that they andonly they represent the true people” (2016, 40). But the “true people” are only part ofthe people at large, a populist paradox perfectly expressed in Donald Trump’s 2016 state-ment that “the only important thing is the uniﬁcation of the people – because the otherpeople don’t mean anything” (cited in Müller 2016, 22). By summoning to power thosethat have been neglected, dispossessed, and disadvantaged, populist leaders do notsimply “represent” those silenced voices: they are, rather, constitutive of those theyclaim to represent. Here we think it is important to insist on the articulatory work of popu-list politics: they do not simply speak for, or express, the views of “ordinary people” assuggested by many commentators (see, for example, Judis 2016). Rather they selectivelyarticulate, silence and amplify particular popular sentiments, constructing the “commonsense” of the people in the process.The demonization of expertise as the basis of authority and the antithesis of authen-ticity is thus at the core of populist rhetoric. This points to our third theme: expertise isjuxtaposed with a moral understanding of politics and judgement in ways that privilegethe latter and present the former as false or corrupt. Müller points to populism as “away of perceiving the political world that sets a morally pure and fully uniﬁed… but ulti-mately ﬁctional – people against elites who are deemed corrupt or in some other waymorally inferior” (Müller 2016, 20). As such, “the people” is constructed as a moralrather than thinking actor; the “sense” that is valorized in appeals to the common senseof the people is one of instinct rather than reason; of trust in the speaker not in an assess-ment of what is spoken. One feature of this moral register of politics is that it is difﬁcult torefute through claims of empirical substance: hence Trump’s rejection of counter claims as“false facts” (neatly turning the use of this phrase by his opponents in the presidentialInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 45election campaign). In addressing the anxieties and fears of the people, populist campaign-ers represent themselves as truth tellers and taboo-breakers – “telling it like it is” –especially around questions of immigration, the nation and sovereignty. In this process,they claim to speak for the “silent majority”: a public that has been silenced by liberalelites and their overwhelming culture of “political correctness” (see, inter alia, Weigel2016; the “silent majority” concept goes back to Richard Nixon who claimed them in1969).Such populist projects elicit particular temporalities as parts of their preferred “ways ofknowing”. They are shaped at the intersection of images of a discredited past – in which thepeople lost their voice, their capacity to speak to power – and a fantasy future in which theirtrue feelings will be recognized and their desires met. As we saw in the previous section,most of the expertise deployed in favour of Remain during the 2016 UK Referendum, orfor a so-called “soft” Brexit thereafter, assumed a more or less predictable future in whichconsequences could be attached to different courses of action, such that leaving the EUwould have predictably negative impacts on economic growth, ﬁnancial stability, employ-ment and “the markets”. This was, after all, the model of evidence, analysis and expertisethat has dominated political discourse since the late twentieth century (even if its capacityto predict problems and crises has appeared recurrently ﬂawed). In contrast, the Leavemovement deployed a different sense of time. Most obviously, it celebrated an imaginarypast when “we” were in control of our country, our borders, our economy and our lives,captured in the demand to “take back control”. But it also appealed to the past-as-experi-ence, contrasting the everyday dislocations and disjunctures of economic and social lifewith the threatened future projected by the Remain camp (see also Davies 2016, on popu-lism and the suspension of the future). How could it be worse than it has been? The denun-ciation of “expertise” at the heart of populism thus challenges forms of probabilistic orpredictive knowledge geared to conceptions of future development or progress:In rejecting knowledge of the future, Brexitists are saying no to such a politics and the assump-tions about social change on which it rests. Theirs is an inquisitorial politics which ﬁxes on thepast in order to identify the crimes and betrayals that happened there, to name the guilty partiesand to demand that they be punished. (Finlayson 2017, 22)Again, these populist challenges carry echoes of left critiques of dominant power/knowl-edge formations, particularly those that transformed social knowledge into quasi-scientiﬁcforms, that excluded popular knowledge from expert decision-making or that inscribed“progress” as both benign and inevitable. The articulation of them into a rightwing nation-alist project also draws on the undoubtedly unequal impacts of this “progress” (reﬂected inthe impacts of de-industrialization, uneven development, wage stagnation, the degradationof work and the decimation of public services: see Clarke and Newman 2017 for a longerdiscussion). But Finlayson’s argument about the projected “unknowability” of the futuresuggests a moralizing divide between the people and their enemies and points to a rearrang-ing of time and temporalities. The distinctive temporality of populism, in which historicaltime is replaced by a continuous and immediate present, is expressed in a promise to efface“any distance between all desires and their realization” (Taguieff 2007, 16; our translation).The proposition that “Leave means Leave” or Farage’s celebration of “Independence Day”carry this sense of time being effaced – the desire to take back control is promised immedi-ate fulﬁlment. One consequence of this “immediacy” is to generate further contradictionsand antagonisms as political and governmental time (negotiation, planning, policy making,etc.) come back into play. If contemporary forms of populist politics fed off feelings of46 J. Newman and J. Clarkefrustration, anger and a sense of betrayal, then the return of “governmental time” has addedfuel to such feelings and deepened popular scepticism about political elites – and their“experts”.Conjunctural conﬁgurations: the instabilities of dominant expertise?The question of temporality is also at stake in developing a conjunctural understanding ofthe Brexit moment and the success of a distinctive populist project (Clarke and Newman2017). This disaffection from expertise – and its claimed distance from the normative timeof politics – helps to explain how the Leave campaign was able to overcome its mostevident paradox. The triumph of an anti-elite politics that was led by members of thatelite (including leading ﬁgures of the Conservative Party such as Boris Johnson andMichael Gove) seems perverse: public school educated establishment ﬁgures championingthe “people” against the “elite”, whilst not unknown in the history of populist movements,was certainly a distinctive feature of the UK’s brush with populism. Their triumph –however momentary – has led to the disruption in all of the established parties (includingUKIP). Such dislocations of the political stage – and the potential frustrations of govern-mental time noted above – may make it even harder to ﬁnd new bases for political mobil-ization among an increasingly disaffected and fractured population.Avariety of commentators have seen the moment of Brexit, Trump and a revived popu-list-nationalism as marking epochal shifts – the arrival of an “age of anger” (Mishra 2017)or an era of populism (Judis 2016). Alternatively, some have argued that this insurgentpopulism marks the end of liberalism, neo-liberalism or even “progressive neo-liberalism”(e.g. Fraser 2017; Gray 2016; Jacques 2016). For instance, Fraser argues that:… Trump’s victory is not solely a revolt against global ﬁnance. What his voters rejected wasnot neoliberalism tout court, but progressive neoliberalism. This may sound to some like anoxymoron, but it is a real, if perverse, political alignment that holds the key to understandingthe U.S. election results and perhaps some developments elsewhere too. In its U.S. form, pro-gressive neoliberalism is an alliance of mainstream currents of new social movements (femin-ism, anti-racism, multiculturalism, and LGBTQ rights), on the one side, and high-end“symbolic” and service-based business sectors (Wall Street, Silicon Valley, and Hollywood),on the other. In this alliance, progressive forces are effectively joined with the forces of cog-nitive capitalism, especially ﬁnancialization. However unwittingly, the former lend their char-isma to the latter. Ideals like diversity and empowerment, which could in principle servedifferent ends, now gloss policies that have devastated manufacturing and what were oncemiddle-class lives. (Fraser 2017)There is much to debate in this analysis: the idiosyncratic representation of “progressiveneoliberalism” that draws on Fraser’s long running view of the collusion of the feminismand other social movements in the making of neoliberalism; the slippage between neoliber-alism and its “progressive” variant; and the concept of cognitive capitalism (see, forexample, Julia Brenner’s response in Dissent: 2017). However, we want to offer a ratherdifferent view. This must begin from a view of neoliberalism as an articulated ensemblein which multiple forces are imperfectly aligned. In this ensemble, different rationalitiesare able to coexist despite their apparent contradictory imperatives and despite theirdiverse political constituencies. And, certainly, any critique of populism as an overwhelm-ing force must address its interplay with other forces and movements, “borrowing, bendingand blending” (Pennycook 2007, 47) from diverse sources (including left critiques ofexpertise as a mode of power). Rather, our problem lies with these “epochal” analyses, con-ﬁdently announcing the “end of” X or Y. In particular, neoliberalism has been pronouncedInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 47dead on rather too many occasions for anyone to be conﬁdent that it has ﬁnally breathed itslast. As Aditya Chakrabortty noted ironically about an earlier death notice:Through the autumn of 2008, a steady stream of obituaries ﬂowed into my inbox. They camefrom think tanks, from academics and from small publishers of books and journals. Allannounced the same death and all were gleeful ‘Neoliberalism is dead!’ they crowed.Wasn’t it obvious? (2016, ix)We think it is important to resist the temptations of pronouncing the “death of”, or the “endof” in such epochal statements. This means refusing to see historical moments in singularterms (from neoliberalism to post-neoliberalism) or in terms of their singular dynamics,forces, or causes. We understand the temptations to announce the one “real” cause, butinstead conjunctural analysis asks us to think about how various lines of force intersectedwith the fracturing of apparently established governmental and political formations (fromthe crises of the European Union to the dis-uniting of the United Kingdom). These multiple– and heterogeneous – lines of force were recombined in new articulations and found newvoicings that promised to overcome the failures and frustrations, as well as the contradic-tions and antagonisms, of the existing arrangements. Such a view demands that we thinkabout multiplicities – of forces, tendencies, antagonisms and contradictions – and about theinstabilities of the emerging formations that are currently in the process of beingconstructed.Elsewhere we have pointed to how the process of reassembling multiple forces intonew formations is political work. Such work involves the practice of articulation, describedby Stuart Hall as marking “the forms of the relationship through which two processes,which remain distinct – obeying their own conditions of existence – are drawn togetherto form a ‘complex unity’” (1977, 48). The work involved is that of decoupling existingchains of meaning, forging new associations and installing new representations. It relieson the labour of forging alliances, borrowing vocabularies, and reinventing political pro-jects, often through appropriating (partially) other political rationalities. The process ofneoliberalization required such work: for example, the articulations with communitarian-ism (in Blair’s Britain); or Catholic voluntarism (in Northern Italy; see Muehlebach2012) drew on established formations which gave the neoliberal project a new vitalityand popular reach. In a similar way, we would argue that we need to think of populism,not as a singular form with a unique character, but as an ensemble or assemblage, elementsof which may be brought into new articulations – with varieties of nationalism, racism, orwhite supremacist thinking, for example – to produce newly potent conﬁgurations. Suchwork was highly visible during the UK referendum campaign of 2016 and the US electionlater that year.Hall’s concept of a “complex unity” seems indispensable for thinking about the con-juncture as a whole, and for the particular formations that are active within it. It also pro-vides a way of returning to the conception of expertise as particular conﬁgurations ofpower/knowledge with which we began this article. Thinking of these as articulatedensembles – of forms and practices of power, of types of knowledge, deploying speciﬁcsets of tactics, devices and forms of calculation, enacted through particular institutionalapparatuses – makes it possible to see their contingent character. In turn, this enables ana-lyses of their conditions of existence, their construction and their vulnerabilities. Similararguments can be made about the different formations of “populism” that map on to differ-ent spatialities and temporalities (SYRIZA in Greece, Podemos in Spain, Modi in India,Orbán in Hungary, and Trump in the US). Such contingent conﬁgurations are always48 J. Newman and J. Clarkepotentially unstable (as the assembled elements threaten to become unglued) and poten-tially contestable. This should lead us away from generic or one dimensional views ofeither knowledge or power, even when (or perhaps, especially when) the particularfusion of knowledge and power appears hegemonic or incontestably solid. Such solidityexists in a dynamic relationship with instability. Gramsci once suggested that “the lifeof the state can be conceived as a series of unstable equilibria” (1971, 182), providing afruitful image of paradoxical dynamics. We ﬁnd it a productive way of thinking aboutstates, but think its value extends further – in this case to thinking about forms of expertiseas conﬁgurations of knowledge-power. Certainly, the role of “economic” expertise, centralto the diverse processes of neoliberalization, has shifted from a position of equilibrium,institutionalized as the necessary and natural knowledge of how economies and theirsocieties work, to a moment of instability, subject to varieties of scepticism, disaffectionand disenchantment. But what follows or emerges from such instability? What new equi-libria might be constructed in the re-entangling of power, knowledge and politics?Emergent articulations: reconﬁguring power, knowledge and politicsConjunctural analysis requires us to pay attention to the potential lines of development in acomplex historical moment, rather than assuming that there is only one way forward. ForWilliams (1977), this meant paying attention to the ﬁeld of possibilities that he character-ized as made up of dominant, residual and emergent formations (and their interrelations).For our purposes here, this implies addressing the reconﬁgurations of power, knowledgeand politics that are in play in the present moment, including the emergence of potentialnew formations. In this ﬁnal section, then, we sketch some emerging articulations ofknowledge, power and politics. We view these as potential sites in which forms anduses of expertise are currently being remade, rather than assuming that they have, orwill, become stable conﬁgurations.We begin by pointing to emergent instabilities in and around the discipline of econ-omics itself. There has been extensive scepticism about austerity policies on the basisthat there is little or no evidence that austerity works. There have been numerous revoltsagainst the imposition by the EU of technocratic and depoliticizing expertise on“debtor” nations, particularly visible in Greece and Spain (e.g. De Witte, Héritier, andTrechsel 2013; Kowalsky 2015; Varoufakis 2016). The IMF offered a self-criticalaccount of the failings of its pro-austerity stance (Elliott 2016) and even the Bank ofEngland admitted that economic forecasting itself might be “in crisis” (Giles 2016). Theorthodoxies of economic expertise on which policy “realism” is based had already beenchallenged – for example by feminist economists who offered alternative economic ima-ginaries and practices (Gibson-Graham 2006; Himmelweit 2013). There have been numer-ous attempts to challenge economic models that rely on assumptions of permanent growth(e.g. Raworth 2017). In 2016 protests by economics students at Manchester Universitydramatized ﬂaws in the economic models that, they argued, had contributed to the ﬁnancialcrisis of 2008. Their protest widened into a series of student campaigns across ﬁfteencountries, and into a new network of civil servants exploring alternative approaches toeconomic ideas in policymaking. Such instabilities challenge what Earle, Moran, andWard-Perkins (2017) term The Econocracy. They may not fundamentally unravel theknowledge/power knot of economic expertise and its relationship to neoliberal rule, butthey certainly create cracks in its facade of inevitability.A second potential instability arises from the growing signiﬁcance of emergent clustersof expertise. Foremost has been the growing interest in the “behavioural sciences” inInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 49government and the academy as policymakers have sought new practices for managingpopulations, for example, by changing the “choice architecture” that inﬂuences human be-haviour – to reduce smoking, obesity, infant diseases and other social ills, or to promoterecycling, charitable giving and personal health and ﬁtness. The use of such techniquesand technologies been widely critiqued as non-deliberative and individualizing (Jones,Pykett, and Whitehead 2014; Newman 2013), but they have been at the forefront in theturn to “digital governance” (Dunleavy 2006); and of innovations in policy and practice,especially, but not only, in the UK. But the growing signiﬁcance of the behaviouralsciences is also fundamental to new alignments of political power based on the usesocial media (Facebook, Twitter etc.) in political campaigning. Investigations by theObserver newspaper show how companies such as Cambridge Analytica, Strategic Com-munication Laboratories, and AggregateIQ worked with the Leave campaign in the UKand the Trump campaign in the US in attempts to inﬂuence voters (Observer Review26/2/17, Observer 5/3/17). Such reports revealed not only the dense networks that con-nected companies, campaigns and digital platforms such as Facebook, but also theextent of inﬂuence by billionaire funders such as Robert Mercer. The claims made aboutCambridge Analytica have been disputed, as have the “neuropretensions” of neuroscience(Rose and Rose 2016). However, such forms of disciplinary expertise have helped shape anew consolidation of power, expertise and ﬁnancial capital capable of reaching into thebeliefs, choices and behaviours of citizens. And such forms of power – transnational, net-worked, secretive, digital – typically tend to elude public scrutiny (Wedel 2009).The harvesting of personal data is of course not only associated with right-wing move-ments. The thinktank NESTA argues that the quality of democratic decisions can beimproved by the use of digital platforms to elicit citizen knowledge and transform thequality of political engagement (Simon et al. 2017). In a similar vein, Noveck (2016)argues that “big data” affords a means of tapping into distributed expertise in order tohelp develop more participative institutions. This focus on the power of “citizen expertise”looks back to earlier attempts to enhance citizen participation in governing in order toaddress the defects of forms of professionalized governance. But rather than seekingpublic opinions on speciﬁc policy choices (the tendency of governance-led involvementinitiatives) Noveck advocates the use of crowdsourcing techniques in order to draw oncitizen skills and knowledge. Such developments have echoes in a variety of technologiesfor crowdsourcing commercial design (“prosumer” techniques involving users in designand development) and crowdfunding forms of social and commercial innovation (see,for example, Ritzer, Dean, and Jurgenson 2012). However, the implications of thegrowing interest in “big data” remain ambiguous: it offers tools and technologies thatserve both anti-democratic populist movements and would-be progressive attempts todemocratize governance. There are, however, dangers in viewing these as equivalent.First, attempts to mine personal data to inﬂuence voting behaviour is concerned withopinions and values, while crowd-sourcing seeks to elicit a variety of skills and knowledge.Second, the former seeks to generate mass data while the latter is explicitly focused onmultiplicity and difference. But third, and most importantly for our argument, theattempt to draw parallels overlooks the dynamics of power that shape these different devel-opments: the former backed by corporations and ﬁnanced by multi-millionaire backers; thelatter a normative set of ideas on the fringes of government.We might also trace the emergence of new political forms and forces. In April 2017,thousands of people joined a “March for Science” to warn against the threat to scientiﬁcresearch that the Trump presidency posed. In the UK, numerous pro-EU local activistgroupings have emerged, while investigative and campaigning journalism has ﬂourished,50 J. Newman and J. Clarkealbeit from a fragile ﬁnancial base. Failures of ﬂood defenses, food scares and other highproﬁle tragedies (including the ﬁre in Grenfell Tower, a high rise block of social housing inLondon in 2017) have led to calls for a return to regulation and a reassertion of the pro-fessional skills underpinning it. In the UK and the US we can also trace a reassertion ofjudicial power as a means of constraining executive power within government. All pointto the potential reassertion of traditional political ideas and institutions embedded inlaw, regulation, and in the multiple organs of statehood. The formerly dominant formationsof policy and politics have not exactly gone away, although their legitimacy has been calledinto question. Announcements of the “health of the economy” and promises/threats aboutthe economic consequences of particular courses of action continue to dominate politicaldiscourse (in claims about the virtues of free trade, protectionism, and nativist imaginingsof work and welfare, for example). And popular scepticism about the role and power of“experts” (including bankers, economists, politicians, judges, regulators) remains apotent force. This points to a much more unsettled place for dominant conﬁgurations ofknowledge and power in the present moment as political regimes attempt to create newequilibria – new settlements – in the face of fractured and fractious publics.This is by no means an exhaustive survey of dominant, emergent and residual conﬁgur-ations. Rather our aim has been to suggest that – in this currently unstable landscape – newarticulations of knowledge, power and politics are being elaborated that have potential forrealigning political forces, practices and relationships. Some of these seek to intensifycurrent concentrations of power, while others seek to loosen or unsettle them. Existingsites, forms and practices of expertise – and their articulations of knowledge and power– will not go away easily. What the present moment has made clear, though, is that wecannot expect that challenges and contestations to them will lead to progressive or libera-tory outcomes. On the contrary, the nationalist-authoritarian-populist appropriations of cri-tiques of expertise threaten profoundly regressive recompositions of knowledge, powerand politics.ConclusionWe have argued for the importance of thinking about expertise through the concepts ofconjuncture and articulation (terms central to the vocabulary of cultural studies). Theseconcepts point to the contextual speciﬁcity of forms of expertise – their location in particu-lar formations of space/time – and to the ways in which speciﬁc arrangements of knowl-edge, power and politics are conﬁgured. Such a perspective illuminates the shiftingfortunes of dominant forms of expertise in recent Euro-Atlantic politics, where populistmovements have made expertise and experts contestable. The process of identifying anddiscrediting “experts” as part of the cosmopolitan elite or establishment has undercutclaims to objective or scientiﬁc authority. The process involves the labour of politicalactors mobilizing, we have suggested, deep rooted popular scepticism about expertise (par-ticularly economic expertise) and drawing on previous left critiques of knowledge-as-power. These insurgent attacks on expertise, elites and the establishment “in the nameof the people” borrow extensively from progressive analyses even while bending themto other political ends.This leaves critics with some problems to address. First, can we be more speciﬁc andcareful about our critiques of knowledge/power: are there some forms of expertise thatmight be valued, recognized, defended or developed? Our analysis of “emergent” and “tra-ditional” forms of expertise in the ﬁnal section suggests the need for a more careful decon-struction of expertise, modes of knowing and forms of authority, rather than assuming thatInnovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 51“expertise” is always effectively sutured into relations and practices of domination.Second, it implies thinking more contingently about how knowledge and power are articu-lated – and their relationship to ﬁelds of political contestation and activation. How mightthe “good sense” (rather than the “common sense”) of people be animated and activated(Crehan 2016)? Third, it implies thinking about conjunctures as heterogeneous – madeup of contradictory, antagonistic and divergent forces and tendencies. As we havenoted, there are a number of forces and movements contesting the “de-politicizing”effects of dominant conﬁgurations of power/knowledge, creating instead an unsettlingre-politicization. Through such a frame, it becomes possible to see the shifting dynamicsof stabilization and disequilibrium in what Gramsci called the “life of the state” – and in theformations of knowledge, power and politics in which the life of the state is entangled. Inthe end, we believe that attention to the “instabilities of expertise” reveals a terrain that ismore uncertain, more contested and more fractious than conventional approaches wouldsuggest.AcknowledgementsWe are grateful to the editors and the reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments on earlierdrafts.ORCIDJohn Clarke http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3968-4713ReferencesBrenner, Julia. 2017. “There’s No Such Thing as ‘Progressive Neoliberalism’.” Dissent, January 14.https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/nancy-fraser-progressive-neoliberalism-social-movements-response.Brown, Wendy. 2015. Undoing the Demos. New York: Zone Books.Cabinet Ofﬁce. 1999.Modernising Government. London: Stationery Ofﬁce. 66 pp. Cm 4310. http://www.cabinet-ofﬁce.gov.uk/moderngov/whtpaper/index.htm.Chakrabortty, Aditya. 2016. “Foreword” to W. Davies The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority,Sovereignty and the Logic of Competition. London: Sage.Clarke, John. 2010a. “Of Crises and Conjunctures: The Problem of the Present.” Journal ofCommunication Inquiry 34 (4): 337–354. doi:10.1177/0196859910382451.Clarke, John. 2010b. “Enrolling Ordinary People: Governmental Strategies and the Avoidance ofPolitics?” Citizenship Studies 14 (6): 637–650.Clarke, John. forthcoming a. “Articulating Austerity and Authoritarianism: Re-imagining MoralEconomies?” In Austerity: The Lived Experience, edited by Bryan Evans, and StephenMcBride. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.Clarke, John. forthcoming b. “‘The Here and Now’? Finding the Time and Space of theConjuncture.” In Doreen Massey – Critical Dialogues, edited by Jamie Peck, Marion Werner,Jamie Peck, Rebecca Lave, and Brett Christophers. London: Agenda.Clarke, John, and Janet Newman. 1997. The Managerial State: Power, Politics and Ideology in theRemaking of Social Welfare. London: Sage.Clarke, John, and Janet Newman. 2012. “The Alchemy of Austerity.” Critical Social Policy 32 (3):299–319.Clarke, John, and Janet Newman. 2017. ““People in This Country Have Had Enough of Experts”:Brexit and the Paradoxes of Populism.” Critical Policy Studies 11 (1): 101–116.Crehan, Kate. 2016. Gramsci’s Common Sense. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Crouch, Colin. 2014. Post-democracy. Cambridge: Polity.Davies, William. 2016. The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty and the Logic ofCompetition. London: Sage.52 J. Newman and J. ClarkeDavies, Huw, Sandra Nutley, and Peter Smith, eds. 2000. What Works? Evidence-based Policy andPractice in Public Services. Bristol: Policy Press.Dean, Jonathan. 2014. “Tales of the Apolitical.” Political Studies 62 (2): 452–467.De Witte, Bruno, Adrienne Héritier, and Alexander Trechsel, eds. 2013. The Euro Crisis and theState of European Democracy. Florence: European University Institute, (e-book).Dunleavy, Patrick. 2006. Digital Era Governance: IT Corporations, the State, and E-Government.Oxford: Oxford University Press.Earle, John, Cahal Moran, and Zach Ward-Perkins. 2017. Econocracy. Manchester: ManchesterUniversity Press.Elliott, Larry. 2016. “Austerity Policies Do More Harm than Good, IMF Study Concludes.” TheGuardian, May 27. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/27/austerity-policies-do-more-harm-than-good-imf-study-concludes.Evans, Bryan, and Stephen McBride (eds). forthcoming. Austerity: The Lived Experience. Toronto:University of Toronto Press.Finlayson, Alan. 2017. “Brexitism.” London Review of Books 39 (10): 22–23.Forkert, Kirsten. 2017. Austerity as Public Mood: Social Anxieties and Social Struggles. London:Rowman and Littleﬁeld.Foucault, Michel. 1991.Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Translated by Alan Sheridan.London: Penguin Books.Fraser, Nancy. 2017. “The End of Progressive Neoliberalism.” Dissent, January 2. https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/progressive-neoliberalism-reactionary-populism-nancy-fraser.Gibson-Graham, J. K. 2006. A Post-Capitalist Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Gilbert, J. 2015. “Disaffected Consent: That Post-democratic Feeling.” Soundings: A Journal ofPolitics and Culture (60): 29–41. doi:10.3898/136266215815872971.Giles, Chris. 2016. “Bank of England’s Haldane Admits Crisis in Economic Forecasting.” FinancialTimes, January 6. https://www.ft.com/content/e94c96a2-d3e3-11e6-b06b-680c49b4b4c0.Gill, Nick, Phil Johnstone, and Andrew Williams. 2012. “Towards a Geography of Tolerance: Post-politics and Political Forms of Toleration.” Political Geography 31: 509–518.Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. Selections From the Prison Notebooks. Edited by G. Nowell-Smith.London: Lawrence and Wishart.Gray, John. 2016. “The Strange Death of Liberal Politics.” New Stateman, July 5. http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/07/strange-death-liberal-politics.Grossberg, Larry. 2010. Cultural Studies in the Future Tense. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Grossberg, Larry. 2018. Under the Cover of Chaos: Trump and the Battle for the American Right.London: Pluto Press.Hall, Stuart. 1977. “The ‘Political’ and the ‘Economic’ in Marx’s Theory of Classes.” In Class andClass Structure, edited by A. Hunt, 15–60. London: Lawrence and Wishart.Hall, Stuart, and Doreen Massey. 2010. “Interpreting the Crisis.” In After the Crash: Re-Inventing theLeft in Britain, edited by R. Grayson, and J. Rutherford, 37–46. Soundings in Collaboration withthe Social Liberal Forum and Compass. London: Lawrence and Wishart e-book.Harding, Jeremy. 2016. “Contribution to Where are We Now? Responses to the Referendum.”London Review of Books 38 (4): 12.Himmelweit, Sue. 2013. “Care: Feminist Economic Theory and Policy Challenges.” Journal ofGender Studies Ochanomizu University, 16.Jacques, Martin. 2016. “The Death of Neoliberalism and the Crisis of Western Politics.” TheGuardian, August 21. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/21/death-of-neoliberalism-crisis-in-western-politics.Jones, Owen. 2014. The Establishment: And How They Get Away With It. London: Penguin Books.Jones, Rhys, Jessica Pykett, and Mark Whitehead. 2014. Changing Behaviours: The Rise of thePsychological State. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.Judis, John J. 2016. The Populist Explosion: How the Great Recession Transformed American andEuropean Politics. New York, NY: Columbia Global Reports.Kowalsky, Wolfgang. 2015. “Is There a Future for Europe?” https://epaminternational.wordpress.com/2015/12/19/is-there-a-future-for-europe/.Mirowski, Philip, and Dieter Plehwe. 2009. The Road From Mont Pelerin: The Making of theNeoliberal Thought Collective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Mishra, Pankaj. 2017. The Age of Anger: A History of the Present. London: Penguin Books.Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research 53Muehlebach, Andrea. 2012. The Moral Neoliberal: Welfare and Citizenship in Italy. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.Müller, Jan-Werner. 2016. What is Populism? Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.Newman, J. 2001. “‘What Counts is What Works’? Constructing Evaluations of MarketMechanisms.” Public Administration 79 (1): 89–103.Newman, Janet. 2013. “Performing New Worlds? Policy, Politics and Creative Labour in HardTimes.” Policy and Politics 41 (4): 515–532.Newman, Janet. 2017. “The Politics of Expertise; Neoliberalism, Governance and the Practice ofPolitics.” In Assembling Neoliberalism: Expertise, Practices, Subjects, edited by V. Higgins,and W. Larner, 87–105. New York: Palgrave.Noveck, Beth Simone. 2016. Enough of Experts: Data, Democracy and the Future of Expertise.Campaign for Social Science Annual Sage Lecture, Delivered at 61 Whitehall London, 22November. www.campaignforsocialscience.org,uk.Patten, Steven. 2017. “Partisan Politics, Neoliberal Hegemony, Epistemological Populism and theProduction of Social Illiteracy.” Paper presented to Conference on The Crises ofNeoliberalism, University of Alberta, May 5.Peck, Jamie. 2010. Constructions of Neo-Liberal Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Peck, Jamie. 2013. “Disembedding Polanyi: Exploring Polanyian Economic Geographies.”Environment and Planning A 45: 1536–1544.Pennycook, Alistair. 2007. Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows. London: Routledge.Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.Raworth, Kate. 2017. Doughnut Economics. London: Penguin Books.Ritzer, George, Paul Dean, and Nathan Jurgenson. 2012. “The Coming of Age of the Prosumer.”American Behavioral Scientist 56 (4): 379–398.Rose, Hilary, and Steven Rose. 2016. Can Neuroscience Change Our Minds? Cambridge: Polity.Samet, Robert, and Naomi Schiller. 2017. “All Populisms Are Not Created Equal.” AnthropologyNews, May 8. doi:10.1111/AN.432Saurette, Paul, and Shane Gunster. 2011. “Ears Wide Shut: Epistemological Populism, Argutainmentand Canadian Conservative Talk Radio.” Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue cana-dienne de science politique 44 (1): 195–218.Simon, Julie, Theo Bass, Victoria Boelman, and Geoff Mulgan. 2017. Digital Democracy; The Toolsfor Transforming Political Engagement. London: Nesta. www.nesta.org.uk.Taguieff, Pierre-André. 2007. L’Illusion Populiste. 1st ed.Manchecourt: Editions Flammarion.Turner, Graeme. 2010. Ordinary People and the Media: The Demotic Turn. London: Sage.Van Hollen, Cecilia. 2016. “Trump and the Establishment Boogeyman.” Anthropology News,December 14. http://www.anthropology-news.org/index.php/2016/12/14/trump-and-the-establishment-boogeyman/.Varoufakis, Yanis. 2016. The Weak Suffer What They Must? Europe, Austerity and the Threat toGlobal Stability. London: The Bodley Head.Watkins, Susuan. 2016. “Editorial: Casting Off?” New Left Review 100: 5–31.Wedel, Janine. 2009. Shadow Elite: How the World’s New Power Brokers Undermine Democracy.New York: Basic Books.Weigel, Moira. 2016. “Political Correctness: How the Right Invented a Phantom Enemy.”The Guardian, November 30. https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/political-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump.Williams, Raymond. 1977. Marxism and Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Wilson, Japhy, and Erik Swyngedouw, eds. 2015. The Post-Political and its Discontents. Edinburgh:Edinburgh University Press.54 J. Newman and J. Clarke