ABSTRACT: 
The convergence of climate change and post-Soviet socio-economic and institutional transformations has been underexplored so far, as have the consequences of such convergence on crop agriculture in Central Asia. This paper provides a place-based analysis of constraints and opportunities for adaptation to climate change, with a specific focus on water use, in two districts in southeast Kazakhstan. Data were collected by 2 multi-stakeholder participatory workshops, 21 semi-structured in-depth interviews, and secondary statistical data. The present-day agricultural system is characterised by enduring Soviet-era management structures, but without state inputs that previously sustained agricultural productivity. Low margins of profitability on many privatised farms mean that attempts to implement integrated water management have produced water users associations unable to maintain and upgrade a deteriorating irrigation infrastructure. Although actors engage in tactical adaptation measures, necessary structural adaptation of the irrigation system remains difficult without significant public or private investments. Market-based water management models have been translated ambiguously to this region, which fails to encourage efficient water use and hinders adaptation to water stress. In addition, a mutual interdependence of informal networks and formal institutions characterises both state governance and everyday life in Kazakhstan. Such interdependence simultaneously facilitates operational and tactical adaptation, but hinders structural adaptation, as informal networks exist as a parallel system that achieves substantive outcomes while perpetuating the inertia and incapacity of the state bureaucracy. This article has relevance for critical understanding of integrated water management in practice and adaptation to climate change in post-Soviet institutional settings more broadly. 
 
PREDICTION: 
in this letter , we discuss the importance of correctly predicting the outcome of climate events .<n> we show that in predicting the outcome of a climate event , it is of primary importance to correctly predict the probability that the event is occurring .<n> we argue that the probability that a given event is caused by a systematic error is proportional to the square root of the error .<n> we conclude that predicting the probability that a given event is caused by a systematic error is of primary importance for predicting the probability that the event is occurring . <n> we consider the following question .<n> given the importance of predicting the outcome of climate events , it is of primary importance to correctly predict the probability that the event is occurring .<n> the main objective of any palaeoclimate project is to predict the temperature at which the climate starts to deviate from zero . to this end<n> , we consider the following question .<n> given the importance of predicting the outcome of a climate event , it is of primary importance to correctly predict the probability that the event is caused by a systematic error .<n> the main objective of any palaeoclimate project is to predict the probability that the event is caused by a systematic error .<n> the main objective of any palaeoclimate project 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Keywords Adaptation to climate change .Watermanagement . Post-Soviet transformation .Agriculture . Kazakhstan . Rapid appraisal of agriculturalinnovation systems . Central AsiaIntroductionClimate change is projected to have significant impacts onagriculture in Kazakhstan (Hijioka et al. 2014). Past trendshave shown warming at rates of between 0.19 °C per10 years and 0.46 °C per 10 years since the middle of thetwentieth century, with higher temperature increases athigher altitudes (Shahgedanova et al. 2016). Recent cli-mate projections from an ensemble of regional climatemodel (RCM) simulations suggest future mean tempera-ture increases of up to 2 °C during 2025–2049 and of 4–5 °C in 2050–2074 (Mannig et al. 2013; Reyer et al. 2015;Shahgedanova et al. 2016). While there is agreement be-tween all simulations that air temperature will increase inall seasons (although the projected magnitudes of changevary between models and scenarios), the projected changesin precipitation are spatially heterogeneous and the magni-tude and even direction of change varies between seasonsElectronic supplementary material The online version of this article(https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-017-9947-9) contains supplementarymaterial, which is available to authorized users.* Giuseppe Feolag.feola@reading.ac.uk1 University of Reading, Department of Geography andEnvironmental Science, Reading, Whiteknights RG6 6AB, UK2 Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology, Halle, Germany3 Kazakh Institute of Geography, Almaty, KazakhstanHum Ecolhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-017-9947-9and models (Mannig et al. 2013; Shahgedanova et al.2016). Analysis of the ensemble of RCM simulations,however, indicates that a decrease in precipitation duringthe growing season is likely (Shahgedanova et al. 2016).Hydrological modelling of snow and glacier melt based onfuture climate change scenarios suggest that freshwaterlimitations and water stress are among the most importantlikely impacts on socioeconomic and biophysical systems.National policies toward water and rural development aretherefore key to responses to future climate change(Lioubimtseva and Henebry 2009; Pavlova et al. 2014;Pomfret 2016).Projected impacts of climate on agriculture acrossKazakhstan have been addressed by several recent studies(Fay et al. 2010; Lioubimtseva and Henebry 2009;Yesserkepova 2010; Mirzabaev 2013; Sommer et al.2013; Bobojonov and Aw-Hassan 2014; Eisfelder et al.2014). Most studies concentrate on the northern regionsof the country, where large-scale industrialised grain pro-duction predominates. With low productivity and efficien-cy, discussion centres on whether actors are able to seizethe opportunities that climate change may bring (WorldBank 2009; Lioubimtseva and Henebry 2012; Bobojonovand Aw-Hassan 2014; Pomfret 2016; although Pavlovaet al. 2014, present a less sanguine assessment). In themountainous areas of south and southeast Kazakhstan,where agricultural production is mixed and small and me-dium landholdings predominate, discussion focuses on theadaptive capacity of farmers who lack financial and otherresources (Lioubimtseva and Henebry 2009; Yesserkepova2010; Kerven et al. 2011; Mirzabaev 2013). There is agree-ment that the distributional effects of climate change maylikely be skewed against these areas.Our understanding of the capacity of crop agriculture toadapt to climate change in the southern regions ofKazakhstan is limited by important gaps that result fromgeographical and methodological biases in the literature.First, with exceptions mostly concerning pastoralism(e.g., Kerven et al. 2011, 2016), these areas have beenlargely neglected in post-Soviet research, resulting in poorunderstanding of how local biophysical systems areresponding to a changing climate. There is insufficient un-derstanding of how farming is socially constructed, whatinstitutions regulate agricultural activities, and how thesemay be changing concurrently or responding to climatechange. Second, research tends to be based on top-downclimate, crop-climate, or climate-economic modelling, en-gaging little with communities on the ground and makinglimited use of social scientific theories to examine adapta-tion practices, or lack thereof, in specific places(Lioubimtseva and Henebry 2009; Hamidov et al. 2016).Research has focussed on technological or managerial ad-aptation measures (drought resistant crop varieties,insurance schemes) (e.g., Heidelbach 2007; Pavlova et al.2014) at the expense of cultural or social adaptation prac-tices, which are not only more difficult to model, but alsocall for critical analysis of the socio-political context, usu-ally a given external factor in climate and economicmodels (Feola et al. 2012, 2015).This study provides a place-based analysis of con-straints and opportunities for agricultural adaptation to cli-mate change, with a specific focus on water use in twodistricts in southeast Kazakhstan. We focus specificallyon crop farming; the effects of climate change onKazakhstan’s extensive livestock sector are beyond thescope of this research. The convergence of post-Soviet po-litical, economic, and socio-cultural environments and cli-mate change has been underexplored so far, as have theconsequences of such convergence on agriculture inKazakhstan and Central Asia. This paper is the first ac-count of on-the-ground adaptation to climate change inKazakhstan and the first to consider how the post-Sovietinstitutional environment converges with and affects adap-tation to climate change, and to what extent implementedwater management models (particularly IWRM) supportclimate change adaptation in a semi-arid region. Thesefindings have broad relevance for other former Sovietcountries and countries that have undergone major institu-tional transformation from long-established regimesworldwide.Agriculture and Water Management in Post-SovietKazakhstanAgriculture is an important sector of Kazakhstan’s ruraleconomy, accounting for 80% of land-use, 4.4% of GDP,and providing livelihoods for some 19% of the labour force(World Bank 2016). The dissolution of the Soviet systemled to fundamental and ongoing restructuring of politicaland economic institutions, connections to regional andglobal markets, and social relations, and in the agriculturalsector to widespread de-intensification as without Soviet-era inputs and subsidies, pastures and marginal arable landwere abandoned (de Beurs and Henebry 2004). State sup-port for agriculture was terminated and many farms be-came heavily indebted amid a tortuous land reform pro-gram aimed at restructuring and privatising former stateand collective farms (Pomfret 2013).Land reforms during the 1990s had little to no impact onthe size and internal structure of large farms. But a bank-ruptcy law enacted in 1998 led to the liquidation of insol-vent corporate farms and an increase of private farms fromapproximately 5000 in 1990 to 162,000 in 2006 (Wegerich2008; World Bank 2004). The adoption of a new land codein 2003 introduced private ownership of farmland and aHum Ecolfledgling land sales market (Petrick et al. 2011). Kazakhlaw now recognises three farm structures: household pro-ducers, individual farms, and corporate farms. Large agro-holdings and agro-food clusters enjoy unclear legal status(Wandel 2009). Household producers and individual farmsaccount for the majority of agricultural production (39% ofarable land and 71% of gross agricultural output in 2010)(Lerman 2009, 2014).Post-Soviet farmers generally have a negative attitude tothe removal of agricultural subsidies and the institution of landmarkets. In several former Soviet countries, farmers and ruralpopulations did not support cropland privatisation and op-posed private land ownership and markets (Lioubimtseva2010), attributing responsibility for food security to the stateand consequently blaming it for poor economic conditionsand increasing food prices (Serova 2000). Various issues ex-acerbated dissatisfaction, including high transaction costs(bribes, administrative obstructions), restricted access to fi-nance for agribusinesses, low land productivity, land tenurerestrictions, and an underdeveloped transport infrastructure ingrain production (Meng et al. 2000; Petrick et al. 2014: 1,citing OECD 2011, 2013). Moreover, as DFID (2003: 72)noted, a consequence of privatisation and redistribution ofland to former state and collective farm employees is thatBmany current farmers have relatively little experience in gen-eral farm management practices, either because they are newto farming or because their jobs on the state and collectivefarms were specialised.^Integrated Water Resource Management and IrrigationManagement TransferSoviet-era water management for agriculture and energywas central ised under the all-Union Ministry ofMelioration and Water Management (MinVodKhoz), itscorresponding ministries and subordinated agencies in therepublics. The concentration of agricultural production inarid and semi-arid areas – with otherwise favourable soiland thermal conditions – necessitated extensive water stor-age and distribution systems oriented to planned produc-tion by state enterprises that had responsibility for on-farmwater delivery. These systems were of low technology andefficiency (50–60% in Kazakhstan) and by the 1980s insevere need of rehabilitation (Micklin 1988: 17).One of the most significant consequences of the disso-lution of the Soviet system has been the opening of thecountry to international development assistance, with do-nors promoting the transfer of privatised models of naturalresource management . Among these , I r r iga t ionManagement Transfer (IMT) Bseeks the relocation of re-sponsibilities and authority from central governments enti-ties managing irrigation schemes to non-governmentalagencies such as the Water Users Associations (WUAs)or to private entities^ (Zinzani 2015:767). IMT is the back-bone of Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM),a hegemonic paradigm elaborated in the 1992 Dublin prin-ciples to promote sustainable social and environmental de-velopment through water management, formalised inKazakhstan in the 2003 Water Code.Evidence suggests that the implementation of IMT andIWRM in Kazakhstan has not been informed by a solid under-standing of the local cultural, socio-political, and economiccontext (DFID 2003; Wegerich 2008; Mukhtarov 2013;Zinzani 2015). Some authors have noted the inflexible imple-mentation of IMT and other resource management models(Wegerich 2008), and lack of consideration in developmentorthodoxies for place-specific conditions (Kerven et al.2011, 2016; see also Meinzen-Dick 2007). This is consistentwith evidence in other countries in the global South (Biswas2004; Solokov 2006; Meinzen-Dick 2007; Mollinga et al.2007), and with typical dynamics of policy implementationin Kazakhstan (Petrick et al. 2014) where the Breform processhas been characterised by variability and arbitrariness at thelocal level^ (Behnke 2003), which is similar to implementa-tion of IWRM in neighbouring former Soviet countries(Hornidge et al. 2011).Water Users Associations (WUAs) were established af-ter 1994 with the intention of creating agricultural watermarkets (Burger 1998), although this often entailed merelya change of name of pre-existing structures and infiltrationof decision structures by local farm elites, with attendantissues over accountability, lack of specialist knowledge,and representation of farmer interests (Wegerich 2008;see also Zinzani 2015).1A second important issue was the inability of WUAs toconvert an irrigation system designed for a large-scale farmingsystem and which collapsed with the fragmentation of farms.Failure to maintain or upgrade water storage and irrigationinfrastructure resulted in reduced capacity of canals, especial-ly smaller canals, and in high water losses (Wegerich 2008;Hornidge et al. 2011). WUAs often lack the financial re-sources required for infrastructure investment, as not allfarmers regularly pay their fees and transfers from centraland district government have been reduced or stopped(Burger 1998; Johnson 1998; Rosen and Strickland 1998;Zinzani 2015).Persistent top-down decision-making and broader unequalrelations also inhibit efficient water use in agriculture. InKazakhstan, district water departments often override WUAsdecisions about maintenance work, while unequal relations(e.g., between small and large landholders) influence not only1 Hornidge et al. (2011) encountered similar issues in Uzbekistan, includingendemic corruption in the public sector, limited sense of ownership regardingwater user associations, and little involvement in water management.Hum Ecolhow conflicts regarding water are addressed, but whether theyare raised in the first place. Rigidities in the water manage-ment system therefore result from both infrastructural pathdependence and persistent power relations and other socialdynamics resulting from the fragmentation of decision-making actors following the collapse of the Soviet agriculturalsector (Van Assche et al. 2014).2MethodologyThis study set out to investigate factors affecting agriculturaladaptation to climate change in southeast Kazakhstan with fourspecific objectives: (i) characterise the water systems in repre-sentative sites; (ii) identify the challenges faced by a range ofactors involved in water use in agriculture; (iii) identify currentwater use and management practices employed to deal withwater stress and variability; (iv) identify entry points for adap-tation of water use in agriculture. Here we briefly present theapproach used to achieve these objectives (for a fullerpresentation and critical discussion see Barrett et al. 2017).DataFieldwork was conducted in three phases between September2015 and March 2016. Data were collected using an adaptedRapid Appraisal of Agricultural Innovation Systems (RAAIS)approach (Schut 2014; Schut et al. 2015a, b, c, d, 2016).RAAIS Bis a diagnostic tool that can guide the analysis ofcomplex agricultural problems and innovation capacity of theagricultural system in which the complex agricultural problemis embedded^ (Schut et al. 2015a:1). Emerging from agricul-tural innovation studies within a broader Farming SystemsResearch approach (Darnhofer et al. 2012; Klerkx et al. 2012)RAAIS is a multidimensional, multilevel, multi-stakeholder,and participatory tool for assessing the innovation capacity ofan agricultural system. It combines Bqualitative and quantitativemethods, and insider (stakeholders) and outsider (researchers)analyses which allow for critical triangulation and validation ofthe gathered data^ (Schut et al. 2015a:1). Accordingly, weemployed the following complementary data collectionmethods:Multi-stakeholder ParticipatoryWorkshopsWe conductedone-day workshops in each of the two study sites in February2016. These brought together approximately 30 people eachin separate stakeholder groups of small farmers, medium andlarge-scale farmers, non-governmental organisations (NGOs),scientists, agribusinesses, and representatives of state struc-tures (e.g., local and regional authorities, WUAs) to discussthe theme: Water-use in agriculture: main challenges andways forward. The workshops consisted of seven exercises:1. Individual brainstorming of challenges and constraints2. Ranking constraints to adaptation within stakeholdergroups3. Identifying nature of constraints (technological develop-ment, government programmes and insurance, farm pro-duction practices, farm financial management)4. Categorising type of constraints (understanding, planning,management)5. Situating constraints and challenges at different levels(farm, village, district, region, national, international)6. Identifying linkages between constraints and identifyingkey constraints7. From constraints and challenges to entry points and bestbets for adaptationExercises 2 to 5 were conducted within the stakeholdergroups, while groups were brought together for Exercises 6and 7. We adapted the methodology to suit our theoreticalframework and objectives. The typology of adaptation usedin Exercise 3 followed that proposed by Smit and Skinner(2002), which defines different types of agricultural adapta-tion measures, and was used to identify types of constraintfaced by different actors; participants were asked whetherthose constraints were problems of (i) technological develop-ment, (ii) government programmes and insurance, (iii) farmproduction practices, or (iv) farm financial management(Barrett et al. 2017). The understanding-planning-managingframework for Exercise 4 was derived from Moser andEkstrom’s adaptation process framework (2010), which con-ceptualises a generic process of deliberate adaptation of thetype expected in agricultural water use. Thus, participantswere asked whether the five constraints and challenges collec-tively selected and ranked in Exercise 2 represented problemsof (i) understanding (i.e., not enough known about what isgoing on in the water system to be able to change/adapt), (ii)planning (although knowing what is going on, have difficultydeciding and planning what to do to change and improvewater use), or (iii) managing (knowing what is going on andwhat they want to do, but not knowing how to implementwater-use changes and adaptations) (Barrett et al. 2017).2 Some studies show how farmers and other actors navigate the above-mentioned dysfunctions in other ex-Soviet countries (see e.g., Hornidgeet al. 2013 and Oberkircher and Hornidge 2011). Importantly these authorsdid not find evidence of efficiency being a value for farmers, as Westerneconomic rationales with regard to scarce resources are not part of the localconcept of water management. Discursive practices mediate this discrepancy,thus maintaining the system by verbally affirming formal arrangements in theface of informal practices. Informal practices (e.g., installing illicit waterpumps) may facilitate water management in the face of structural deficiencies,but they also reinforce a divide between official and actual practice, whichhinders learning and constitutes a barrier to institutional adaptation.Hum EcolSemi-structured in-Depth Interviews Follow-up interviewswere conducted with workshop participants following an op-portunity sample design whereby farmers were purposefullyover-represented (10 out of 21 interviewees) to gain betterinsight of the experiences and perspectives of water users.Interviews were conducted on a one-to-one basis, and focusedon the structure (physical and institutional) and functioning ofthe water system, and on current adaptation practices from theinterviewee’s perspective. Thus, interviews complemented theworkshops. Interviews were guided by the research team onthe basis of a flexible protocol in order to insure, on the onehand, that the interview maintained the above mentioned fo-cus, and on the other, that the interviewees had sufficient free-dom to propose their own perspectives or interpretations, andraise any connected points for understanding the water systemand current adaptation practices. Each interview lasted ap-proximately one hour and was digitally recorded. Interviewnotes were compiled with inputs from the two or three inter-viewers who conducted each interview.Secondary Data Collection Secondary data were collectedfrom the National Agricultural Census of 2006/2007, districtand regional authorities (background interviews, annual re-ports, statistical databases), and agricultural statistics fromthe KazakhMinistry of National Economy. These data mostlyconsist of standard agricultural indicators aggregated at theregional level (e.g., agricultural land, number of farm enter-prises, irrigated land), and are therefore useful only as abroader contextualisation of data from the multi-stakeholderworkshops and semi-structured interviews.Study SitesWe selected two study sites in different regions of AlmatyOblast’, southeast Kazakhstan, to represent broadly ‘typi-cal’ water management sites fed by the Ile Alatau mountainsystem, with a mix of irrigated and rain-fed agriculture.The climate is extremely dry, harsh continental, with aver-age temperatures ranging from −7 °C in January to 22–25 °C in July and an average of 150–170 frost-free daysper annum. Rainfall varies with elevation across the regionfrom 200 mm on the plains to 970 mm at the high-elevationTuyuksu station located at 3440 m. Locations were select-ed Key differences between sites were geographical loca-tion, farm size, and proximity to the main market inAlmaty (Fig. 1).Koram (population 6000) is a former tobacco producingstate farm [sovkhoz] within Enbekshikazakh Region. It lieson the plain below the northern foothills of the Ile Alatau,10 km southwest of the former regional centre, Shelek, and130 km east of Almaty. Koram comprises some 7700 ha ofland, now privatised into individual farms. Most house-holds are engaged in farming of some sort: Koram has833 registered farms and 1005 agricultural households(MA n.d.).Agricultural land accounts for some 4682 ha, of which58% (2723 ha) is irrigated arable land and 37% (1753 ha)is pastures. The rest is given over to haymaking (203 ha)and a small amount of multi-annual crop production (4 ha)(KAGIS 2016). Farms tend to be small (less than 25 ha),mixed arable and livestock, with most arable production(maize, alfalfa, clover) used as fodder for cattle, horse,sheep and poultry production. In addition, small-scale veg-etable production (peppers, tomatoes, cucumbers) is doneon privatised land-shares. The village also lies sufficientlyclose to the mountain system to benefit from precipitationfavourable for orchard production. Produce is sold whole-sale to Russian shuttle traders, via local middlemen to thewholesale market in Almaty, or by limited roadside sales.Karaoi (population 5600) is the administrative centre ofKaraoi rural district in Ile Region, some 20 km northwestof Almaty and 25 km from the regional administrative cen-tre, Otagen Batyr. The region’s landscape is largely repre-sented by semi-deserts, used for dryland farming on theKaraoi plateau and winter, spring, and autumn pastures inthe Sartaukum desert. Karaoi is one of the largest districtsin Ile Region, comprising three villages and a territory of8570 sq. km (OEBPIR 2015).3 Farms range from house-hold plots of 0.5 ha to greater than 3000 ha and comprise arange of organisational forms including a single productioncooperative, six business partnerships, 197 individual pri-vate farms, and 1343 farming households (OEBPIR 2015:25; MA n.d.). There is also significant formal and informalrental of land plots and unregistered small-scale farmingactivity.Agricultural land in Karaoi accounts for some53,737 ha, of which 26% (14,090 ha) is arable and 74%(39,647 ha) is used for pasture and haymaking. Around14% (2035 ha) of arable land is irrigated (KAGIS 2016)and production consists mostly of maize for human andanimal consumption, soy, wheat and alfalfa, as well asoil, potato, and vegetable production. Winter wheat, winterand spring barley, safflower, and wheatgrass are grown onrain-fed arable land, mostly as fodder. Closer to the city,agricultural production is more vertically integrated than inKoram. The region boasts four processing plants for ani-mal products and crops. Nevertheless, production is pri-marily for local markets. Even small-scale production isoften oriented to local processing plants (flour, sugar, poul-try). Smaller producers sell to established networks of cli-ents, at a seasonal market in Karaoi village, and at thewholesale market in Almaty.3 Field research focused on the water system around Karaoi village, but inev-itably also took into account farmers’ landholdings in the wider district.Hum EcolResults and AnalysisIrrigation Systems in Koram and KaraoiThe primary water source for Koram’s irrigation system is theGreat Almaty Canal [Bol’shoi Almatinskii Kanal] (BAK)(Figs. 2 and 3) a large capacity concrete canal that was builtin the late-Soviet period to increase irrigated agriculture in thearea. The canal is fed from the Bartogai reservoir and is man-aged by a filial of a state enterprise tasked with agriculturalwater management under the Ministry of Agriculture,KazVodKhoz. Water from the BAK is distributed via feedercanal to a large earthen primary canal, the MK [magistral’nyikanal] Kuram, under the administration of the local WUA.Dug by hand in the 1940s, the MK Kuram has suffered fromdecades of non-maintenance (Fig. 3). A series of sluices con-nects this to an earthen on-farm channel [Bvnutrokhoznyi^kanal4], in effect little more than a ditch, and associated net-work of ditches [aryki] by which channels water onto thefields. Primitive water gauges are installed at the sluicesconnecting the MK Kuram to the on-farm canal (Fig. 3), andwater is distributed to particular fields by opening andblocking ditches with sandbags and boulders. On-farm waterdistribution is the responsibility of farmers, although it is inpractice negotiated in conjunction with the head of the WUA.Disagreements have occasionally arisen and individualfarmers have been known to take matters into their own handsto obtain their share of water. A second water supply comesfrom the Terekti, a mountain stream that irrigates a patch ofpastureland west of the village centre and is channeled along asimilar system of ditches. Farmers who rely on this watersource report no problems with irrigation.Koram’sWUAwas established in 2003 by the present headof the village administration and has its offices in the village’sadministration building [akimat]. It acts as an intermediarybetween 740 local farmers and the BAK. Farmers close anagreement with the WUA on a yearly basis in March andagree a price according to the type of crop and area undercultivation. The WUA then contracts with the BAK on behalfof farmers and agrees a delivery date. Farmers pay half themoney up front and half at the end of the growing season. TheWUA also coordinates farmers’ annual upkeep of the districtirrigation network (MK Kuram, secondary canal, and ditches)and contracts for heavy maintenance work. The director andhis six staff are funded 80% by farmer’s water payments and20% by state subvention.In Karaoi, water for agricultural production is obtainedfrom several sources (Figs. 4 and 5). The Kaskalen and theUlken Almatinka rivers account for four fifths of water supply.4 The Soviet term vnutrikhozyaystvennyi kanal [intra-farm channel] refers tothe network of irrigation channels that were internal to the state farm.Following privatisation these channels supply fields of different farmers andwould bemore appropriately described as inter-farm channels.We use the termBon-farm channel^ to indicate that farmers are considered to have responsibil-ity for them.Fig. 1 Map of the study areaHum EcolThe BAK represents another source. A municipal wastewatertreatment plant in Almaty provides water for the production offeed crops and is distributed along a separate 18 km canal.Groundwater is also obtained from (mostly Soviet-era) wellsand used for livestock production on non-irrigated farms.Water from mountain rivers and the BAK is channelledthrough a system of earthen primary canals administered bythe semi-private production cooperative [proizvodstveniikooperativ] PK BIli,^ and collected into a network of collectorponds (Fig. 5). Water is distributed from these ponds viasluices into a network of earthen on-farm channels and thenceto ditches to particular fields (Fig. 5). As in Koram, these on-farm channels and ditches are the responsibility of localfarmers.Karaoi’s irrigation system differs from Koram in terms ofthe number of actors involved. The local WUA (BKos-Ozen^)covers five villages and is considered to be a branch of IliIrrigatsiya, a municipal utility service [gorodskoekommunal’noe prepriyatie] based in the district centre,Otagen Batyr. Karaoi’s irrigation system is larger and morevertically integrated than Koram’s. The localWUA consists ofone employee with responsibility for five villages who is ac-countable to Ili Irrigatsiya.Functionally, these are extensions of the district adminis-tration. In conjunction with the WUAs, Ili Irrigatsiya agreescontracts with farmers, acts as an intermediary for supply re-quests from the BAK, and administers an annual irrigationschedule. This irrigation schedule covers provision from pri-mary canals and collectors. On-farm irrigation is negotiatedbetween farmers. As in Koram, farmers agree delivery con-tracts with Ili Irrigatsiya, and pay 50% of water charges at thestart of the irrigation season and 50% after harvest.General Patterns in Identification of ChallengesKey challenges identified during the workshop in Koram re-lated to one of three categories: (i) water supply (timing, inad-equacy, and unclear supply rules), (ii) poor infrastructure (con-dition and maintenance, lack of consumption measurementequipment), and (iii) high water prices. Problems falling intothese categories were mentioned most frequently in Exercises1 and 2 and were ranked highest by workshop participantsFig. 2 Map of water system in KoramHum EcolFig. 4 Water system in KaraoiFig. 3 Water system in Koram. Clockwise from top-left: (1) BAK, (2) MK Kuram, (3) water meter, (4) on-farm canal and irrigation ditchHum Ecolabove other constraints, such as climate change, soil cultiva-tion practices, knowledge transfer, or water losses (Appendix).Some challenges highlighted in Koram also featured prom-inently in Karaoi, where participants were overwhelminglyconcerned by: (i) water supply (inadequacy), (ii) poor infra-structure (condition and maintenance, but not consumptionmeasurement equipment), and (iii) lack of irrigation technol-ogy (drip and sprinkler irrigation) (Appendix). This last chal-lenge, which was not mentioned in Koram, can be explainedby the presence of larger and more mechanised farms inKaraoi. Water supply rules were mentioned frequently by in-dividual participants, but were accorded less prominencewhen prioritising challenges in stakeholder groups.Climate change was not perceived to be significant in eitherstudy site: it was mentioned only a few times by actors notdirectly involved in local agriculture (NGOs and scientists).However, there was widespread perception of declining waterinflows in both sites. The water stock of the Bartogai reservoirwas reportedly depleted in 2012 and 2014, affecting farmersreliant on the BAK. In Karaoi, decreasing water stock wasreported from the Ulken Almatinka and other mountain rivers.Farmers andWUA officials report that water flow through thisriver system has declined, small channels have dried up, andsome collector ponds have become so silted as to be almostunusable. These reported decreases contradict discharge mea-sures in the undisturbed parts of the mountain river system,indicating that perceptions of decreasing supply occur in acontext of increasing demand. Analysis of long-term observa-tions of the headwaters of the Ulken Almatinka since 1952shows increased discharge in all seasons including summer asglaciated catchments melt (Shahgedanova et al. 2016). TheBAK is asked to provide for an increasing area of land asagriculture continues to recover from the collapse of the1990s. The section of the BAK that includes Koram irrigates9300 ha of land; up from 3500 ha in the 1990s but still lessthan the 17,000 ha in the Soviet period. The Ulken Almatinkaused to irrigate 3000 ha in Karaoi, but now feeds only1200 ha.Farmers also mentioned climate change with respect tosnow cover. In rain-fed zones a good year depends on snowlying on the ground during the previous winter. This has be-come increasingly problematic. The first snow in the winter of2015–2016 was reported to be very late, and winter air tem-peratures were as high as 15 °C, so little snow remained on theground.Participants in Koram (smallholders, state officials)highlighted uncertainty and lack of clarity around existingwater supply rules, while participants in Karaoi mostlydiscussed noncompliance. Farmers and NGOs mentionednon-compliance in interviews, but not state officials (waterusers associa t ions , local adminis t ra t ion, BAK).Transgressions were reported in abstraction of water with-out payment or outside of mutually agreed supply rota-tions, diversion of water from other farms, and higher-Fig. 5 Water system inKaraoi. Clockwise from top-left: (1) Glaciers in the Ile Alatau mountains, the source of the Ulken Almatinka, (2) burning reeds toclear irrigation channels, (3) water collector pond, (4) dismantled Soviet concrete irrigation canalHum Ecollevel diversion of state funds earmarked for investment inwater supply infrastructure.Finally, in both sites participants took the Soviet period as ausually positive benchmark by which to assess the currentwater system. Local actors considered adaptation in terms ofrestoring the Soviet irrigation system. For example, a BAKrepresentative clarified the local administration’s aim as beingBto repair [unmanaged canals], reduce water losses, restoreirrigated lands, and rebuild the system as it was in the SovietUnion.^ Similar attitudes were evident when actors comparedthe area of irrigated land with Soviet-era benchmarks, taken asa target for re-irrigation. This baseline refers to a period whenBthere was still a system^ and when agricultural productivitywas very clearly higher. This, of course, depended on a wholesocio-technical system of subsidised inputs that allowed forhigher productive capacity.Differences Among Actors in Identification of ChallengesIn both Koram and Karaoi small and large landholdersconcurred on some challenges but diverged on others,which revealed their distinct experiences. Further, in bothstudy sites there was a substantial overlap of challengesidentified by farmers and state structures. In Koram, smalland large landholders and state structures substantiallyagreed on the three challenges listed above, but placeddifferent emphasis on unclear supply rules (smallholdersand state structures), untimely supply and high prices(small and large landholders), poor infrastructure andmaintenance (large landholders and state structures), andlack of consumption measurement (state structures)(Appendix). Similarly, in Karaoi small and large land-holders concurred in stressing inadequate supply and poorinfrastructure and maintenance , but differed inemphasising supply rules (smallholders), and lack oftechnology (large landholders), while state structures alsostrongly highlighted poor infrastructure and maintenance(Appendix).In both study sites non-local actors did not experience wa-ter use directly, identified challenges that differed significantlyfrom those identified by local actors (small and large land-holders and state structures). In Koram, for instance, NGOs,agribusinesses and scientists identified a wider range of chal-lenges, including supply rules, water losses and inadequatesupply, lack of knowledge, and land use. In both Koram andKaraoi NGOs, agribusinesses and scientists mentioned a morediverse range of challenges than farmers and state structures,which mentioned fewer problem areas, showing a stronger in-group consensus (Appendix). These differences may havebeen determined by the relative distance of these actors fromdirect and daily experience of water management, but also bya distinct conceptualisation and understanding of water useshared by both scientists and NGO representatives.Categorisation of ChallengesAll participants in the two workshops in Koram and Karaoiclassified the majority of their challenges (approximately60%) as related to government programmes rather thantechnological development, farm production processes, orfarm financial management. Similarly, all actors consid-ered that of the challenges identified most (48% inKoram, 60% in Karaoi) related to management of waterstress, while only a few were related to understanding thenature of experienced water stress or planning for betterwater management.Another similarity is that actors tended not to situatechallenges at their own system level, but at levels belowor above them. In Koram, 60% of challenges were situatedby participants at local level (farm or district). NGOs andagribusinesses, scientists, and state structures located is-sues at farm level, but farmers did not. State structureslocated issues at national level (i.e., government policy),while farmers located them at the level of village and dis-trict (smallholders) or district and region (large land-holders). NGOs, agribusiness, and scientists located issuesat various levels. Also, farmers (both small and large land-holders) and state structures situated challenges at fewerlevels (i.e., showed more in-group consensus) than otheractors. In Karaoi 64% of challenges were situated at villageto regional level and no challenges were situated at farmlevel by any actor, while the key challenges identified inExercise 6 were situated at regional level (Almaty Oblast’).Spatio-temporal Distribution of Challenges and ProblemsParticipants in both Koram and Karaoi emphasised thatwater stress is unevenly experienced during the year, as itis especially felt in the summer at the height of the growingseason. Most importantly, it was apparent that the chal-lenges faced by farmers strongly depended on the locationof their plots. The presence of reservoirs or groundwater inKaraoi offered alternative sources of water for irrigationthat could compensate for lower inflows from managedand unmanaged secondary canals or lack of connection tothose canals provided the farm had sufficient financial cap-ital to purchase and operate pumps to extract water. InKoram, farmers who did not depend on water supply viapublicly managed and unmanaged canals were less con-cerned with water stress. Further it was apparent that thechallenges faced and the level of concern with water stressis markedly different among farmers whose plots were lo-cated upstream (i.e.,closer to the head of the MK Kuramand secondary on-farm canal) and those with downstreamplots as the latter often received less water or receivedwater with more substantial delays.Hum EcolCurrent Water Management and Adaptation PracticesMost management and adaptation practices were implement-ed by farmers and WUAs, that is, by the actors most directlyinvolved in water use in agriculture (Table 1). Farmers ap-peared to be engaged mostly in day-to-day operational prac-tices, such as offsetting water scarcity through alternative wa-ter sources. WUAs appeared to facilitate collective actionamong farmers by coordinating water supply rotation in pe-riods of drought and the voluntary maintenance and cleaningof ‘unmanaged’ canals, usually in spring before the start of theirrigation season (end of April). In 2014, for instance, whenKoram received only two fifths of the requested water supply,the WUA reduced the area of land to be irrigated andchannelled water from three out of seven sluices, workingday and night to distribute evenly and in time to prevent cropfailure. The strategy was to distribute water evenly, but toreduce the volume given to individual farmers to ensure thateverybody got a crop, if not an optimal yield. According to thehead of the WUA, Bthe farmers weren’t happy, but theyunderstood.^ The voluntary maintenance and cleaning of ‘un-managed’ canals had a tactical (i.e. seasonal) rather than struc-tural value; in the absence of adequate capital for a refurbish-ment and upgrading of the canals, the seasonal interventionwas limited to basic maintenance aimed at facilitating waterflow and reducing water losses.While operational adaptation practices in Koram generallycorresponded to those in Karaoi, practices with a longer-term(strategic and structural) effect differed, probably reflectingthe different challenges and dominant farm profiles. InKaraoi, farmers had tested (or at least considered adopting)more efficient irrigation technology, such as drip irrigation,and also reported shifting cultivation to less water demandingcrops, such as alfalfa or safflower. These crops were less prof-itable, but were generally considered a safe option as theywere used to feed livestock on mixed farms, or sold to live-stock farms locally. In Koram, which is characterised bysmallholding and lower levels of mechanisation, the adoptionof more efficient irrigation technologies did not appear to havebeen tested or considered, possibly because it was beyond thefinancial capacity of smallholders. The predominance of lesseconomically secure smallholdings in Koram seems to bereflected in non-voluntary exiting from agricultural produc-tion, often temporarily, after bankruptcy caused by crop lossas a result of water scarcity and variability of spring and winterfrosts. However, despite the relative frequency of bankruptcyand in spite of the extreme droughts of 2010 and 2014, farmersin Koram reported having increased the area under irrigatedcultivation in response to demand for food crops.Koram was characterised by substantial uncertainty over themanagement responsibilities of supply canals and supply rules,reflected in the application by the regional administration to theTable 1 Adaptation practices implemented in Koram and KaraoiPractice Purpose Type Timeframeof effectsaActor Location wherepracticereportedUse of alternative water supply(e.g. underground water)To make up for lower inflowfrom canalsTechnical Operational Farmer Koram, KaraoiAdditional use of fertilisers To make up for lower inflowfrom canalsTechnical Operational Farmer KaraoiIllegal access to water (e.g. diversionof water from other farmers‘canals)To make up for lower inflowfrom canalsTechnical Operational Farmer Koram, KaraoiMonitoring of the water system(e.g. reservoirs levels)To enable a timely responseto water stressTechnical Operational Farmer, Water UserAssociationKaraoiCoordination of water distributionamong farmers (water supply rotation)To enable fair distributionof scarce water resourceand of negative impactsInstitutional Operational Farmer, Water UserAssociationKoram, KaraoiEfficiency improvement (e.g. cleaningor repairing intra-farm canals)To reduce water losses Technical Tactical Farmer, Water UserAssociationKoram, KaraoiChange to less water demanding crops To reduce water need Technical Strategic Farmer KaraoiAdoption of more efficient irrigationtechnologyTo reduce water need Technical Strategic Farmer KaraoiTemporary or permanent exit fromagriculture (non voluntary)To avoid risk of further cropfailure and loss oflivelihoodEconomic Strategic Farmer KoramEstablishment of formal responsibilitiesfor water supply infrastructuremanagementTo clarify water supply rules,and enable investment andmanagementInstitutional Structural District Council Korama (Risbey et al. 1999)Hum Ecolnational government for formal recognition of authority overso-called ‘unmanaged’ on-farm channels. Once the years-longprocedure is completed, and subject to involvement of an in-vestment partner, this may enable investment in canals andassociated infrastructure (e.g., water meters), and rule enforce-ment with structural (decadal) effects.These adaptation practices (Table 1) do not amount a uni-fied and coherent adaptation strategy. For example, in Koramand among smallholders in Karaoi the voluntary cleaning ofon-farm channels seemed an institutionalised practice, whileother practices, such as the use of alternative water sources orthe adoption of more efficient irrigation systems, were usuallyreported by medium and large landholders with higher socialcapital who had access to these sources and technologies.It was apparent that actors perceived the institutional andpolitical environment and the decaying infrastructural andtechnical system as fixed boundaries. There was no sign ofattempts to challenge those institutional and technical struc-tures, which would constitute a transformative form of adap-tation (Feola 2013, 2015) and effectively expand the adaptivespace of farmers, WUAs, and local authorities. Most adapta-tions were therefore operational and appeared to have positiveeffects on agricultural production in the region. But longerterm (structural) adaptation, either social or technical, seemednot to be an option due to the costs of an infrastructural up-grade and the resistance to change of an established top-downdecision-making system that allocates responsibilities to loweradministrative levels in principle, but actually maintainsdecision-making (and financial) power at higher levels.Entry Points for AdaptationThe workshops revealed two specific entry points for adaptingwater use in agriculture to climate change. Firstly, the need forinfrastructural investment directed towards efficient use ofwater resources, i.e., prevention of water loss within the sys-tem. While financing of infrastructural upgrades and mainte-nance is a major constraint, actors were hopeful of privateinvestment in this domain. Farmers in Koram gossiped thatBthe Arabs^ might be interested in repairing the MK Kuram.In Karaoi, people had heard that Chinese companies wereinvesting in irrigation for soya production. Limited foreign-backed partnerships were operating in both areas (e.g., seedproduction, orchard management). This openness to invest-ment is tempered by local worries about government plansto lease land to foreign investors, which has led to populardemonstrations in protest against feared Chinese land-grabs.Secondly, the need for information on shorter and longer-term weather patterns and for improved communication ofsuch information. Knowledge of climate change forecastingand trends in water balance in the area is poor, and local actors(including farmers and heads of WUAs) are keen to obtainsuch knowledge. Up-to-date information from the fewweather stations in the area is available online; data from rivergauges are not freely available; weather and agricultural (butnot climate) forecasts go to larger farms who have their ownagronomists but not to small producers (Shahgedanova, per-sonal communication). Provision of climate informationwould enable local actors to better plan, and NGOs to orienttheir activities towards the sustainability of agriculture in thearea. Local organisations are well positioned to communicateto farmers and water users, but there seems to be little coordi-nation among these organisations and higher system levels, aswell as lack of trained personnel.Finally, the attitude of farmers, local administrations, andNGOs (when present) indicates receptiveness to adaptationinnovations. Farmers are already working marginal land de-spite the frequent risk of crop failure. Even with these con-straints, farmers seek to adapt and maintain dilapidated infra-structure (e.g., damming sections of a river to create a newwater source) and experiment with crop varieties and growingmethods (with the support of a local agribusiness centre).Officials within the administration are also active in seekingto bring ‘unmanaged’ canals under management and directinvestment for concrete lining of canals (e.g., MK Kuram).Notwithstanding the need to address the more structural con-straints, which are often associated with higher administrativelevels, the levels of experimentation observed at local level inboth villages opens opportunities for adaptation.Discussion and ConclusionsOur research was designed to investigate constraints and op-portunities for adaptation of agricultural water-use to climatechange in southeast Kazakhstan. We found that stakeholdersin both study sites were concerned about water supply andpoor infrastructure, while concerns with high water prices(Koram) and lack of irrigation technology (Karaoi) reflectedthe socioeconomic circumstances of farmers of each site. Inboth sites, actors engaged in a range of adaptation measuresand were interested in exploring all available options, includ-ing self-organisation, and engaging state and non-state, com-mercial and non-commercial actors. In particular, water sys-tem stakeholders repeatedly raised the issues of financing andimproving technical knowledge and capacity. However, de-spite considerable operational and tactical adaptation therewas little structural adaptation.Constraints are significant and specifically related to theinfrastructural and institutional structures. Current irrigationinfrastructure is a legacy of the Soviet period and much hasdeteriorated or been destroyed. Local institutions (WUAs, lo-cal authorities, farmers) cannot finance rehabilitation, let aloneinvest in new infrastructure. Present-day water-managementinstitutions were cobbled together by state actors in responseto a liberalising national policy and remain functionally part ofHum Ecolthe state. We also observed a continued ‘statist’ orientationwith workshop participants overwhelmingly identifying con-straints as related to government programmes and questions ofmanagement. Our findings broadly confirm those of earlierstudies in Kazakhstan (Wegerich 2008; Zinzani 2015) and inneighbouring formerly Soviet countries (Hornidge et al. 2011;Oberkircher and Hornidge 2011), although the morefragmented farming system and absence of central coordina-tion and agricultural production targets mean that WUAs inSouth Kazakhstan are more flexible. Nevertheless, the impor-tance of the state to local actors leads to two issues specific tothe post-Soviet transformation: the implementation of watermanagement models in practice and the post-Soviet institu-tional environment.Implementation of Water Management ModelsAn important finding of this research is that aspects ofIWRM did not translate well into the Kazakh context.Despite stated intentions to improve water-use efficiencythrough the introduction of market mechanisms to watermanagement, in the absence of individualised water con-sumption measurement there is at present no incentive forfarmers to economise water consumption. As one farmerput it, Bin the season, we use as much as they [the BAK]give, we can’t get enough.^ Although assessed volumetri-cally and priced at market rates, water is still apportionedon the basis of Soviet-style consumption norms (calculatedon the basis of irrigation method, crop type and area undercultivation, and including acceptable water losses of up to33%; actual water losses may be significantly higher).Without effective water metering, the present system mere-ly perpetuates inefficient water use (at increased costs):farmers seem to have accepted significant price hikes in2010 without adjusting consumption behaviour. Lack ofaccurate metrification may explain why farmers prioritisedthe issues of ‘water supply’ and ‘water prices’ over ‘waterlosses’ since losses are unmeasured (cf. Biswas 2004;Solokov 2006; Meinzen-Dick 2007; Mollinga et al. 2007).IWRM was implemented with the intention that marketswould make up for state divestment from irrigation (Burger1998). Our results confirm earlier studies in Kazakhstanthat found, although effective in coordinating water useand on-farm canal maintenance, in market conditions offull-cost recovery WUAs struggled to meet costs and main-tain already deteriorated infrastructure and were incapableof financing further investments (Burger 1998; Johnson1998; Rosen and Strickland 1998; Wegerich 2008;Zinzani 2015). WUAs are unable to raise sufficient fundsfrom farmers and subventions to cover operating costs andbasic maintenance without relying on farmers’ voluntarylabour. Farmers’ margins are too small and rural land mar-kets insufficiently developed to provide collateral for loansto finance infrastructural investments (business loans canonly be secured with property in Almaty5). The role ofWUAs thus remains limited to managing annual waterflow, coordinating the share of irrigation water amongfarmers and maintaining on-farm infrastructure. Forsmall-scale farming, at least, it would be unreasonable toexpect a thriving market for water to develop, certainly notone that would permit the infrastructural upgrading of thesystem that is necessary for improved productivity andadaptation to water stress. This could change with big in-vestments in large-scale farms (as is occurring withChinese investment in soya in nearby Sorbulaq).We found that farmers and local state officials are willing toengage at a range of levels to overcome challenges in waterprovision, agricultural production, and sales; as one farmercommented: BEveryone must do things for themselves. Ifyou work, things will turn out well, but we have to do it forourselves.^ However, the reality is that farmers in Koram andKaraoi have limited capacity. The state and its local and semi-privatised organs (akimat, BAK, PK, WUA) is the main insti-tutional actor and farmers’ attitudes reflect this. Indeed, thecontinued statist orientation of farmers with respect to infra-structure provisioning may not be so much a reflection ofSoviet culture or nostalgic attitudes as economic pragmatism.Infrastructural investment directed towards efficient use ofwater resources would probably also lead to intensification ofdemand (‘rebound effect’ Alcott (2005)) and would not nec-essarily make the system more resilient to extreme weatherevents such as droughts. It would also not reduce the irrigationsystem’s continued vulnerability to weak administration, un-timely completion of contracts, and erratic delivery of water.But it is an essential component of future agricultural plan-ning, which might include re-designation of irrigated and oth-er agricultural zones to reflect future climate and water avail-ability projections rather than the Soviet-era benchmarks thatcurrently inform planning (Hornidge et al. 2013).Adaptation to Climate Change in Post-Soviet InstitutionalSettingsKazakhstan’s limited climate change policy framework re-mains little implemented beyond concept documents(Lioubimtseva and Henebry 2009; Yesserkepova 2010). Onefactor in this may be the specific post-Soviet bureaucraticenvironment within which policy is formulated and enacted.Sociological research has shed light on the considerablerepertoire of informal practices that characterise post-Sovietbureaucracies, and which animate an otherwise brittle set of5 In both field sites, it is possible to identify the emergence of commercialagriculture with investments from the city. This was more pronounced inKaraoi, but was occurring on a small scale with regards to orchard productionin Koram.Hum Ecolhierarchical and centralised institutions (Willerton 1992;Sehring 2009; Ledeneva 2006; Kononenko and Moshes2011). Our research identified several instances where infor-mal practices compensated for deficiencies in formal watermanagement (e.g., welding sluices shut, voluntary mainte-nance, damming a river) with tacit acceptance, if not support,from local officials.Yet these workarounds solve only specific problems and donot contribute to the resolution of broader systemic adaptationissues. Structural adaptation measures may be impeded by aclosed, top-down bureaucracy that delegates little responsibil-ity or funds to local-level administration. In consequence, anoften internationally funded NGO sector seems to beattempting to fill a significant capacity gap in state adminis-tration. Although these organisations may be effective insupporting local authorities and populations anecdotal evi-dence suggests that this may have resulted in a parallel systemthat achieves substantive outcomes while perpetuating the in-ertia and incapacity of state bureaucracy.The range of local innovations we encountered in this studynevertheless testifies to farming system actors’ concern forand engagement with water issues within tight constraints.We find that efforts to support and promote structural adapta-tion measures cannot take a normative or ‘out of the box’approach, but must work with and within constraints(including institutional and infrastructural path-dependence)inherent in post-Soviet governance systems, on which basisstrategic interventions allow for necessary and locally appro-priate institutional adaptation. Future place-based studies ofwater management can make an important contribution tobetter understanding the challenges of climate change adapta-tion in such institutional contexts.Acknowledgments We are grateful to workshop and interview partic-ipants and to those who helped organise the workshops and interviews, inparticular, Il’ya Alimaev, Bakytgul Elchibaeva, Asel Imangozhina,Nikolai Kasatkin, Roza Moldobaeva, Aidos Smailov, and AleksandrYegorov. We also extend our gratitude to Carol Kerven, MariaShahgedanova, Nodir Djanibekov, Maya İskenderova and all membersof the project for their feedback, suggestions and constructive criticism.Funding The project Climate Change, Water Resources and FoodSecurity in Kazakhstan was funded by the United Kingdom’s NewtonFund Institutional Links Programme (grant number 172722855). Theproject was a collaboration between the University of Reading (UnitedKingdom), Kazakhstan Institute of Geography, al-Farabi KazakhNational University and Nazarbayev University (Republic ofKazakhstan).Compliance with Ethical StandardsEthical Standards Ethical approval was obtained from theUniversity of Reading Research Ethics Committee. Local necessarypermissions were sought and obtained before the relevant researchphases commenced. Informed consent was required of all partici-pants. An accessible project factsheet was produced in Russian andexplained as part of the process of negotiating informed consent.Participants’ right to withdraw at any time was emphasised. Groundrules about confidentiality within the group were established withparticipants. The datasets was fully anonymised. Written outputsand the dissemination strategy ensure participants’ anonymity.Capacity building of all research assistants took place to ensure thatthey are aware of ethical issues and protocols to be followed.Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict ofinterest.Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the CreativeCommons At t r ibut ion 4 .0 In te rna t ional License (h t tp : / /creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a linkto the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.ReferencesAlcott B. (2005). Jevons’ Paradox. Ecological Economics 54: 9–21.Barrett T., Feola G., Krylova V., and Khusnitdinova M. (2017). TheApplication of Rapid Appraisal of Agricultural InnovationSystems (RAAIS) to Agricultural Adaptation to Climate Changein Kazakhstan: A Critical Evaluation. Agricultural Systems 151:106–113.Behnke R. (2003). Reconfiguring Property Rights and Land Use. InKerven C. (ed.), Prospects for Pastoralism in Kazakstan andTurkmenistan. From State Farms to Private Flocks, RoutledgeCurzon, London.Biswas A. K. (2004). Integrated Water Resources Management: AReassessment. Water International 29(2): 248–256.Bobojonov I., and Aw-Hassan A. (2014). Impacts of Climate Change onFarm Income Security in Central Asia: An Integrated ModelingApproach. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 188: 245–255.Burger, R. (1998). Water User Associations in Kazakhstan: AnInstitutional Analysis. Harvard Institute for InternationalDevelopment: NIS Project Environmental Discussion Paper No. 45.Darnhofer I., Gibbon D., and Dedieu B. (2012). Farming SystemsResearch into the 21st century: The New Dynamic, Springer,Dordrecht.de Beurs K. M., and Henebry G. M. (2004). Land Surface Phenology,Climatic Variation, and Institutional Change: AnalyzingAgricultural Land Cover Change in Kazakhstan. Remote Sensingof Environment 89(4): 497–509.DFID (2003). Privatisation/Transfer of Irrigation Management in CentralAsia, Final Report, DFID, London.Eisfelder C., Klein I., Niklaus M., and Kuenzer C. (2014). Net PrimaryProductivity in Kazakhstan, its Spatio-temporal Patterns andRelation to Meteorological Variables. Journal of AridEnvironments 103: 17–30.Fay M, Block R, Ebinger J (Eds.) (2010) Adapting to climate change inEastern Europe and Central Asia. Europe and Central Asia reports.Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/303981468031170111/Adapting-to-climate-change-in-Eastern-Europe-and-Central-Asia.Feola G. (2013). What (science for) Adaptation to Climate Change inColombian Agriculture? A Commentary on BA Way Forward onAdaptation to Climate Change in Colombian Agriculture:Perspectives Towards 2050^ by J. Ramirez-Villegas, M. Salazar,A. Jarvis, C. E. Navarro-Valcines. Climatic Change 119: 565–574.Feola G. (2015). Societal Transformation in Response to GlobalEnvironmental Change: A Review of Emerging Concepts.AMBIO 44: 376–390.Hum EcolFeola G. et al (2015). Researching Farmer Behaviour in Climate ChangeAdaptation and Sustainable Agriculture: Lessons Learned from FiveCase Studies. Journal of Rural Studies 39: 74–84.Feola G., Sattler C., and Saysel A. K. (2012). Simulation models infarming systems research: potential and challenges. In DarnhoferI., Gibbon D., and Dedieu B. (eds.), The Farming SystemsApproaches into the 21st Century: The New Dynamic, Springer,Dordrecht.Hamidov A., Helming K., and Balla D. (2016). Impact of AgriculturalLand Use in Central Asia: A Review. Agronomy for SustainableDevelopment 36(1): 1–23.Heidelbach O. (2007). Efficiency of Selected Risk ManagementInstruments. An Empirical Analysis of Risk Reduction inKazakhstani Crop Production, IAMO, Halle.Hijioka Y., Lin E., Pereira J. J., Corlett R. T., Cui X., Insarov G. E., LascoR. D., Lindgren E., and Surjan A. (2014). Asia. In Barros V. R.,Field C. B., Dokken D. J., Mastrandrea M. D., Mach K. J., Bilir T.E., Chatterjee M., Ebi K. L., Estrada Y. O., Genova R. C., Girma B.,Kissel E. S., Levy A. N., MacCracken S., Mastrandrea P. R., andWhite L. L. (eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, andVulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of WorkingGroup II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the IntergovernmentalPanel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,pp. 1327–1370.Hornidge A.-K., Oberkircher L., Tischbein B., Schorcht G., Bhaduri A.,and Manschadi A. M. (2011). Reconceptualizing WaterManagement in Khorezm, Uzbekistan. Natural Resources Forum35(4): 251–268.Hornidge, A.-K., Oberkircher, L., and Kudryavtseva, A. (2013).Boundary Management and the Discursive Sphere – NegotiatingBRealities^ in Khorezm, Uzbekistan. Risky Natures, Natures ofRisk 45:266–274.Johnson, S. (1998). Economics ofWater Users Associations: The Case ofMaktaral Region, Southern Kazakhstan. USAID.KAGIS (Kazakhstan Agency of Geographic Information Systems andRemote Sensing) (2016). Kompleksnaya karta zemel’nykh ugodiiAlmatinskoi oblasti. Accessed online: http://alm.obl.kz/#.Kerven C. (2003). Prospects for Pastoralism in Kazakstan andTurkmenistan. From State Farms to Private Flocks, RoutledgeCurzon, London.Kerven, C. et al. (2011). Pastoralism and Farming in Central Asia’sMountains: A Research Review, University of Central Asia,Mountain Societies Research Centre.Kerven C. et al (2016). A Pastoral Frontier: From Chaos to Capitalismand the Re-colonisation of the Kazakh Rangelands. Journal of AridEnvironments 127: 106–119.Klerkx L., van Mierlo B., and Leeuwis C. (2012). Evolution of systemsapproaches to agricultural innovation: concepts, analysis and inter-ventions. In Darnhofer I., Gibbon D., and Dedieu B. (eds.), FarmingSystems Research Into the 21st Century: The New Dynamic,Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 457–483.Kononenko V., and Moshes A. (2011). Russia as a Network State WhatWorks in Russia When State Institutions Do Not, PalgraveMacmillan, Basingstoke.Ledeneva A. V. (2006). How Russia Really Works: The InformalPractices that Shaped Post- Soviet Politics and Business, CornellUniversity Press, Ithaca.Lerman Z. (2009). Land Reform, Farm Structure, and AgriculturalPerformance in CIS Countries. China Economic Review 20(2):316–326.Lerman, Z. (2014). Structure and Performance of Agriculture in CentralAsia. The Center for Agricultural Economic Research, The HebrewUniversity of Jerusalem.Lioubimtseva E. (2010). Global Food Security and Grain ProductionTrends in Central Eurasia: Do Models Predict a New Window ofOpportunity? National Social Science Journal 41(1): 154–165.Lioubimtseva E., Henebry G. M. (2009). Climate and environmentalchange in arid Central Asia: Impacts, vulnerability, and adaptations.Journal of Arid Environments 73(11): 963–977. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1007887107.Lioubimtseva E., and Henebry G. M. (2012). Grain Production Trends inRussia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan: New Opportunities in anIncreasingly Unstable World? Frontiers of Earth Science 6(2):157–166.Mannig B., Müller M., Starke E., Merkenschlager C., Mao W., Zhi X.,Podzun R., Jacob D., and Paeth H. (2013). Dynamical Downscalingof Climate Change in Central Asia. Global and Planetary Change110: 26–39.Meinzen-Dick R. (2007). Beyond Panaceas in Water Institutions.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104(39):15200–15205.Meng E., Longmire J., and Moldashev A. (2000). Kazakhstan’s WheatSystem: Priorities, Constraints, and Future Prospects. Food Policy25: 701–717.MA (Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Kazakhstan) (n.d.)Monitoring razvitiya sel’skikh territorii na 2007 i 2010 gody.Astana, Kazakhstan.Micklin, PHP. 1988. Irrigation and Its Future in Soviet Central Asia: APreliminary Analysis. Western Michigan University.MirzabaevA. (2013). Impacts ofWeather Variability and Climate Changeon Agricultural Revenues in Central Asia. Quarterly Journal ofInternational Agriculture 52(3): 237–252.Mollinga P. P., Meinzen-Dick R. S., and Merrey D. J. (2007). Politics,Plurality and Problemsheds: A Strategic Approach for Reform ofAgricultural Water Resources Management. Development PolicyReview 25(6): 699–719.Moser, S. C., Ekstrom, J. A., (2010). A framework to diagnose barriers toclimate change adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences 107: 22026–22031. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1007887107.Mukhtarov F. (2013). Translating water policy innovations intoKazakhstan: the importance of context. In De Boer C., Vinke-deKruijf J., Özerol G., and Bressers H. T. A. (eds.), WaterGovernance, Policy and Knowledge Transfer: International Studieson Contextual Water Management, Earthscan, London.Oberkircher L., and Hornidge A.-K. (2011). BWater is Life^—FarmerRationales and Water Saving in Khorezm, Uzbekistan: ALifeworld Analysis. Rural Sociology 76(3): 394–421.OEBPIR (Otdel ekonomiki i biudzhetnogo planirovaniya Ilijskogorajona) (2015). Sotsial’no-ekonomicheskij pasport ilijskogo rajonaza 2014 god. Otagen Batyr.OECD (2011). Competitiveness and Private Sector Development:Kazakhstan 2010. Sector Competitiveness Strategy, OECD, Paris.OECD (2013). OECDReview of Agricultural Policies: Kazakhstan 2013,OECD, Paris.Pavlova V. N., Varcheva S. E., Bokusheva R., and Calanca P. (2014).Modelling the Effects of Climate Variability on Spring WheatProductivity in the Steppe Zone of Russia and Kazakhstan.Ecological Modelling 277: 57–67.Petrick, M. Wandel, J., and Karsten, K., (2011). Farm Restructuring andAgricultural Recovery in Kazakhstan’s Grain Region: An Update.IAMO Discussion Paper No. 137. IAMO, Halle.Petrick M., Oshakbaev D., and Wandel J. (2014). Kazakhstan’s Wheat,Beef and Dairy Sectors: An Assessment of Their DevelopmentConstraints and Recent Policy Responses, IAMO, Halle.Pomfret, R. (2013). Kazakhstan’s Agriculture after Two Decades ofIndependence. Elliot School of International Affairs Central AsiaProgram: Central Asia Economic Paper No. 6.Pomfret R. (2016). Modernizing Agriculture in Central Asia. GlobalJournal of Emerging Market Economies 8(2): 104–125.Reyer, C.P.O., Otto, I.M., Adams, S., Albrecht, T., Baarsch, F. Cartsburg,M., Coumou, D., Eden, A., Ludi, E., Marcus, R., Mengell, M.,Hum EcolMosello, B., Robinson, A., Schleussner, C.-F., Serdeczny, O. & Stagl,J. 2015. Climate Change Impacts in Central Asia and TheirImplications for Development. Regional Environmental Change 1–12.Risbey J., Kandlikar M., Dowlatabadi H., and Graetz D. (1999). Scale,Context, and Decision Making in Agricultural Adaptation toClimate Variability and Change. Mitigation and AdaptationStrategies for Global Change 4: 137–165.Rosen, S., and Strickland, J. (1998). After the State Farm. AWater UserAssociation in Kazakhstan. USAID.Schut, M. (2014). Rapid Appraisal of Agricultural Innovation Systems(RAAIS) workshops. Action Site workshop protocol and facilitationguide. Accessed online: https://www.academia.edu/21011575/RAAIS_Action_Site_workshop_protocol_and_facilitation_guide_-_English.Schut M., van Asten P., Okafor C., Hicintuka C., Mapatano S.,Nabahungu N. L., Kagabo D., Muchunguzi P., Njukwe E.,Dontsop-Nguezet P. M., Sartas M., and Vanlauwe B. (2016).Sustainable Intensification of Agricultural Systems in the CentralAfrican Highlands: The Need for Institutional Innovation.Agricultural Systems 145: 165–176.Schut M., Klerkx L., Rodenburg J., Kayeke J., Hinnou L. C.,Raboanarielina C. M., Adegbola P. Y., van Ast A., and BastiaansL. (2015a). RAAIS: Rapid Appraisal of Agricultural InnovationSystems (Part I). A Diagnostic Tool for Integrated Analysis ofComplex Problems and Innovation Capacity. Agricultural Systems132: 1–11.Schut M., Rodenburg J., Klerkx L., Kayeke J., van Ast A., and BastiaansL. (2015b). RAAIS: Rapid Appraisal of Agricultural InnovationSystems (Part II). Integrated Analysis of Parasitic Weed Problemsin Rice in Tanzania. Agricultural Systems 132(0): 12–24.Schut M., Rodenburg J., Klerkx L., Hinnou L. C., Kayeke J., andBastiaans L. (2015c). Participatory Appraisal of Institutional andPolitical Constraints and Opportunities for Innovation to AddressParasitic Weeds in Rice. Crop Protection 74: 158–170.Schut, M., Klerkx, L., and Leeuwis, C. (2015d) Rapid Appraisal ofAgricultural Innovation Systems (RAAIS). A toolkit for integratedanalysis of complex agricultural problems and innovation capacityin agrifood systems. International Institute of Tropical Agriculture(IITA) and Wageningen University, November 2015, 140.Sehring J. (2009). Path Dependencies and Institutional Bricolage in Post-Soviet Water Governance. Water Alternatives 2(1): 61–81.Serova E. V. (2000). Russia’s agro-food sector: state of the art. InWehrheim P., Frohberg K., Serova E., and Von Braun J. (eds.),Russia’s Agro- Food Sector: Towards Truly Functioning Markets,Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 81–106.Shahgedanova, M., Afzal, M., Usmanova, Z., Kapitsa, V., Mayr, E.,Hagg, W., Severskiy, I., and Zhumabayev, D. (2016) Impacts ofclimate change on river discharge in the northern Tien Shan: resultsfrom long-term observations and modelling. In Medeu, A. (ed),Water Resources in Central Asia and Their Use. Almaty,Kazakhstan, pp. 248-258.Smit, B., Skinner, M.W., (2002). Adaptation options in agriculture toclimate change: a typology. Mitigation and adaptation strategiesfor global change 7(85): 114–114.Solokov V. (2006). Experiences with IWRM in the Central Asia andCaucasus Regions. Water International 31(1): 59–70.Sommer R., Glazirina M., Yuldashev T., Otarov A., Ibraeva M.,Martynova L., Bekenov M., Kholov B., Ibragimov N., KobilovR., Karaev S., Sultonov M., Khasanova F., Esanbekov M.,Mavlyanov D., Isaev S., Abdurahimov S., Ikramov R.,Shezdyukova L., and de Pauw E. (2013). Impact of ClimateChange on Wheat Productivity in Central Asia. Agriculture,Ecosystems & Environment 178(0): 78–99.Van Assche K., Nodir Djanibekov N., Hornidge A.-K., Shtaltovna A.,and Verschraegen G. (2014). Rural Development and the Entwiningof Dependencies: Transition as Evolving Governance in Khorezm,Uzbekistan. Futures 63: 75–85.Wandel, J. (2009). Agro-holdings and Clusters in Kazakhstan’s Agro-food Sector. IAMO Discussion Paper No. 126. IAMO, Halle.Wegerich K. (2008). Blueprints for Water User Associations’Accountability Versus Local Reality: Evidence from SouthKazakhstan. Water International 33(1): 43–54.Willerton P. (1992). Patronage and Politics in the USSR, CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge.World Bank (2004). Project appraisal document on a proposed loan in theamount of US$35 million to the Republic of Kazakhstan for a sec-ond agricultural post-privatization assistance project (Phase 2 APL)in support of the second phase of the agricultural post-privatizationassistance program, Report No: 30707-KZ.World Bank (2009). Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and CentralAsia, World Bank, Washington, DC.World Bank (2016). Kazakhstan Partnership Program Snapshot, April2015, World Bank, Washington, DC.Yesserkepova, I. (2010). Concise Report and Summary ofNational Publications on Climate Change Dimensions andImpacts. FAO.Zinzani A. (2015). Irrigation Management Transfer and WUAs’Dynamics: Evidence from the South-Kazakhstan Province.Environmental Earth Science 73: 765–777.Hum Ecol