ABSTRACT: 
First paragraph: John Hoberman observes in Sport and Ideology (1984) that "sport has no intrinsic value structure, but it is a ready and flexible vehicle through which ideological associations can be reinforced," and Eric Hobsbawm asserts that "the identity of a nation of millions seems more real as a team of eleven named people." Implicit in these comments is the belief that sport has the capacity to embody and express identity and community-in its national, cultural, ethnic, religious, social, political, and even economic dimensions-in a way that few other social manifestations can match. Celtic Football Club in Scotland, a professional soccer team based in Glasgow, offers a vivid case study of these observations and assertions, including aspects of the nature of community and supporter associations involved in Scottish football. For countless supporters, Celtic is far more than "merely" a football club. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we show that the propagators of @xmath0 in the popular @xmath1 vs. @xmath2 seesawsaw game do not obey the rules of probability theory .<n> our analysis is based on the fact that the most probable values of @xmath3 and @xmath4 in the game are related by @xmath5 , where @xmath6 and @xmath7 are the probabilities for @xmath8 and @xmath9 respectively . <n> _ introduction .<n> _ in the famous @xmath1 vs. @xmath2 seesaw game , the referee makes a mistake .<n> the ball is in the penalty zone and the penalty kick is not a free kick .<n> the referee then makes a mistake .<n> the rules of probability theory do not apply in this game .<n> the reason for this is that the most probable values of @xmath3 and @xmath4 in the game are related by @xmath5 , where @xmath6 and @xmath7 are the probabilities for @xmath8 and @xmath9 respectively . <n> _ introduction .<n> _ in the popular @xmath1 vs. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Celtic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish SocietyJoseph M. BradleyNew Hibernia Review, Volume 12, Number 1, Earrach/Spring 2008,pp. 96-110 (Article)Published by Center for Irish Studies at the University of St. ThomasDOI: 10.1353/nhr.2008.0028For additional information about this article Access provided by University of Stirling (24 Mar 2014 10:00 GMT)http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/nhr/summary/v012/12.1bradley.htmlJoseph M. BradleyCeltic Football Club,Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish SocietyJohn Hoberman observes in Sport and Ideology (1984) that “sport has no intrin-sic value structure, but it is a ready and flexible vehicle through which ideolog-ical associations can be reinforced,”1 and Eric Hobsbawm asserts that “the iden-tity of a nation of millions seems more real as a team of eleven named people.”2Implicit in these comments is the belief that sport has the capacity to embodyand express identity and community—in its national, cultural, ethnic, reli-gious, social, political, and even economic dimensions—in a way that few othersocial manifestations can match. Celtic Football Club in Scotland, a professionalsoccer team based in Glasgow, offers a vivid case study of these observations andassertions, including aspects of the nature of community and supporter asso-ciations involved in Scottish football. For countless supporters, Celtic is farmore than “merely” a football club.3As an institution founded by and for the Irish Catholic immigrant diasporain the West of Scotland, the role of the Celtic Football Club in the cultural andethnic identity of this part of the Scottish population warrants attention for anumber of reasons. As Thomas Devine notes, the Irish community in Scotlandhas not, until recent years, “been effectively integrated into the wider study ofScottish historical development.”4 Nevertheless, what has been overlooked inacademic research has received extensive attention in the domain of popularcommentary, particularly within the Scottish sports media. Sport can echo andreproduce ethnic and national distinctiveness, as well as reflect social tensionsnew hibernia review / iris éireannach nua, 12:1 (spring / earrach, 2008), 96–1101. John Hoberman, Sport and Political Ideology (London: Heinemann, 1984,), p. 10.2. Eric Hobsbawm, Nations and Nationalism Since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality (Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, 1990), p. 4.3. See Joseph M. Bradley, Celtic Minded 2: Essays on Celtic Football Culture and Identity (Argyll:Argyll Publishing, 2006).4. Thomas M. Devine, “Introduction,” in Irish Immigrants and Scottish Society in the Nineteenthand Twentieth Centuries; Proceedings of the Scottish Historical Studies Seminar (Strathclyde: JohnDonald Publishers, 1991).07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 96and cleavages. While the dominant discourses present the idea of Scotland as“one” people on a range of cultural and identity indicators, the case of Celticpartly demonstrates how that dominance is manufactured as a social reality andnorm by discounting, marginalizing, demeaning, or corrupting minority dis-tinctiveness and difference: in effect, by disempowering a minority community.Among second- and third-generation Irish populations for whom whiteskin, local accents, and assumed cultural similarities have traditionally beentaken to reflect a community effortlessly assimilated to the “white” Scottish(British) majority,5 the resolute Irish identity of Celtic and its fans challengesthose assumptions. The act of supporting Celtic is involved in the reproduction,maintenance, and expression of Irishness in Scottish society, and thus, impor-tant to understanding the processes of identity formation in a multi-ethnicBritain. This occurs within the context of ongoing debates concerning multi-culturalism in Britain as a whole, as well as within animated, and occasionallyacrimonious, deliberations regarding the contested subject of “sectarianism” inScottish society.6Much of the research reported on here arose from the Irish 2 Project con-ducted in the first years of the present decade, a sociological inquiry that lookedat questions and issues of identity among people born in Britain of at least oneIrish-born parent or grandparent. In addition, a web-based review of all main-stream Scottish newspapers over the period of research since 1990 shows thatthe discourses and narratives appearing in the print media problematize theIrishness of the Celtic Football Club and its supporters. Several hundred directand indirect references and comments on Celtic—as well as hundreds in othermedia outlets—leave no doubt that a particular sort of commentary is domi-nant, all-encompassing, and recurrent, threading through editorials, letterspages, popular articles, news columns, and radio and television discussions.7 Inother print media, the commentary on Irishness in Scottish society unambigu-ously demonstrates the links between sport and cultural and national identities.Celtic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society5. See: T. Modood, “The Changing Context of ‘Race’ in Britain: A Symposium,” in Patterns ofPrejudice, 30, 1 (1996), pp. 3–13, 36–42; Harry Goulbourne,Race Relations in Britain Since 1945, (Bas-ingstoke: Macmillan, 1998).6. For examples of press attention to the subject, see: Scottish Catholic Observer, 3 February 2005,p. 5; Sunday Herald, 29 January 2006, p. 11; and The Herald, 31 January 2006, p. 32. For academicattention, see Joseph M. Bradley “Celtic Minded,” and “‘We Shall Not Be Moved’! Mere Sport,Mere Songs?: A Tale of Scottish Football’ in Fanatics’, (London: Routledge, 1998) pp. 203–18; JimConroy,“Yet I Live Here. . .”A Reply to Bruce on Catholic Education in Scotland,”Oxford Review ofEducation, 29, 3 (September, 2003), 403–12; Thomas Devine, Scotland’s Shame: Bigotry and Sectari-anism in Modern Scotland (Edinburgh: Mainstream, 2000).7. For additional examples of such discourses, see Bradley, Celtic Minded 2.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 97In a word, discourse that is deeply critical of the club’s Irish identity is embed-ded in Scottish society.The interview-based research centered on ideas of self, family, community,and nation among persons living in Britain for whom some,most, or all of theirfamily originated in Ireland. Questions on sport and football formed a portionof the overall study, along with examinations of notions relating to history, reli-gion, politics, health, work, family, and social life. Regardless of gender, age, andsocial class, all respondents in Scotland—with only one exception—reportedthat Celtic was their favored football club, and further, that this had significancefor their sense of Irishness in Scotland.8Celtic Football Club traces its origins to 1887 and 1888, when it was found-ed by first- and second-generation Irish immigrants in Glasgow. At that time,the vast majority of Catholics in Scotland were from Ireland, and the words“Catholic” and “Irish”were essentially interchangeable in the West of Scotland.Although never constituting a Catholic club in an institutional sense, or anorganization meaningfully influenced by Church matters or interests, the immi-grant Irish community and its offspring has historically provided the vastCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society8. This project was financed by the government-sponsored Economic and Social Research Coun-cil in 2001–02, and looked at questions and issues of identity focusing on people born in Britain ofat least one Irish-born parent or grandparent. Interviewees have been given pseudonyms for thepurpose of reporting findings. For Scotland, one focus group comprised people who were Protes-tant, not Catholic; this also entailed a number of individual interviews with these respondents. Theyare not included in this part of the work but will contribute to other aspects of the research pro-duced from the overall study. All interviews and group discussions were tape-recorded and tran-scribed verbatim. The qualitative evidence presented here is a result of these interviews. Focusgroups for the Irish 2 Projectwere conducted in different locations in England and Scotland with sec-ond- and third-generation Irish people. In total, thirteen focus groups were run, four in London,three in the Glasgow area, and two in each of the remaining locations. In-depth interviews were alsoconducted in the same locations (116 in total) with approximately 24 in Scotland). Participants forboth parts of the research were recruited through a variety of methods, including communitygroups, local newspapers, radio programs, and Irish ethnic newspapers. The research team placedspecial emphasis on recruiting second- and third-generation Irish people from a variety of back-grounds including those with one or two Irish-born parents and one, two, or more Irish-borngrandparents. A nonrandom stratified quota sampling method was used, drawing on a statisticalprofile of demographic and socio-economic characteristics. The aim was to ensure that importantvariations in the profile were represented in the overall sample, including by age, social class, andgender, rather than to produce statistical representativeness. The qualitative data generated by dis-cussion group members assisted in the formation of questions and themes raised in individualinterviews.All subjects signed a consent form that explained the purposes and uses of the resultantdata and all interviewees were informed that pseudonyms would replace their real names in anyresultant publications. The project’s transcriptions have been logged with the Economic and SocialResearch Council in England.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 98majority of staff, players, and supporters over the course of Celtic’s life, andCatholic characteristics have long permeated aspects of the club and its sup-porters’ identities and culture.Part of Celtic’s original purpose was to raise money for charities serving theIrish Catholic poor in the city’s East End. The club’s beneficiaries frequentlyincluded such specifically Irish causes as the Evicted Tenant’s Fund, then animportant aspect of Irish nationalist politics. Off the field, the national questionwas of crucial importance to Celtic’s founders, as it was within the larger immi-grant community. Club officials, players, and supporters alike were ofteninvolved in politics. They supported Irish Home Rule, campaigned for therelease of Irish political prisoners, opposed what they viewed as British impe-rialism in the Boer War and South Africa, and supported the at-the-time con-tentious petition for Catholic schools to be maintained within the state system.Although other Irish football clubs had existed in other parts of Scotland,many were forced to go out of existence owing to a number of factors, includ-ing antagonism toward such cultural and social expressions of Catholicism andIrishness.9 Celtic, however, had the advantages of sound management, a ferventbase of support, and on-the-field success—all of which helped to sustain it in agenerally hostile anti-Catholic and anti-Irish environment.10 Its location in themidst of a large and supportive Irish community proved crucial to its survival.Still, despite quickly rising to become the most significant Irish team inScotland, Celtic’s presence and subsequent success also caused problems. Forexample, in 1896, Celtic and Hibernian (an Edinburgh side that had emergedfrom the Irish community in the capital) were on top of the Scottish league: thisprompted the newspaper, Scottish Sport, to note the dominance in Scotland oftwo Irish teams and asking where was the Scottish team that could challengethem?11 This challenge explicitly reflects the ethnic nature of the Scottish gamefrom its earliest years.The problematic nature of Celtic and its supporters’ Irish and Catholicidentities in Scotland is not only an historic fact, but also a contemporary issuethat is frequently debated and discussed in Scottish society, particularly withinCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society9. See: Gerry P. T. Finn, “Racism, Religion and Social Prejudice: Irish Catholic Clubs, Soccer andScottish Society—1 The Historical Roots of Prejudice,” International Journal of the History of Sport,8, 1 (1991), 72–95; Finn, “Racism, Religion and Social Prejudice: Irish Catholic Clubs, Soccer andScottish Society—11 Social Identities and Conspiracy Theories, International Journal of the Historyof Sport, 8, 3 (1991), 370–97.10. See Tom Campbell and Pat Woods, The Glory and The Dream, The History of Celtic FC,1887–1986, (Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing, 1986).11. Bill Murray, The Old Firm: Sectarianism, Sport and Society in Scotland (Edinburgh: John Don-ald, 1984 ), p. 11.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 99the sports media.12 The dominant discourses with regard to Celtic and its sup-port can be seen in Scotland’s best-selling tabloid newspaper,The Daily Record,and one of Scotland’s most well-known football commentators, Jim Traynor.On the eve of Celtic’s UEFA (Union of European Football Associations) CupFinal match in Spain in 2003 the columnist wrote,Celtic, a Scottish team whether some of their fans are willing to admit it or not.. . . Celtic ARE Scottish so they belong to more than the supporters who followthem week in, week out. . . . This is Scotland against Portugal . . . right now Celtic,albeit unwittingly, are flying our flag.13The phrase “albeit unwillingly” clearly suggests that Traynor believes the club’ssupporters’ cultural and ethnic allegiances lay elsewhere. A Sunday broadsheetadded to the hostile views regarding Celtic supporters’ Irishness, complainingthat Celtic’s identity “still contains a large Irish component.”’14 Still anotherScottish sports journalist offered a similar observation; decrying the renditionsof Celtic and Irish folk songs occasionally played live before matches during thesoccer season, he believed the fans should not have such songs “imposed” onthem,“especially coming from the musical equivalent of Darby McGill [sic] andthe Little People with their ‘Have A Potato’ style of hokey Irishness.”15In The Scottish Sun, journalist Bill Leckie referred to the Irish diaspora inScotland as the “pseudo-Irish”who support Celtic, and decried their penchantfor “diddly-dee music.”16 Such hostility is further demonstrated in a News of theWorld newspaper column that again reflected on the ethnic identity Celtic andits fans. For columnist Gerry McNee, Celtic’s stadium was full ofPlastic Irishmen and women who drink in plastic Irish pubs and don’t knowtheir Athenry from their Antrim when it comes to Irish history or politics. . . .Celtic must stop . . . flashing their Irishness . . . if Celtic are so keen to flaunt theirIrishness perhaps they could do us all a favour and relocate to Dublin.17These commentaries, by well-known figures, would deny any public visibil-ity or acceptability of the desire of Celtic and its fans to be seen as Irish, toesteem their Irishness, or to display Irish symbolism.At a certain level, such dis-courses refuse to acknowledge the Irish diaspora in Scotland, let alone its rightCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society12. See Joseph M. Bradley,“Facets of the Irish Diaspora: ‘Irishness’ in 20th Century Scotland,” IrishJournal of Sociology, 6 (1996), 79–100.13. See Jim Traynor, Daily Record, 19 May 2003, p. 3.14. Allan Massie, Scotland on Sunday, Week in Review, 29 July 2001, p. 915. Ewing Grahame, Herald, Sport, 8 April 2002, p. 1.16. Bill Leckie, Sun, 8 April 2002, p. 50.17. Gerry McNee, News of the World, 5 June 2001, p.15; 10 July 2001, p. 69.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 100to consider itself in some way Irish and not “typically” Scottish. These observa-tions from the sports pages and elsewhere can be viewed as part of an assimila-tionist, as opposed to integrationist, approach toward Irish identities and cul-tural expressions in Scotland. The club and its support is relentlessly detachedand alienated from—and simultaneously denied—the relevance of its roots,origins, heritage, and identity. A continual stream of alienation and denial alsoharbors the capacity to disempower and disorient Celtic supporters in relationto their Irish identities. Further, and adding substantially to the intended alien-ation, these most central and significant identities of the support and the clubare also branded and represented as “sectarian.”Around the period of the 2003 UEFA Cup Final, the letters to newspapersamply demonstrated the contested nature of Celtic’s Irish identity. Two exam-ples from the Daily Record reflect this:I was absolutely appalled and disgusted when watching the UEFA Cup Final. I amsure I am not the only non-Celtic supporter who was urged to ‘get behind’ theScottish team. How many Scottish flags were in the stadium? I counted one butmaybe I couldn’t see the others due to the sea of Irish Republican flags in display.Isn’t it about time that people like this decided which nationality they are?18I could have sworn the UEFA Cup Final in Seville was between teams from Scot-land and Portugal, but judging by the flags in the stadium I think it was actual-ly Ireland against Portugal; there were more American, Canadian, or Australianflags than Scottish. . . . I can’t imagine what the rest of the world thought as theywatched this disgraceful sight which was attended by some of our politicianswho supposedly abhor this type of behaviour. This was not a good reflection onour culture and a bad night for Scottish sport.19The latter correspondent was, in fact, criticized by several letters in subse-quent editions of the Herald. However, the apparent linking of Celtic fans’ fly-ing of the Irish flag with sectarianism—which the writer states politicians “sup-posedly abhor,” thus implying that they are somehow derelict for not takingaction against flying the flag—revives the arguments and accusations of theScottish Football Association against Celtic beginning as early as 1952, when theruling body within Scottish football ordered the club to cease flying the Irish flagat its stadium. The association, which represented all football clubs in Scotland,considered the display of the flag as having nothing to do with Scotland and anincitement to “sectarian acts and behaviour.”20 Another supporter’s letter to aCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society18. Daily Star, letters, 26 May 2003, p. 20.19 Herald, letters, 23 May 2003, p. 19.20. Brian Wilson, Celtic: A Century with Honour (Glasgow: Willow Books, 1988), p. 94.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 101Sunday broadsheet denied Celtic’s Irishness, stressing that the club should endsuch manifestations.Celtic should remind their fans that they are a Scottish club. They should stopflying the tricolour on their stand and consider restoring it only when their fanswaving the Scottish Saltire outnumber those waving the tricolour.21There are innumerable examples of such criticism toward Celtic and its sup-porters’ Irishness. The media and fans of other teams regularly call for the Irishflag to be removed.In 2004, Aiden McGeady, a first-team Celtic player who was born and raisedin Glasgow, chose to play for Ireland in international soccer. McGeady is third-generation Irish, and chose to represent his family and migrating community’scountry of origin, rather than Scotland, his country of birth and upbringing.The public reaction regarding McGeady’s decision demonstrated the prob-lematization of the Irish diasporic presence in Scotland. McGeady’s decisionmet extensive negative media comment, as well as verbal abuse from oppositionfans of almost every team in the Scottish Premier League during the 2004–05season and subsequently.At the stadium of Hearts Football Club in Edinburgh,a BBC Scotland football commentator stated that he was to interview McGeadyafter the match, adding. “I’ll need to take down a bottle of whiskey and someshortbread to Scottify him.” Earlier in the broadcast, another commentator,Gordon Smith, who in 2007 became the chief executive of the Scottish FootballAssociation, observed,“He may well have chosen to play for Ireland, as far as I’mconcerned the boy was born in Scotland and that makes him Scottish and that’sthe end of the matter.”22A Daily Record sports writer defended the verbal abuse of McGeady at thisand other matches:This isn’t about sectarianism, this is about being Scottish and proud of it.McGeady has been educated here, used our health service and learned all hisfootball in Glasgow. . . . It’s time all Scottish Celtic fans got over their obsessionwith Ireland. The fact that Glasgow sports shops sell as many Ireland footballtops as Scotland football tops is both pathetic and ultimately unhelpful.23Several years previous to this, Raymond Travers, a sports columnist for theScotland on Sunday broadsheet newspaper, anticipated the McGeady case whenhe wrote, “there is a section of the Celtic support, in particular, who turn myCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society21. Scotland on Sunday, Sports, letters, 24 March 2002, p. 20.22. BBC Radio Scotland, Sports/soccer broadcast on 25 April 2004.23. John McKie, Daily Record, 1 January 2005, p.11.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 102Celtic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Societystomach with their allegiance to the Republic of Ireland in preference to thenation of their birth.”24Contentiousness over the visible presence of Irishness in Scotland, and thelinks made between football and religious, cultural, national, and ethnic iden-tities, extends beyond football and has significance outside the sporting arena.One example occurred in 2003, when a debate ensued regarding the organiza-tion of a St. Patrick’s Day Festival in the town of Coatbridge (population45,000), near Glasgow. For several weeks the issue dominated letters to the localnewspaper. Although some letter writers defended the celebration, much ofthe hostile comment reflected a belief that, despite Coatbridge being a townwhere a majority of people are of Irish descent, such a celebration should nottake place. This was, in fact, the only such celebration that took place in Scot-land, despite a longstanding and significant Irish presence in numerous othertowns and villages in the west-central belt.Letters to the newspapers sounded remarkably similar to those occasionedby Celtic’s appearance in Seville. Correspondents repeatedly emphasised theprimacy of Scottishness over Irishness:.While I realise the vast population of the area we live in comes from Irishdescent, I would think by now we would class ourselves as Scottish.25This is one of the many factors which results in the cancer of sectarianism,which still blights our society.26Why wasn’t there anything similar to celebrate the Queen’s Golden Jubilee? . . .The Fields of Athenry being sung by 3000 people with Celtic tops on a Saturdayafternoon. . . .27How can this be organised when no corresponding celebration is ever plannedfor St Andrew’s Day—you know the patron saint of the country we actually livein. . . .28In Scotland, ethnic and religious news or events routinely prompt similarresponses. Issues Irish and Catholic in Scotland often become a focus for overtcritical public comment.The wide-ranging and encompassing nature of the dispute over displays ofIrishness manifests itself in other aspects of everyday life. The comments of theIrish 2 respondents make this clear; significantly, the interviewees also give sub-24. R. Travers, Scotland on Sunday, 9 November 1997, p.13.25. Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser, letters, 12 March 2003, p. 37.26. Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser, letters, 12 March 2003, p. 37.27. Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser, letters, 19 March 2003, p. 44.28. Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser, letters. 19 March 2003, p. 39.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 103stance to the claim of Celtic’s relevance beyond the football environment, byemphasizing the club’s role in creating, maintaining, and providing an expres-sive outlet for their Irishness. Ironically, an important finding of this research isthat the public character of these celebrations and expressions of Irishness inreality also disclose their hidden nature, even invisibility, within other facets ofScottish life, and even within the context of supporting Celtic.This latter point links with Daniel Burdsey’s studies of British-born Asianswho achieve success in England as footballers. His research shows that thoseplayers who have either consciously or unconsciously underemphasized theirAsianness and in some cases, “sought to decrease the degree to which their cul-tural difference is apparent,” are the most successful of young aspirant British-bornAsian footballers.29 In other words, practices and attitudes more acceptableto the “white” mainstream are gradually adopted as cultural capital; or areimposed upon Asianness with little or no comment, reply, or resistance. Burd-sey suggests that regardless of how “ethnic” the player’s private, or publiclyundisclosed, family and social life may be, the required cultural passport can beacquired or achieved only if he or she complies with the mainstream codes ofwhat is acceptable.In a similar way, made particularly clear in the case of Aiden McGeady, ifIrishness is maintained as a visible and esteemed identity with respect to Celtic,the cultural passport required for acceptance cannot be acquired. The percep-tions of the interviewees suggest that press reporting in relation to the Irish andCatholic nature of Celtic and its support strongly indicates a need to negotiateIrishness in Scotland. Further, the interviewees report that such contestationsare not restricted to the football arena, but extend to other areas of everyday lifethat have economic and social implications for the interviewees. The perceptionof the interviewees, virtually all of whom indicated support for Celtic, alsoconfirm that the team is both an important aspect of Irishness in Scotland andprovides a public indicator of how Irishness is perceived as well as sociallymanaged.Many interviewees disclose concern and even fear that they may be“caught”or “revealed” as being Catholic, as a Celtic supporter, as being Irish, or as sim-ply esteeming their Irishness. They are aware of how these identities can be usedagainst them, how isolated they can feel, and how they might be portrayed andreferred to negatively and inferiorized by hostile people who do not share theirreligious or ethnic background. They have an intimate knowledge, born fromexperience and insider community learning, of the cultural codes involved inCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society29. Daniel Burdsey,“‘One of the lads’? Dual Ethnicity and Assimilated Ethnicities in the Careers ofBritish Asian Professional Footballers,” Ethnic and Racial Studies, 27, 5 (September, 2004), 757.07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 104reading contested social situations. The interviewees realize when, how, and whythey must disguise their Irishness, downplay its relevance, and even discard it.They understand their Irishness as dominated by the hegemony of anti-Catholi-cism, anti-Irishness, Scottishness, and Britishness. Further, they recognize thesectarianism they experience as being culturally embedded, but an encounterrarely, if ever, publicly acknowledged.Philomena Donnelly described how Celtic was an aspect of Irish Catholiccultural life in Scotland that needed to be dealt with sensitively:There was times when they wouldn’t [want to be identified by the popularlabels of Celtic, Catholic and Irish], it wasn’t as openly discussed I suppose,almost like the football wouldn’t be discussed if people were coming round whoyou knew weren’t Celtic fans. . . . I can remember once when I was very young,I was about 7 or 8 and I got a baby doll for Christmas and I fancied a guy atschool at the time, I must have been a bit older, called John Paul, but I told mymum that I was naming this baby doll after the Pope and her friends werecoming in and I remember her saying ‘don’t say that in front of them, just callit John in front of people, because that would be easier’. . . . I know he [myfather] takes an awful lot of abuse for Celtic but whether it goes on to IrishnessI don’t know.This difficulty in being negatively imagined as a member of the Catholic-Celtic-Irish community in the context of Scottish society was also experiencedin the late 1960s by the then-teenager, Joseph John Flanagan:when I started work, I got a job as an apprentice in the works my father was in,which was absolutely great. Going into this environment which was very muchnot a Catholic environment, very much managed by the Scottish Protestantbackground. Now he (Father) hadn’t spoken about that to me but when I wentover there the guys were wearing their football colours and you had a hard hatto wear and that kind of stuff, so the Rangers stickers and all that. So I put theCeltic stickers on mine, he went ballistic. I had not to do that. That was justsomething that was private, you keep that and I would never get on if that was,you know if I was going to wear them . . . so didn’t blow it from the rooftop. . . .Didn’t talk about your background, just didn’t talk about that kind of stuff, justavoided the conversations. You were almost expected to conform into a sub-servient role. Do your bit, go away home.The connection of Celtic to other aspects of second- and third- generationIrish Catholic life in Scotland, and the subservient role mentioned by Flanagan,was also alluded to by seventy-year-old James Haggerty. Haggerty’s narrativeexposes the way that people who wish to “fit in” and obtain esteem can oftenonly acquire this by acquiescing to ongoing assimilative pressures that result ina corresponding dilution of their own ethnic distinctiveness. When HaggertyCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 105embarked on a working life outside his community, he said of his previouslyopen and relaxed Irish identity,I tended to cover that up. . . . The Irish part of it that was the part, if you like, itsort of [was] on a back boiler, out of the road, used when I was with the Irishcrowd back home. . . . I knew that I couldn’t cope with that identity in work. . . .I don’t know about promotion and so on but if you know, the men above and soon were all probably Masons and so on and I think it could have . . . made lifekind of miserable and as it was I got on fine with everybody.For Francis Daly, the workplace also presented a site for potential conflictand downplaying Irishness. Again, Celtic appears as part of a triangle of ethnicidentity—Irish, Catholic, and Celtic football—that attracted hostility and sus-picion, and led to a privatization of identity.I would be exposing myself if I were to be outspoken about Irish things or aboutbeing a Catholic or being a Celtic supporter. . . . I know it would go against me,it wouldn’t do me any favours. . . . See I wouldn’t emphasise my Irishness eitherbecause it’s just, it can be too, it’s not worth it, because it opens up a can ofworms for a lot of people and they can’t accept it. People don’t, there’s a thingabout, it’s dangerous to be quite outspoken . . . Scottish society does not acceptpeople of Irish origin, they don’t like it.Similarly, Rosaleen Ashling Gaffney noted the hostility within Scottish soci-ety to Irishness:a lot of people would comment on, especially they pick up on your name, youknow, Rosaleen Ashling Gaffney, straightaway they pick up on your name, thatyou’re Irish. A lot of people it’s fine but then some people don’t like it . . . theywould just make maybe fly comments about, you know, you being Irish or thefact that you would be a Celtic fan, things like that. . . .Joseph John Flanagan also made the connection with other aspects of his lifeas a third-generation Irish Catholic living in Scotland. The inhibitions he hadassumed in his lifestyle with regard to Celtic also permeated Flanagan’s work-ing environment and life generally outside of his Irish and Catholic place ofupbringing. Like Philomena Donnelly, Flanagan stated that he, too, experi-enced the idea of changing names to disguise identity in unknown or potentiallyunfriendly company while fashioning another more acceptable designation.The sometimes confused but disguised nature of Flanagan’s identity was alsoinferred when asked whether he would support Ireland or Scotland in interna-tional football:If I’m honest? I mean my next door neighbour’s a great guy, old man, Scottishthrough and through . . . if I was watching it in the house and he came in to watchCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 106it with me, for his sake I would be a Scottish fan. If I was watching it privately,with Peter or Mark [his sons], I would be supporting Ireland.Flanagan felt little affinity with the Scottish international football side, andviewed Celtic as his national team—although he also indicated how uneasy hewas with expressing this outside of groups of similarly minded people. He sig-nalled a desire to fit in as shown by a contextual desire to be seen to supportScotland, “‘for the sake of” his older neighbor. Numerous other respondentsmentioned the privatized aspect of the constitution of Irish identity in Scotland.Francis Daly said:When I went to a primary school,maybe 95–98 percent of the kids at the primaryschool were of Irish descent. All of the teachers, with the exception of one, wereof Irish descent. She was a Lithuanian. But it wasn’t encouraged, anyone show-ing an Irish identity wasn’t encouraged at all. It was encouraged in the house per-haps, in certain families. . . .Daly also noted that an otherwise privatized Irish identity could be publiclycelebrated in the context of Celtic Football Club:You were allowed to go see Celtic matches and express your Irish identity . . . it’smaybe a lot more important, it’s not just the football club of course, it’s a lotmore. Celtic is all about attitude and that as well. You know you can express anIrish identity and there’s safety at Celtic Park, whereas you wouldn’t be able toexpress it out. . . .Celtic has allowed the respondents an expression of their Irish identity in apublic space, in the company of thousands of other like-minded individuals,devoid of the “usual” hostility and suspicion. Interviewees who made connec-tions between Celtic and other cultural, social, and political aspects of their livesfrequently referred to the significance of Celtic to Catholics of Irish descent. Sec-ond-generation Glasgow Irish Peadar McGrath went so far as to say that:I’ve no interest in football. . . . I don’t watch football, but sometimes I’d turn theradio on and listen to the Celtic game hoping that Celtic would win but I don’tgo to see them . . . the only way I’ve got any interest in Celtic at all is, I’m not actu-ally interested in football, my interest in Celtic is I see them as the Irish team inGlasgow.As McGrath suggests, only in Celtic-related social circles did he experiencecomfort in self- and in-group recognition. Among interviewees, the dominantexperience of being openly “Irish” was of being a stranger and unwelcome.Harry McGuigan referred to this “unease” that many Celtic supportersencounter in negotiating their Irish identities in Scottish society. “When Irishemigrant’s children had nothing, the only thing they had to anchor themselvesCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 107Celtic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Societyhere was Celtic. Why should they apologise for that and why should Celtic?”Pauline Rice’s comments echo her identification of remembered deprivation:My identity with Celtic, again, is the underdog, my strength of feeling is that itassociates me with the injustices that have been attached to Celtic Football Clubover the years . . . we never had a discriminatory policy at any time at Celtic, youknow there was never a religious discrimination. . . . My strength of feeling forCeltic goes back to having to fight for where we’ve got and from the poverty thatwe’ve come from and what we’ve done from that. I see the Irish culture over heredoing the exact same, getting to the top having had to struggle to get there andthat would be my association with Ireland and Celtic but again I don’t apologisefor thinking we should be able to sing Irish songs if we wanted to because Irishmen have been involved with Celtic from the start.A majority of interviewees saw Celtic as pivotal to the Irish in Scotland inrelation to their sense of history, heritage, cultural Catholicism. James Branni-gan provided a succinct statement of the team’s primary role:They represent the Irish who had to leave Ireland….They’ve never been an Irishonly or a Catholic only club because that would be wrong. But, Celtic is essen-tially about us—it’s our team, our club and our community. . . . Celtic wouldn’tbe here without the Irish. Ireland’s history helps explain the institution that isCeltic Football Club. Every time we win a big match it’s a celebration for a com-munity. We can come together and we can celebrate publicly.We are recognisedand the rest of the country can see us even though many of them ignore ordespise us. . . . Just to see the green and white hoops running out is evidence thatwe’ve survived despite what many have thrown at us. Seeing the tricolour and theshamrock somewhere publicly where we don’t ‘usually’—usually we have tokeep them hidden, is the greatest thing about Celtic.Thus, Celtic’s symbolic, social, and cultural role among much of the Irishdiaspora in Scotland is fundamental. The vast majority of the team’s supportcomes from this segment of the Scottish population. Even when a third-gener-ation, Glasgow-based interviewee was asked about his sense of home, JohnFlynn’s reply not only stated how he continued to be Irish in Scotland but alsoreflected the place of Celtic in this specific Irish diasporic setting.Home’s where the heart is. Home’s Glasgow. I tell you the last couple of weeksI’ve seen Johnny Crawley the Cork singer at the Riverside. I’ve seen Juno at theCitizens. I’ve seen the Ploughboy [sic] of theWesternWorld at the Arches and wewere at the Irish concert last night in the Concert Hall and we’ve got Celtic aswell, so if we only had Old Ireland over here. I think we’ve got it. No I’m quitehappy with that, you know. I do feel at home in Ireland. . . . There’s a lot of placesI love in England, cause I’ve got a lot of friends too but I do feel particularly athome in Ireland too. I don’t feel, and I think it’s like when Ella goes to Italy [his07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 108Scots-born, Italian-identifying wife], she still feels kind of comfortable thereyou know. But I do too, I don’t think . . . in Ireland I definitely feel at home butif anybody said to me, where’s your home, I’d say Glasgow.Even if some or many of the diaspora have become Scottish, the Irish 2 Projectshows that second- and third-generation Irish individuals in Scotland can alsoidentify themselves as Irish or see Irishness as their primary or favored identi-ty. This, then, is one of the main themes to emerge from this research: the linksrespondents construct between their ethnic origins, Celtic Football Club, andexpressions of Irishness, reveal that not everyone born in Scotland wishes to beimagined as a Scot.30Another significant theme to arise from the Irish 2 Project is the perceiveddifficulty in being Irish in Scotland for those who are consciously part of themulti-generational Irish community. The evidence demonstrates that support-ing Celtic in Scottish society, the one football club and fanbase in Britain whereIrishness is a defining aspect, can invite not only communal solidarity, succour,esteem, and celebration, but also opprobrium, invective, sectarian labelling,denial, and occasionally violence, and the possibility of social and economic dis-crimination. This is important to understanding past and present Irish identi-ties in Scotland. Such hostility also links to Mary Hickman’s thesis, in Religion,Class and Identity (1995), that Irish people in Britain have been subjected to aprocess of “denationalising.”31Irish 2 Project interviewees report that hostility toward their Irishness is fre-quently manifested in the workplace and in everyday social life, including hos-tility from other members of the Irish diaspora. This latter experience, in turn,can be viewed as another reaction toward hostility and antagonism and as aresponse to the pressures to assimilate.31 There are members of the Irish dias-poric community in Scotland who have chosen, or learned to adopt, othermore acceptable identities which are not Catholic, Irish, or supporters of Celtic.The disregard and marginalisation of Irish identity over the course of manydecades, and its lack of positive recognition in Scottish society, sustains sectar-ian attitudes toward Catholics of Irish descent. The West of Scotland is a specificlocation where ethnic difference and the sustenance of Irish identity are subjectto such pressures. The sample of newspaper articles reveals the construction ofIrishness in Scotland as oppositional to indigenous Scottish and British identi-ties. The Scottish print media appears to be engaged in a resolute endeavor tohave Irish diasporic identities marginalized and negatively labelled as “sec-30. Joseph M. Bradley, “Images of Scottishness and Otherness in International Football,” SocialIdentities: Journal for the Study of Race, Nation and Culture, 9, 1 (March, 2003), 7–23.31. Mary J. Hickman,Religion, Class and Identity: The State, the Catholic Church and the Educationof the Irish in Britain (Avebury: Aldershot, 1995).Celtic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 109tarian.” This has been a continual feature of modern Scottish society. In theprint media, the Irishness of Celtic and its supporters is often treated as aber-rant, disloyal, alien, and sectarian.Nonetheless, despite the contestation and assimilative and conforming pres-sures, Irishness can be recognized as remaining a significant element in the livesof the Irish 2 Project respondents in Scotland. The narratives of these intervie-wees also demonstrate that in Scotland, football is bound up and inherentlylinked with the process of community construction. For those descended fromIreland in Scotland and who view Celtic as intrinsic to their Irishness, the clubremains a site for the preservation of their cultural traditions, customs, andpolitical preferences. It functions as a mechanism for the socialization and sus-tenance of Irishness in Scotland. The team exists as a site for a sense of com-munity born from the majority of these supporters sharing familial and kinshiporigins in Ireland. It constitutes a setting for friendship and association withpeople often intermarried, having experienced the same denominational schoolformat, sharing similar geographical spaces in Scotland—frequently in theGlasgow and Lanarkshire areas, within a thirty-mile radius of Celtic Park inGlasgow—and with a sense of belonging to Ireland, Catholicism, Irish history,and Irish culture. Celtic’s Irish identity and the multigenerational Irish immi-grant community that has sustained this as the central component of the cluband its fan base, makes it a unique football club in Scotland and beyond. Celticand its supporters constitute a distinctive representation of Irishness in theworldwide diaspora.The Irish 2 Project shows that, with respect to the Irish in Scotland andBritain more generally, Celtic and its supporters’ Irishness challenge notions ofassimilation amongst the children and grandchildren of Irish migrants. AsHickman stresses, this points to the need for more nuanced understandings ofwhite diasporic identities, as well as of Scottishness and Britishness.Without thediasporic community’s sense of Irishness in Scotland, Celtic would not exist,have become established, or have gained widespread recognition as one of themost significant institutions in world football. Not only does this study offerweight to the views of Hoberman and Hobsbawm in relation to sport and iden-tity but it specifically demonstrates that support for Celtic Football Club dis-closes otherwise hidden—and, in the eyes of their possessors, repressed—aspects of the Irishness of the Irish ethnic minority in Scotland, whilesimultaneously reflecting experiences and identities frequently marginalized,unheard, ignored, and denied. UNIVERSITY OF STIRLINGj.m.bradley@stir.ac.ukCeltic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society07-bradley-pp96-110:0-start file ftn 2/12/08 7:50 PM Page 110