ABSTRACT: 
Researchers? responsibilities towards their research data are changing across all domains of social scientific endeavour. Government, funders and publishers expect greater transparency of, open access to, and re-use of research data, and fears over data loss call for more robust information security practices. Researchers must develop, enhance and professionalise their research data management skills to meet these challenges and to deal with a rapidly changing data sharing environment. This paper sets out how we have contributed to jump-starting the research methods training curriculum in this field by translating high-level needs into practical guidance and training activities. Our pedagogical approach involves applicable, easy-to-digest, modules based on best practice guidance for managing and sharing research data. In line with recent findings on successful practices in methods teaching, we work on the principle of embedding grounded learning activities within existing narratives of research design and implementation. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we consider the problem of learning a set of binary expressions .<n> the set of binary expressions can be expressed as the sum of a number of terms , each of which is a function of the given set of binary expressions .<n> we show that the number of terms in a given expression depends on the set of binary expressions .<n> we also show that the number of terms in the given expression depends on the given set of binary expressions . <n> the problem of learning a set of binary expressions is to find a set of binary expressions that can be expressed by a set of functions .<n> the first set of functions is the set of the elements of the system .<n> the elements of the system are the elements of the system .<n> the system can be considered as a collection of elements .<n> the elements of the system are the elements of the system .<n> the first set of elements is the set of elements of the system .<n> the elements of the system are the elements of the system .<n> the first set of elements is the set of elements of the system .<n> the elements of the system are the elements of the system .<n> the second set of elements is the set of elements of the system . 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttp://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tsrm20Download by: [University of Essex] Date: 24 September 2015, At: 02:42International Journal of Social Research MethodologyISSN: 1364-5579 (Print) 1464-5300 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tsrm20Learning to manage and share data: jump-startingthe research methods curriculumLouise Corti & Veerle Van den EyndenTo cite this article: Louise Corti & Veerle Van den Eynden (2015) Learning to manage and sharedata: jump-starting the research methods curriculum, International Journal of Social ResearchMethodology, 18:5, 545-559, DOI: 10.1080/13645579.2015.1062627To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2015.1062627© 2015 The Author(s). Published by Taylor &FrancisPublished online: 25 Jul 2015.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 292View related articles View Crossmark dataCiting articles: 1 View citing articles Learning to manage and share data: jump-starting the researchmethods curriculumLouise Corti* and Veerle Van den EyndenUK Data Archive, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex CO43SQ, UK(Received 31 October 2014; accepted 29 March 2015)Researchers’ responsibilities towards their research data are changing across alldomains of social scientiﬁc endeavour. Government, funders and publishersexpect greater transparency of, open access to, and re-use of research data, andfears over data loss call for more robust information security practices. Research-ers must develop, enhance and professionalise their research data managementskills to meet these challenges and to deal with a rapidly changing data sharingenvironment. This paper sets out how we have contributed to jump-starting theresearch methods training curriculum in this ﬁeld by translating high-level needsinto practical guidance and training activities. Our pedagogical approachinvolves applicable, easy-to-digest, modules based on best practice guidance formanaging and sharing research data. In line with recent ﬁndings on successfulpractices in methods teaching, we work on the principle of embeddinggrounded learning activities within existing narratives of research design andimplementation.Keywords: data management; data sharing; teaching approaches; researchmethods curriculum; transferrable skillsIntroductionAcross the disciplinary spectrum, researchers’ responsibilities towards their ownresearch data and their use of others’ data are changing. Open access is increasinglymandated for publicly-funded research data, governments demand transparency inresearch they support, and publishers ask for evidence of data that underpin ﬁndings.The economic climate also requires more re-use of data. In turn, concerns about dataloss call for more robust information security practices. Much of the responsibilityfor the management of research data is placed upon researchers who need toimprove, enhance and professionalise their skills to meet the challenge of producingthe highest quality research data for publication, sharing and reuse in a responsibleway. Since data form the cornerstone of empirical research, such data skills must beintegrated with research methods teaching and learning. Novice researchers at under-graduate or postgraduate level may beneﬁt from teaching that is integrated intodegree curricula and sits naturally alongside narratives of standard methodologicalapproaches. Experienced researchers are likely to need a greater degree of upskill-ing, to plug gaps in current knowledge and refresh or update their knowledge inresponse to rapid changes in technology or legislation relating to the governance of*Corresponding author. Email: corti@essex.ac.uk© 2015 The Author(s). Published by Taylor & Francis.This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivativesLicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduc-tion in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 2015Vol. 18, No. 5, 545–559, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2015.1062627Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 research data. Irrespective of the level of a researcher’s expertise, these skills canhelp maximise the impact of research and foster greater appreciation of the use ofsecondary sources. However, guidance and training for gaining data managementand sharing skills are noticeably absent from many social science research methodscurricula, with the exception of data handling covered within statistical analyticaltechniques. Data management skills are equally important for qualitative researchers.A culture change is therefore needed and pedagogy forms part of that change.In this paper we show how research methods training can be enhanced by inte-grating practical guidance and training activities into research methods instructionalliterature and teaching. In this approach, upskilling can be achieved by interweavingmodular practice-based instruction in data management with traditional methodslearning that focuses on research design, ﬁeldwork and analysis. As we move into agrowing data landscape with novel forms of data coming on stream, these skillsrepresent a step change towards the next level of competence required for datamining and data science.Our pedagogical approach involves up-to-date, easy-to-digest information aboutpractices for managing and sharing a variety of types of research data, presented ina modular structure. In line with recent ﬁndings on successful practices in methodsteaching, we work on the principle of embedding grounded learning activities withinthe narrative of research design and implementation (Buckley, Brown, Thomson,Olsen, & Carter, 2015). Effective learning of data skills within social scienceresearch methods teaching was found by Kilburn, Nind, and Wiles (2014a) to beachieved through three means: active learning by making processes visible; directlyexperiencing methods; and critical reﬂection on practice. Providing building blocksthat create a solid empirically-based research knowledge base to underpin the cre-ation and use of digital data in the social sciences is at the heart of our approach. Amodular structure is also beneﬁcial because it enables the coverage of topics to betailored towards multi- or non-disciplinary learners. Case studies, practical activities,exercises and group discussions help support effective learning and application ofthe core concepts. Success of the approach has been demonstrated through a grantfrom the UK Economic and Social Research Council’s (ESRC) Research Develop-ment Initiative to reﬁne and test the teaching materials and by integration of contentand pedagogy into more recent publication of an internationally-appealing handbookon the topic (Corti, Van den Eynden, Bishop, & Woollard, 2014).Challenges for data management pedagogyEmerging agendas for data sharingIn the past 5 years, signiﬁcant funds have been made available to open up a varietyof data for research purposes, such as government administrative data, data underly-ing published research outputs and data from commercial sources. The rise of the‘big data’ agenda has also pushed to the fore the issue of how to look after and man-age data to beneﬁt interdisciplinary investigation of large and complex data. In theUK, funding is being dedicated to secondary analysis research, with the intention ofmaximising opportunities for the analysis of data from large-scale governmentinvestments such as national surveys and cohort studies (ESRC, 2012). With adecrease in funding for research generating new data, it is important for researchersto explore the optimal use of existing data. Investments that seek to advance data-related skills are also being driven by research councils’ policies on open access546 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 (Research Councils UK [RCUK], 2012) and by the desire to enhance quantitativeskills in social science education (British Academy, 2014). These sets of activitieswould appear to beneﬁt greatly from alignment around shareable data as a focus fortraining in the collection, management, and analysis of long-term data resources.Skills involved in data managementWhile data management skills come under the broad banner of data handling, theyﬁt in at all stages of the research process. Figure 1 shows likely intervention pointsin the data lifecycle of data management type activities that should be considered inany research design and throughout the research process.Based on the UK Data Archive’s decennia of work supporting and advisingESRC grant holders about data archiving, sharing, and reuse, within the frameworkof the ESRC research data policy, this framework was translated into guidance thatfollowed the logic of the data lifecycle. Guidance was iterated, enhanced andexpanded into detailed best practice guidance for researchers and accompanyingteaching materials and further development resulted in an extensive handbook onbest practices for managing and sharing research data (Corti et al., 2014). Thecontent includes:• the importance of sharing data;• consent, conﬁdentiality and ethics of data sharing;• rights associated with the use of existing data;• describing, contextualising, and documenting research data;• data formats and software;• storage, back-up and security in response to the fragility of digital data;• publishing data in a sustainable way and enabling future citation.Sign off consent formAgree data & metadata templatesShared data sharing protocolsLicensing, terms and conditions for sharing, formal documentationData formats, data migrationFigure 1. Intervention points in the research data lifecycle. Based on Green and Gutman(2006).International Journal of Social Research Methodology 547Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 Proﬁciency in these topics is expected for those creating new data during thecourse of research and those undertaking secondary analysis. Enhanced data skillsbecome essential as we move towards a new data landscape where more digital dataare increasingly available for use, including new forms of data such as social mediadiscussions, administrative data, commercial customer data and epidemiologicaldata. Such novel data sources are already entering the social sciences via new datacentres dedicated to the challenges of solving research challenges using ‘big data’(ESRC, 2013). In the future we are likely to see increased analysis of large andvaried data sources in the pursuit of impactful ﬁndings.Data handling in methods teaching: assessing gapsData handling methods have tended to be more widely acknowledged in disciplineswhere large-scale secondary data sources are routinely used. Our own experiencetells us that, for example, geographers and historians tend to have good data skillsand are familiar with reusing and sharing research data. Secondary analysis of sur-vey data is routinely taught, and here data management skills such as quality assur-ance measures, metadata and annotation of data, formatting and modes oforganisation are very much part of research and learning activities. Assessment ofdata created by someone else is a useful way to gain insight into what it means toprepare data for sharing and future use. In turn, economists may have good technicaldata skills, but sometimes lack appreciation of ethical issues surrounding dataobtained from human participants (Blomﬁeld, 2012). Other research domains maysuffer from a tendency to exclude technical components from methods courses. Forinstance, students of sociology or linguistics may only encounter data handling inthe context of collecting data for their own research projects.Despite reviews of postgraduate training guidelines and surveys of senior aca-demics and researchers over the past 10 years, the UK still fails to produce enoughquantitatively proﬁcient or data-savvy graduates in some areas of social sciences(MacInnes, 2012). From an international perspective, the quantitative skills deﬁcitwas also recognised as a major concern in the 2010 International BenchmarkingReview of Sociology (ESRC, BSA, & HAPS, 2010). This recognition by researchfunders and professional societies propagated a welcomed ﬂurry of activity (BritishAcademy, 2012; Nufﬁeld Foundation, 2012; Royal Statistical Society, 2014;Williams, Payne, Hodgkinson, & Poole, 2008). Concrete investments have followed,with some £20million invested in the UK’s recent Q-Step initiative that aims toachieve a life-course approach to building quantitative methods skills (NufﬁeldFoundation, 2013). The UK’s ESRC National Centre for Research Methods(NCRM) is also supported to initiate and promote targeted and advancedmethods training across the methods spectrum (NCRM, 2014). This drive to embedmethods in real social science questions and engage in practice-based learning ringswell with our own approach. However, it would be beneﬁcial for these programmesto explicitly consider the longer-term value and re-use of data.Of most interest to the thrust of this paper were the ﬁndings emerging from the2012 Higher Education Academy Social Sciences learning and teaching summit,focusing on teaching research methods in the social sciences. These includedinnovative ways of improving applied research methods, for example by gainingexperience outside of the academic environment and undertaking projects in thework place (Hamilton, Gossman, & Southern, 2014; Kirton, Campbell, & Hardwick,548 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 2014). These offer working models of applied methods in practice. Others haveidentiﬁed real life problems and task-oriented group work as a means of engagingreluctant students with research methods teaching (Leston-Bandera, 2013).We have seen some progress in the uptake of secondary analysis, particularly forqualitative researchers. The outreach work done by the UK Data Service and itspredecessors in providing teaching resources and running training courses encourageuptake of secondary analyses for qualitative data (Bishop, 2012). This included col-lating case studies from academics who use secondary data in their own teaching(UK Data Service, 2014c). A recent review of research methods learning and teach-ing also recognised the opportunities of using existing data as a learning tool inmethods teaching – either working with own data that learners bring to a session, orusing teachers’ data or teaching datasets, the latter being easier to manage (Kilburn,Nind, & Wiles, 2014b). Across the curricula, though, there remains work to be doneon streamlining the portfolio of data management skills within research methodsteaching.The supporting research methods literatureThe recent research methods literature continues to comprise publications that pre-dominantly focus on research design, data collection in the ﬁeld and data analysis,although the availability of instructional books on secondary analysis techniques isgrowing (Smith, 2008; Trzesniewski, Donnellamn, & Lucas, 2011; Vartanian, 2010).However, the social science literature still lacks texts that cover the core skillsrequired to support good data management and sharing. Some of these skills areinherently taken for granted as good research practice. Yet issues such as ﬁle formatchoices, storage, backup and security of research data, and documentary descriptionsof data, are crucial in creating high quality data. So too are ethical and legal con-siderations in data use and stewardship – both within and beyond the life of project.In particular, qualitative researchers may ﬁnd few written sources on managingdigital data for sharing. Authors of new instructional methods books should beencouraged to include such topics.Upskilling for novel forms of dataIn the ‘big data’ era, researchers see the beneﬁts of working with novel and morecomplex data sources, often across disciplinary boundaries. With this, there is poten-tial for deﬁcits in conﬁdence or skills for researchers to become even greater. Whilesome disciplines may feel comfortable running algorithms on big data, many socialscientists will want to take smaller samples and analyse these in more familiar ways.Examples are seen in the use of social media data such as Twitter feeds, where a dis-course analyst may wish to select tweets from a particular social group, geographicalcontext, or pertaining to a speciﬁc issue.Good metadata and quality assurance skills are needed for retrieving, assessing,manipulating, and analysing these big data extracts; skills that fall under the rubricof data management. Courses aimed at non-technical audiences are emerging on theuse of social media data, such as network analysis and data mining. These courseswill also introduce skills on data extraction using Application ProgrammingInterfaces and assessing the quality of new forms of data by means of statisticaltechniques (University of Michigan, 2014; University of Southampton, 2014).International Journal of Social Research Methodology 549Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 For instance, research on smart cities demands much greater appreciation of datamodelling, which is best achieved through cross-disciplinary methodologicalcollaboration (Urban Big Data Centre, 2014).For the qualitative researcher wishing to explore the potential of online digitaltextual sources – be those social media data or other source – the upskilling neededto handle, extract and analyse such data may be signiﬁcant. Basic core data manage-ment skills can bring researchers some steps closer to technical proﬁciency. Forinstance, a successful outcome might be for a biographical researcher to runalgorithms on large volumes of rich text relevant to their area of study.Despite the trends towards exploiting ‘big data’, users of ‘smaller’ data shouldnot be left by the wayside. While small scale research will remain critical, research-ers who perhaps consider that big data pushes them out of their comfort zone canbeneﬁt from upskilling. Enabling them to feel comfortable with handling complexand new forms of research data, to be cognisant of longer-term sustainability of data,and to appreciate the art of accessing and re-use of secondary data sources are allsigniﬁcant steps towards this goal. This incremental knowledge sharing and capacitybuilding will help the broader social science research community move towardsappreciating big data.Looking to the more data-intensive disciplines, the new data science coursesaimed at computer or statistics students all take for granted some areas of data man-agement skills with their modules mostly oriented towards data handling, qualityassessment and analytics. However, it may be some time before undergraduatecourses in traditional social science disciplines embrace such technical components.Even in our own institution, where data science courses have recently started up, thesocial sciences do not yet contribute to that teaching with students instead hailingfrom maths and computing programmes. The emergence of internet-based text as adata source is prompting qualitative social scientists to consider branching into newtypes of analysis, requiring more advanced computational skills which may beneﬁtfrom structured training in the context of degree courses.In summary, the UK’s apparent quantitative methods skills deﬁcit, together withdemands of the current research climate (openness, accountability, impact and valuefor money) and the need for computational skills in the era of big data, emphasisethe importance of data management skills. To meet this need, methods curriculamust evolve rapidly.Applying solutions: data management skills, training, teaching and learningProfessional training in data management for researchersSharing data is becoming a vital part of research activity. This is especially true if we con-sider the training needs of professional researchers and their requirement for life-longlearning to keep pace with the changing demands of social research and the UK researchcouncils’ expectations for societal and economic impact (Research Councils UK, 2011).Over the past 5 years we have seen a rise in the marketing of career developmentpathways and support for junior researchers. Vitae (2013), an international pro-gramme led by a UK charity and supported by UK research and higher educationalfunding, is dedicated to realising the potential of researchers through transformingtheir professional and career development. In their role of supporting the employa-bility of doctoral researchers, Vitae concentrates on enhancing research skills.550 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 However, a review of their 2008–2012 framework and concordat indicates that,while employability of postgraduates is high on their agenda, there is no mention ofthe need for data competence or management skills across the disciplines.Social science libraries also play a role in offering support to students in gather-ing references for assignments and in some cases actively helping with statisticalprojects. In the US there has long existed the speciﬁc role of the data librarian,working to deliver access to data and even teaching appropriate techniques for sta-tistical analysis. Evidence from Corti and Watkins (2004) suggested that in the US,where there is typically a heavier focus on quantitative methods training in socialscience courses, students needing guidance with statistical assignments turned totheir local data librarians for assistance. Consequently, a movement of dedicatedextra-curricular training by data librarians to support these skills has developed.In the UK, the Jisc (the lead organisation that champions the use of digital tech-nologies in UK education and research) invested in a 5 year Managing Research Dataprogramme (2009–2013) to help develop and deliver data infrastructure, resources,tools and training materials to meet the increasing demands of research funders forgood data management or sharing of research data in the higher education sector. Thisresulted in various UK institutions developing and investing in institutional researchdata policies, data repositories and data management training resources. Examplesinclude the Universities of Edinburgh and Bristol, where materials were developedpartially based on the UK Data Service training modules (UK Data Service, 2014b;University of Bristol, 2014; University of Edinburgh, 2014). The Digital CurationCentre provides an overview of data management training provided for researchersand data custodians, such as library and research support staff across UK institutions(DCC, 2013). The UK Data Service runs a national programme of training forresearchers and research support staff (UK Data Service, 2014b, 2014c).There are also an increasing number of training courses on the topic of digitalpreservation (now a discipline in its own right). Training in digital preservation isaimed at information and IT professionals, as well as archivists and curators of digi-tal heritage and collections, rather than researchers exclusively. These seek to pro-vide hands-on knowledge and skills involving the collection, selection,management, long-term preservation and accessibility of digital assets. Examples arethe Digital Preservation Coalition training courses in the UK (Digital PreservationCoalition [DPC], 2014) and the Library of Congress’s Digital Preservation Outreachand Education Programme in the US (Library of Congress, 2013). Some master pro-grammes for archivists now cover useful aspects of data management, though areunlikely to be grounded in a narrative of social science research.In summary, courses on data management for sharing are emerging in academicinstitutions in the UK and US, motivated by research funders’ data policies. Europeis lagging behind, largely due to the absence of funder data policies and the driversthese bring.A modular strategy for introducing data management skillsDoctoral training in methods has drastically changed in the last few years, with amove away from ad hoc supervisor–student training towards institutionally organ-ised training, making use of short and professional development courses, hands-onsessions and small group work, plus case studies critique (Kilburn et al., 2014b;Kottmann, 2011; Sloan, 2013; Strayhorn, 2009).International Journal of Social Research Methodology 551Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 Examples of teaching advanced quantitative methods using a modular approachcan be found in the online courses for multi-level modelling provided by theLearning Environment for Multilevel Modelling (LEMMA) (Centre for MultilevelModelling, 2014). LEMMA offers a set of graduated modules starting from an intro-duction to quantitative research progressing to multilevel modelling of continuousand binary data. Equally, In the US the Interuniversity Consortium for Political andSocial Research’s Data-Driven Learning Guides enhance teaching of core conceptsmaking use of topics drawn from concepts that are included in introductory-levelsocial science textbooks (Inter-University Consortium for Political and SocialResearch, 2009). Their guides are topic-based and pose research questions that couldbe explored using a particular data-set, An example is the Guide on Age and Atti-tudes about the Rights of Homosexuals which investigates trends in attitudes regard-ing the rights of homosexuals in the United States from the early 1990s to 2007,using the longitudinal Houston Area Survey. The module guides users to workthrough the questions, prompting them to recode the data, available via an onlinebrowser, to be able to answer substantive questions of interest. Commentary isprovided taking the reader through analytical issues relevant to the data, such asinference and weighting, and provides a summary of key ﬁndings.In developing research data management training materials on a range of modu-lar topics, that can complement methods teaching in quantitative and qualitativeresearch methods, we have formulated a ﬂexible toolkit that can be incorporated intoundergraduate, masters, and doctoral taught curricula. These modules can also beused as voluntary symposia, doctoral colloquia, or professional development ses-sions. While the skills require some degree of research methods knowledge, theyremain accessible to second or third year undergraduate students.Over the years, our training workshops on managing and sharing research datahave developed to achieve effective learning of data skills, following the forms thatare recognised in existing literature on research methods teaching: active learning bymaking processes visible; directly experiencing methods; and critical reﬂection onpractice (Kilburn et al., 2014a). Active learning is realised through the use ofnumerous practical tasks, exercises and discussions during training sessions, such ashands-on lab exercises in encryption of sensitive data ﬁles, creation of metadatausing existing software tools, anonymisation of interview transcripts and surveytables, and quizzes on data practices in collaborative research. Learning by doing orexperiencing is applied where trainees develop their own data management plansthroughout training sessions. Critical reﬂection on data practices is supportedthrough group discussions of real-case data challenges, such as the ethicalimplications of sharing conﬁdential data or copyright scenarios, or discussionsaround individual’s own data requirements to explore shared challenges.Our modules consist of theoretical presentations, hands-on exercises or scenariosand quizzes (with answers) to practice understanding of topics we consider essentialin conducting research, efﬁcient collaborative working, and undertaking informedsecondary analysis. The modularised topics are: why and how to share research data;planning data management; documenting and contextualising data; formatting data;storing, backing-up and transferring data; ethics, consent and conﬁdentiality; andcopyright of data (Corti et al., 2014).These modules were road-tested and ﬁne-tuned into ﬂexible training materialsthrough use in over 75 hands-on workshops to audiences of doctoral students,researchers and research support staff over the period 2008–2013. Research methods552 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 trainers can adapt and repurpose presentations and exercises to suit their own disci-pline, country, or relevant laws. The resources are downloadable via our website.Although the resources were primarily developed for social scientists, they are broadenough to be used by other disciplines including the natural sciences, arts andhumanities.Fitting modules to the audienceIn running training sessions, we adapt programmes to suit our audience. For exam-ple, for a two-hour doctoral professionalisation workshop for social scientists, timewould permit a presentation and an exercise on gaining consent for collecting, usingand sharing qualitative data from structuring interviews in the form of well-documented and well-formatted transcripts. A half-day workshop might focus onseveral technical modules on formatting and organising, storing, and documentingdata, as a continuous professional development course. The use of suggestive titleslike Are you looking after your research data properly? help to attract audiences.Some topics lend themselves better to facilitated group discussions, such as shar-ing experiences of managing data-rich projects. More technical areas, such as datastorage or encryption, may beneﬁt from relatable anecdotes of data disasters in pre-sentations and the realisation of understanding through light-hearted quizzes, so asto keep learners engaged.Here we provide four examples of how a speciﬁc audience can be taught thecore skills within a set time frame. We discuss the most successful trajectory fordelivery of these modules, when to condense or lengthen them, and what kind ofactivities work best in particular settings. The following workshop examples a twohour overview session to an intensive two-day workshop.(1) Two-hour taster session for students (second year undergraduates onwards)on Looking after your research data:• Introduction to data managing and sharing, planning data management:presentation.• Data storage, back-up, security, transmission, encryption, ﬁle sharing:presentation, exercise, quiz and tools demonstration.• Quality control, version control, formatting, describing and organisingdata: presentation, Q&A and quiz.(2) Half-day training for social science professionals/ethics committee memberson: Managing and sharing research data: legal and ethical issues:• Data management and data sharing applied to research involving people asparticipants: legal and ethical aspects of data sharing (based on UK legisla-tion and requirements for publically funded research) and data managementplanning: presentation and Q&A.• Developing consent agreements for obtaining informed consent fromparticipants to share data: presentation, exercise, group discussion.• Dealing with conﬁdential research information and anonymisation tech-niques to enable use and sharing of research data: presentation, exercise,group discussion.International Journal of Social Research Methodology 553Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 (3) One-day training for social science and humanities research students onGoing digital: Looking after and managing your digital research data:• Beneﬁts of data management and data management planning: presentationand discussion.• Documenting your data: presentation.• Creating metadata for a data collection: practical lab session with exercises.• Storing data, data security, formatting, encrypting, organising data: presenta-tion, software demonstrations and Q&A.• Encrypting ﬁles, backups, checksums: practical lab session with exercises.• Copyright and IPR: presentation and scenarios for group discussion.• Ethical and legal aspects – key messages for sharing data: presentation andscenarios for group discussion.• Data management planning: presentation and write a data management planexercise.(4) Two-day train the trainers event on Looking after and managing yourresearch data.• Overview of the UK Data Archive’s managing and sharing training materials:presentation.• Practical data management planning and funder policy context: presentationand exercises.• Consent and ethics: presentation and group exercises.• Data anonymisation: presentation and group exercises.• Formatting data: presentation, formats quiz, ﬁle naming and transcriptionexercises.• Documenting and contextualising your data: presentation and context exercise.• Data copyright: presentation and research scenario discussions.• Storing and transferring data and data security: presentation, software demon-strations and quiz.• Training clinics: discuss your personal data needs with the trainers.In these sessions, we observe that group work is important and can greatly aid thelearning experience.To incorporate such data management training into taught courses that may beconstrained in terms of time or curriculum space, the modules ﬁt alongside new andexisting training provision. At undergraduate level, the typical 10-week course onquantitative methods likely does not have enough time to include data skills that sitoutside the conﬁnes of data collection and analysis. For qualitative methods courses,a ten-week course has barely enough time to cover the practicalities of collecting,transcribing, analysing and reporting research data. At masters and doctoral level, itmay become feasible to include half-day or one-day data skills training. As we sug-gested above, ﬂexibility may be the key, for example adding appealing workshopactivities to mainstream courses.One of the most positive outcomes of teaching these materials has been the posi-tive reception of qualitative researchers to distinct topics that might otherwise bedeemed out of their comfort zone. At the same time, using real life examples ofresearch that are relevant and topical can aid qualitative researchers to fully engagewith some of the more technical topics. For areas like ethics and consent or554 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 interview transcription, qualitative researchers may feel more conﬁdent engaging,perhaps even by reﬂecting on and challenging their own everyday practices (likeonly seeking consent for sole access to data, thereby precluding colleagues andresearch students from using their data in the future). However, topics like data secu-rity, encryption in transferring disclosive data between colleagues, and creatingmetadata can appear technically difﬁcult. By engaging participants in practical andrelevant activities we can demystify the complexity of some of the more technicaldigital data practices or perceived heavyweight topics, supporting learners in gainingthese essential practical skills.Who is best placed to teach?Questions may be raised over whether methods teachers or research support staff arebest placed to teach these materials, or whether learners should attend face-to-facetraining or self-study. Encouragingly, we have seen interesting examples of aca-demics teaching research methods being creative in their classes by incorporatingdata reuse assignments that enable critical evaluation of secondary data and expo-sure to other researchers’ data (Haynes & Jones, 2012; Kelly, 2012; Smith, 2008;Turton, 2012). Moreover, emerging literature on re-use of qualitative data, such asin a 2012 Special Issue of this journal on working with archived textual and visualmaterial in social research helps to inspire students about the possibilities ofconfronting data they have not collected themselves (Crow & Edwards, 2012;Kynaston, 2005; Corti, Witzel, & Bishop, 2005).Alternatively it may be that it is not the responsibility of methods teachers tocover these skills, but that of professional skills trainers. Many universities have setup skills-oriented courses to help amplify their students’ employment prospects andto support lifelong learning. For example, SCONUL (2014), as an academic library-based enterprise, aims to support both research excellence and students’ academicsuccess and employability. They cover important areas of information and digitalliteracy. In the past year the topic of data management has been added to their list ofpriority areas. Indeed there is no reason why data management skills could not berun as a parallel track to any kind of employability or professional development-oriented training.Finally, there is also the role of institutional or faculty research ofﬁces that arealready charged with offering support to researchers on funding opportunities, grantapplications and research ethics submissions; as well as providing training on aca-demic skills such as writing grant applications and academic writing. As their portfo-lio of support has increased to provide active advice for writing data managementplans, training on some data skills could be handled by them. Skills could includewriting data management planning, costing for data management in grant applica-tions, and ethical issues in collecting and reusing data. In similar ways, informationsystems service providers in universities can provide expertise and training in themore technical aspects of data management and sharing, such as good practices indata storage, backup, data encryption, data security measures and data transferring.One of the greatest challenges of teaching on these topics is ensuring the linkwith current research practice (and therefore trainers’ familiarity with research prac-tices). Success may depend on the experience of the trainers and on their ability tospeak the language of research of their audience; being conﬁdent to answer ques-tions about ethics, ﬁeldwork procedures, data validation and so on. Ultimately, anyInternational Journal of Social Research Methodology 555Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 of these actors are capable of teaching data management skills to students andresearchers. The availability of teaching materials and exercises such as those pre-sented by the authors enables many professionals to take on this form of teaching,either as part of or complementing the research methods curriculum.ConclusionResearchers are expected to adapt to new ways of working with data that require skillsto accompany their existing analytics techniques. Data management skills can be seenas the building blocks for data science and in turn, a core set of skills for social scien-tists rather than the domain of dedicated data managers. All empirical researchers aredata managers to some degree. As data sharing requirements come into play, manyplacing the research institution at the heart of responsibility for data sharing (EPSRC,2011), the pressure to build capacity amongst staff and researchers across all researchdisciplines in data management is increasingly crucial. Trained teaching, research,and support staff can engage students and learners in data management, beginning acycle of upskilling. Training provision for managing and sharing data is emerging at afairly rapid pace, led by institutions charged with overseeing the sharing of data byresearchers, in turn driven by conditions of funding for their research projects.However, a cultural change is still needed to encourage research methods teachersand trainers to embrace and capitalise on this emerging ﬁeld of pedagogy.In this paper we set out to demonstrate teaching strategies that can help enhancesocial scientists’ data management skills. Higher-level needs of gaining proﬁciencyand conﬁdence in digital data handling can be met by translating them into practicalguidance and training activities that embed into research (see also Silver & Woolf,2015). With the uptake of these strategies in the UK and beyond, this approach iscontributing to jump-starting the research methods curriculum for data management.At its heart, this pedagogy relies on easy-to-digest information on considered topics,coupled with grounded activities that reﬂect either the substantive or methodologicalinterests of learners. Where possible, such modular activities complement existingresearch methods training approaches and instructional literature. Be it the ethicalaspects of data sharing, collecting and entering data using software packages, or theimportance of data documentation, all parts of research design and analysis haveshort and longer-term data management implications.Finally, with pressure for more transparency in research, for increased reuse ofexisting data, and for handling conﬁdential data well, the pedagogical approach out-lined in this paper offer skills that can help researchers move more readily and conﬁ-dently into this space. These transferable skills help researchers to be better organisedin dealing with digital data sources, and be better prepared to work within ethical andlegal frameworks that govern research data. Further, they offer a strategic contribu-tion to the UK’s research capacity building programme in the social sciences.AcknowledgementsWe would like to acknowledge our colleagues who have undertaken training in areas ofresearch data management at the UK Data Archive, in particular, Libby Bishop who con-tributed to our training modules and the 2014 handbook on Managing and Sharing Data.Disclosure statementNo potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.556 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 Notes on contributorsLouise Corti is an associate director of the UK Data Archive and Head of the CollectionsDevelopment and Producer Support teams. She has directed ESRC research data policy andsharing activities since 1995 also leads on qualitative data activities at the Archive.Veerle Van den Eynden manages the Research Data Management team at the UK DataArchive. She leads on a variety of research and development projects on research data man-agement and actively supports ESRC data policy activities.ReferencesBishop, L. (2012). Using archived qualitative data for teaching: Practical and ethicalconsiderations. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 15, 341–350.doi:10.1080/13645579.2012.688335Blomﬁeld, M. (2012). Ethics in economics: Lessons from human subjects research. ErasmusJournal for Philosophy and Economics, 5, 22–44. Retrieved from http://ejpe.org/pdf/5-1-art-2.pdfBritish Academy. (2012). A position statement – Society counts, quantitative skills of socialsciences and humanities. London: Author.British Academy. (2014). High level strategy group for quantitative skills. Author [Website].Retrieved from http://www.britac.ac.uk/policy/High_Level_Strategy_Group_for_QS.cfmBuckley, J., Brown, M., Thomson, S., Olsen, W., & Carter, J. (2015). Embedding quantitativeskills into the social science curriculum: Case studies from Manchester. InternationalJournal of Social Research Methodology, 18(5), 495–510.Centre for Multilevel Modelling. (2014). Learning environment for multilevel methodologyand applications. Retrieved from http://www.bristol.ac.uk/cmm/learning/online-course/Corti, L., Van den Eynden, V., Bishop, L., & Woollard, M. (2014). Managing and sharingresearch data: A guide to good practice. London: Sage. ISBN 978-1-44626-726-4.Corti, L., & Watkins, W. (2004, Summer/Fall 4-5). Guest editors’ notes. In L. Corti & W.Watkins (Eds.), IASSIST quarterly [Special edition on statistical literacy]. Retrieved fromhttp://www.iassistdata.org/downloads/iqvol282_3editor_0.pdfCorti, L., Witzel, A., & Bishop, L. (Eds.). (2005, special issue). Secondary analysis of qual-itative data. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 6.Retrieved from http:www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/498Crow, G., & Edwards, R. (Eds.). (2012, special issue). Perspectives on working with archivedtextual and visual material in social research. International Journal of Social ResearchMethodology, 15. doi:10.1080/13645579.2012.688308Digital Preservation Coalition. (2014). Digital preservation training programme. Author[Website]. Retrieved from http://www.dpconline.org/training/digital-preservation-training-programmeDCC. (2013). Digital curation training for all. Author [Website]. Retrieved from http://www.dcc.ac.uk/trainingEPSRC. (2011). EPSRC policy framework on research data. Author [Website]. Retrievedfrom http://epsrc.ac.uk/about/standards/researchdataESRC. (2012). Secondary data analysis initiative. Author [Website]. Retrieved from http://www.esrc.ac.uk/research/skills-training-development/sdai/ESRC. (2013). Big data network. Author [Website]. Retrieved from http://www.esrc.ac.uk/research/major-investments/Big-Data/ESRC, BSA and HAPS. (2010). International benchmarking review of UK sociology.Swindon: ESRC.Green, A., & Gutman, M. (2006). Building partnerships among social science researchers,institution-based repositories and domain speciﬁc data archives. OCLC Systems and Ser-vices: International Digital Library Perspectives, 23, 35–53. Retrieved from http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/41214Hamilton, P., Gossman, P., & Southern, K. (2014). Developing innovative support structuresfor students undertaking small-scale research projects in work settings. The HigherInternational Journal of Social Research Methodology 557Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 Education Authority [Website]. Retrieved from https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/resources/Glyndwr_ﬁnal.pdfHaynes, J., & Jones, D. (2012). A tale of two analyses: The use of archived qualitative data.Sociological Research Online, 17(2), 1. Retrieved from http://www.socresonline.org.uk/17/2/1.htmlInter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research. (2009). Age and attitudesabout the rights of homosexuals: A data-driven learning guide. Author, University ofMichigan [Website]. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.3886/gayrightsKelly, A. (2012). Introducing sociology students to quantitative research methods. UK DataService Case Study, University of Essex [Website]. Retrieved from http://ukdataservice.ac.uk/use-data/data-in-use/case-study/?id=19Kilburn, D., Nind, M., & Wiles, R. (2014a). Learning as researchers and teachers: Thedevelopment of a pedagogical culture for social science research methods? BritishJournal of Educational Studies, 62, 191–207. doi:10.1080/00071005.2014.918576Kilburn, D., Nind, M., & Wiles, R. (2014b). Short courses in advanced research methods:Challenges and opportunities for teaching and learning. Southampton: National Centrefor Research Methods Report, NCRM, University of Southampton. Retrieved from http://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/3601/2/advanced_methods_short_courses.pdfKirton, A., Campbell, P., & Hardwick, L. (2014). Developing applied research skills throughcollaboration in extra-academic contexts. The Higher Education Authority [Website].Retrieved from https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/resources/Liverpool.pdfKottmann, A. (2011). Reform of doctoral training in Europe: A silent revolution? InJ. Enders, H. de Boer, & D. Westerheijden (Eds.), Reform of higher education in Europe(pp. 29–43). Rotterdam: Sense.Kynaston, D. (2005, January). The uses of sociology for real-time history. Forum: Qualita-tive Social Research, 6(1). Retrieved from http://www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/503Leston-Bandera, C. (2013). Ten tips to develop engaging undergraduate research methodsteaching. Blog post. Political Insight. Political Studies Association [Website]. Retrievedfrom http://www.psa.ac.uk/political-insight/blog/ten-tips-develop-engaging-undergraduate-research-methods-teachingLibrary of Congress. (2013). Digital preservation outreach and education. Library ofCongress [Website]. Retrieved from http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/education/curriculum.htmlMacInnes, J. (2012). Quantitative methods teaching in UK higher education: The state of theﬁeld and how it might be improved. HEA Social Sciences teaching and learning summit:Teaching research methods. Retrieved from http://www-new1.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/documents/Events/SS_assets/Blog/MacInnes_fullpaper1.pdfNational Centre for Research Methods. (2014). Current research programme. University ofSouthampton [Website]. Retrieved from http://www.ncrm.ac.uk/research/Nufﬁeld Foundation. (2012). Programme backgrounds – Promoting a step change in thequantitative skills of social science undergraduates. London: Nufﬁeld Foundation..Nufﬁeld Foundation. (2013). Why Q-step? Hopes for wider change. Presentation. Author.Retrieved from https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/resources/4_4_Nufﬁeld_panel.pdfResearch Councils UK. (2011). Common principles on data policy. Author. Retrieved fromhttp://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/datapolicy/Research Councils UK. (2012). Research councils UK policy on open access. Author.Retrieved from http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/openaccess/policy/Royal Statistical Society. (2014). Getstats – Statistical literacy for all. Author. Retrieved fromhttp://www.getstats.org.ukSCONUL. (2014). Shared and collaborative services strategy group. Author [Website]. Retrievedfrom http://www.sconul.ac.uk/page/shared-and-collaborative-services-strategy-groupSilver, C., & Woolf, N. (2015). From guided-instruction to facilitation of learning: Thedevelopment of ﬁve-level QDA as a CAQDAS pedagogy that explicates the practices ofexpert users. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 18, 527–543.Sloan, L. (2013). Innovation in the assessment of social science research methods, socialsciences blog. The Higher Education Academy. Retrieved from http://blogs.heacademy.558 L. Corti and V. Van den EyndenDownloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 ac.uk/social-sciences/2013/11/11/innovation-in-the-assessment-of-social-science-research-methods/Smith, E. (2008). Using secondary data in educational and social research. Oxford: OUPPress.Strayhorn, T. (2009). The (in)effectiveness of various approaches to teaching research meth-ods. In M. Garner, C. Wagner, & B. Kawulich (Eds.), Teaching research methods in thesocial sciences (pp. 119–130). Farnham: Ashgate Publishing Group.Trzesniewski, K., Donnellamn, B., & Lucas, R. (Eds.). (2011). Secondary data analysis: Anintroduction for psychologists. Washington, DC: APA.Turton, J. (2012). Getting sociology students into archived qualitative data. UK Data ServiceCase Study, University of Essex. Retrieved from http://ukdataservice.ac.uk/use-data/data-in-use/case-study/?id=107UK Data Service. (2014a). Case studies of re-use. Author [Website]. Retrieved from http://ukdataservice.ac.uk/use-data/data-in-use.aspxUK Data Service. (2014b). Prepare and manage data. Author [Website]. Retrieved fromhttp://ukdataservice.ac.uk/manage-dataUK Data Service. (2014c). Events at the UK Data Service. Author [Website]. Retrieved fromhttp://ukdataservice.ac.uk/news-and-events/events.aspxUniversity of Bristol. (2014). Data.bris. Author [Website]. Retrieved from http://data.bris.ac.uk/research/University of Edinburgh. (2014). Research data management guidance. Author [Website].Retrieved from http://www.ed.ac.uk/schools-departments/information-services/research-support/data-library/research-data-mgmtUniversity of Michigan. (2014). Social network analysis course. Coursera [Website].Retrieved from https://www.coursera.org/course/snaUniversity of Southampton. (2014). Web science: How the web is changing the world course.Author, FutureLearn [Website]. Retrieved from https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/web-science-2014-q3Urban Big Data Centre. (2014). Overview. Author [Website]. Retrieved from http://ubdc.ac.uk/Vartanian, T. (2010). Secondary data analysis. New York, NY: OUP.Vitae. (2013). Transforming professional development for researchers: Vitae achievementsand impact 2008–2012. Author [Website]. Retrieved from https://www.vitae.ac.uk/vitae-publications/reports/report-achievements-vitae-2008-2012.pdfWilliams, M., Payne, G., Hodgkinson, L., & Poole, D. (2008). Does British sociology count?Sociology students’ attitudes toward quantitative methods. Sociology, 42, 1003–1021.International Journal of Social Research Methodology 559Downloaded by [University of Essex] at 02:42 24 September 2015 