ABSTRACT: 
This paper investigates how political theorists and philosophers should understand egalitarian political demands in light of the increasingly important realist critique of much of contemporary political theory and philosophy. It suggests, first, that what Martin O'Neill has called non-intrinsic egalitarianism is, in one form at least, a potentially realistic egalitarian political project and second, that realists may be compelled to impose an egalitarian threshold on state claims to legitimacy under certain circumstances. Non-intrinsic egalitarianism can meet realism’s methodological requirements because it does not have to assume an unavailable moral consensus since it can focus on widely acknowledged bads rather than contentious claims about the good. Further, an appropriately formulated non-intrinsic egalitarianism may be a minimum requirement of an appropriately realistic claim by a political order to authoritatively structure some of its members' lives. Without at least a threshold set of egalitarian commitments, a political order seems unable to be transparent to many of its worse off members under a plausible construal of contemporary conditions. 
 
PREDICTION: 
based on the well - known fact that there is no commutation between the fundamental laws of nature and the laws of nature , there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of principle of the law of nature .<n> therefore , there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> this is one of the main reasons for the great success of the theory of equality .<n> however , there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> this is one of the main reasons for the great success of the theory of equality .<n> there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> there is no commutation between the principle of equality and the principle of the law of nature .<n> there is no commutation 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 The real value of equality Article Published Version Jubb, R. (2015) The real value of equality. The Journal of Politics, 77 (3). pp. 679­691. ISSN 0022­3816 doi: https://doi.org/10.1086/681262 Available at http://centaur.reading.ac.uk/43038/ It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the work. To link to this article DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/681262 Publisher: University of Chicago Press All outputs in CentAUR are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, including copyright law. Copyright and IPR is retained by the creators or other copyright holders. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in the End User Agreement . www.reading.ac.uk/centaur CentAUR Central Archive at the University of Reading Reading’s research outputs onlineThe Real Value of EqualityAuthor(s): Robert JubbSource: The Journal of Politics, Vol. 77, No. 3 (July 2015), pp. 679-691Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Southern Political ScienceAssociationStable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/681262 .Accessed: 24/09/2015 05:10Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp .JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range ofcontent in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new formsof scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. .The University of Chicago Press and Southern Political Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR todigitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Politics.http://www.jstor.org This content downloaded from 134.225.109.120 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMAll use subject to JSTOR Terms and ConditionsThe Real Value of EqualityRobert Jubb, University of LeicesterThis article investigates how political theorists and philosophers should understand egalitarian political demands inlight of the increasingly important realist critique of much of contemporary political theory and philosophy. It sug-or realists,gests, ﬁrst, that what Martin O’Neill has called non-intrinsic egalitarianism is, in one form at least, a potentially realis-tic egalitarian political project and, second, that realists may be compelled to impose an egalitarian threshold on stateclaims to legitimacy under certain circumstances. Non-intrinsic egalitarianism can meet realism’s methodological re-quirements because it does not have to assume an unavailable moral consensus since it can focus on widely acknowl-edged bads rather than contentious claims about the good. Further, an appropriately formulated non-intrinsic egali-tarianism may be a minimum requirement of an appropriately realistic claim by a political order to authoritativelystructure some of its members’ lives. Without at least a threshold set of egalitarian commitments, a political order seemsunable to be transparent to many of its worse-off members under a plausible construal of contemporary conditions.his article discusses the relation between the increas- tics is or the signiﬁcance of the goods it provides. FT ingly important realist critique of much contemporarypolitical theory and one of realism’s favorite targets— politics involves ﬁnding ways to live together despite deep andunresolvable moral disagreement, profound conﬂicts of inter-nationhe Lea commitment to high levels of material equality as in someway central for the acceptability of a political order. I make twomain claims about that relation. I argue ﬁrst that what MartinO’Neill has called non-intrinsic egalitarianism is, in one format least, a potentially realistic egalitarian political project and,second, that realists may be compelled to impose an egalitar-ian threshold on state claims to legitimacy under certain cir-cumstances. Non-intrinsic egalitarianism can meet realism’smethodological requirements because it does not have to as-sume an unavailable moral consensus since it can focus onwidely acknowledged bads rather than contentious claimsabout the good. Further, an appropriately formulated non-intrinsic egalitarianism may be a minimum requirement of anappropriately realistic claim by a political order to authorita-tively structure some of its members’ lives. Without at leasta threshold set of egalitarian commitments, a political orderseems unable to be transparent to many of its worse-off mem-bers under a plausible construal of contemporary conditions.Realists criticize the moralism they see as dominant in con-temporary political theory for failing to understand what poli-Robert Jubb, Lecturer in Political Theory, Department of Politics and InterUK; robert.jubb@leicester.ac.uk.This article was ﬁrst drafted during an Early Career Fellowship from t1. There have been a number of attacks on luck egalitarianism which do nothere. The most well-known of these is probably Anderson (1999). My own discThe Journal of Politics, volume 77, number 3. Published online April 14, 2015.q 2015 by the Southern Political Science Association. All rights reserved. 0022-This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Test, and an inability to consistently act morally (see, e.g., Rossiand Sleat 2014, 691). Politics is for them centrally concernedwith providing a civil order that is “sine qua non for everyother political good” (Galston 2010, 408). Views that assumeaway the problems that political institutions are supposed tosolve are not in fact political at all. For example, even propo-nents of luck egalitarianism—the view that equality requiresall and only outcomes derived from circumstance rather thanchoice to be equalized—recognize that luck egalitarianism landsus “up to our necks” in one of the most apparently intractableof philosophical problems, that of free will (Cohen 1989, 934).Using it as the basis of a political regime would require, at aminimum, either monolithic and unimaginably intrusive co-ercive state power or the kind of agreement on the metaphysicsof causation that is ruled by the continued existence of politicsas a sphere of human activity. In that sense, it is not a politicaldoctrine, whatever merits it may have as an account of how,ideally, we ought to relate to each other.1In cases like that of luck egalitarianism, realism’s caseseems robust. Such doctrines are simply not, in the relevantal Relations, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester LE1 7RH,verhulme Trust (ECF-2011-425).rely on the idea that it is not sufﬁciently political in the sense that I mean iussion of that debate can be found in Jubb (2011).http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/6812623816/2015/7703-0007$10.00 67920 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionstsense, political. Theories like luck egalitarianism assumelevels of moral agreement among those to whom they arechological resources. Here, I argue that, in their standardform, egalitarianisms of the sort Martin O’Neill has called680 / Real Value of Equality Robert Jubbsupposed to apply which would, independently of their ap-plication, remove the difﬁculties with which they are sup-posed to deal. Those theories’ failure to answer what Ber-nardWilliams called the “ﬁrst political question”means theyare, in Patrick Tomlin’s terms, circular recommendations(Tomlin 2012, 43 ff.; Williams 2005a). However, that real-ism can successfully show that some doctrines claiming to bepolitical philosophy are nothing of the sort does not meanwe know what we should use in their place. Realists focuson the goods of civil peace, and under which circumstancesand through which means it makes sense to try to achievethem. Developing a positive realist political theory then willdepend on how much and what sort of civil order we need,and so steering between a crude Hobbesian insistence thatmight is right and the moralistic demand that politicalpower realize the highest moral ideals, whether we can agreeon what those are or not.In this article, I explore one aspect of that question byconsidering the issue of how egalitarian realism can andshould be. Realists have typically been resistant to the focusin contemporary political philosophy on questions of dis-tributive justice, urging that the more properly politicalquestion of legitimacy must at least come ﬁrst.2 The elabo-rate and highly articulated egalitarian commitments of the-orists like G. A. Cohen or Ronald Dworkin are often rightlyseen as exactly the sort of thing against which realists warn.Still, I will argue that certain egalitarian commitments are com-patible with realism’s emphasis on legitimacy and, more, maybe required by it. Realists should reject egalitarianisms whoseimplementation depends on achieving levels of self-sacriﬁceor moral agreement that would radically alter the kind ofpolitical authorities to which we are subject. Demanding thatwe live according to a principle of community that requiresus to serve others for the sake of serving them and not forour own purposes, as G. A. Cohen (2009) does, for example,is clearly ruled out. It asks for too much both in terms of mo-tivation and of acceptance of controversial philosophical ide-als to make sense as a political prescription.However, not all egalitarianisms present in contemporarypolitical philosophy make those sorts of demands. In orderto be acceptable to realists, an egalitarianism has to make useof justiﬁcatory resources that acknowledge the ubiquity ofmoral disagreement and conﬂicts of interest in politics. Itmust draw on a more circumscribed set of moral and psy-2. Enzo Rossi (2012) has even argued that moralist theories cannotapply their own prescriptions of justice without ﬁrst having a theory oflegitimacy .This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tnon-intrinsic are compatible with the realist emphasis oncontaining rather than imagining away disagreement (2008).Non-intrinsic egalitarianisms’ calls for high levels of materialequality are based on widely experienced and understoodharms of status, and so in general this class of egalitarian-ism does not require moral resources on which it is un-realistic to expect political orders to be able to draw. Difﬁ-culties emerge when either the egalitarianism makes appealto a positive moral ideal, or in circumstances where the con-stituencies for such egalitarianism have been marginalized,split, or attempt to satisfy their demands for self-respectin other ways. The ﬁrst of these difﬁculties can easily beavoided though, and whether the second applies is a matterof political judgment that I am not best-placed to make.At the level of generality with which I am concerned, non-intrinsic egalitarianism is compatible with realism.Indeed, some form of non-intrinsic egalitarianism maybe required if we understand the criteria for legitimacy in theway at least one realist suggests we should around here andnow. There are, at least for Bernard Williams, two waysthat a political order can fail to be legitimate. As examplesof what politics is supposed to replace, some political ordersdo not really deserve that name. They involve not the pro-vision of civil order but “one lot of people terrorizing an-other lot of people” (Williams 2005a, 5). As Williams putsit, one lot of people terrorizing another lot of people is nota “political situation” but “rather, the situation which theexistence of the political is in ﬁrst place supposed to alle-viate” (5). Slavery and the relationship between the Spar-tans and the Helots, Williams claims, fail to reach thisstandard. Yet an order may not be an example of “inter-nalized warfare” and still fail to be legitimate (5). WhatWilliams called the ﬁrst political question may be Hobbes’s,but as he notes, that does not mean that we have to takeHobbes’s answer for it to be adequate (4). A political orderis not legitimate simply because it is a political order andnot merely a particularly successful protection racket orother form of “successful domination” (5). Avoiding treat-ing groups of those over whom the state presumes a rightto command as nothing more than recalcitrant instrumentsis not enough to vindicate that claim to authority. Politicalorders must make sense to those over whom they claimauthority, and when we interpret what that implies for usin a certain way, that rules out political orders with the kindsof hierarchies against which non-intrinsic egalitarianism in-veighs. Such orders do not provide those at the bottom of thehierarchies they create with an adequate return on their sub-mission to them and so fail to be legitimate for them. Indeed,20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsrealists’ commitment to a minimally egalitarian claim that au-thorities need to attempt to justify themselves to those overothers advocate to make sense to and avoid placing toomuchmotivational stress on agents like us, with our conﬂictsVolume 77 Number 3 July 2015 / 681whom they claim authority turns out, in particular circum-stances at least, to have more substantive conclusions thantheymight expect.NON-INTRINSIC EGALITARIANISM AS APOLITICAL DOCTRINEThe term non-intrinsic egalitarianism was coined by Mar-tin O’Neill to cover a range of egalitarian positions. Whatdistinguishes non-intrinsic egalitarian positions is that theircommitment to the value of distributive equality is neitherweakly instrumental nor intrinsic. Rather than valuing moreequal holdings of goods because such a distribution is ameans to an end or because it is valuable in and of itself,non-intrinsic egalitarians value it because of a set of socialrelations to which it is closely connected. High levels of dis-tributive equality are required to avoid “the badness of ser-vility, exploitation, domination, and differences in status”(2008, 130).3 It is a “deep social fact,” O’Neill claims, thatgreater equality of condition will typically be both necessaryand sufﬁcient to avoid “domination and stigmatizing dif-ferences in status . . . offensive to the dignity and standingof human agents” (130). Five related kinds of harms that acollection of broadly egalitarian political theorists and moralphilosophers mention as motivating their egalitarianism clus-ter in such a way that removing or reducing differences in in-come and wealth will reliably act to prevent them.4 Althoughof course there are other interesting issues raised by O’Neill’sdiscussion, the question here is whether non-intrinsic egali-tarianism is compatible with a realist emphasis on the un-avoidability of disagreement in politics. In the remainder ofthis section, I suggest that realists can be non-intrinsic egali-tarians as long as some presentational changes are made andsome satisfactory answers to a range of mainly empiricalquestions about the political possibilities genuinely open tous can be found.A non-intrinsic egalitarianism will be vulnerable to attackby realists if its justiﬁcation and implementation dependon moral or psychological resources unavailable in the cir-cumstances of politics generally or the political situationin which its particular audience ﬁnd themselves. Can wereasonably expect the kinds of political orders O’Neill and3. Like O’Neill, I ignore demands for equality associated with absolutedeprivation, since equality is, after all, about your position related to thatof others.4. O’Neill (2010) discusses the relation of non-intrinsic egalitarianismto recent social epidemiology, which similarly suggests that the harms ofinequality cluster and are at root related to status hierarchies.This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tof interest, differing visions of the good life, and inability toconsistently govern ourselves through reason alone? Clearly,agents much like us have lived and do live in societies withmuch higher levels of material equality than are currentlyexperienced in, for example, the United Kingdom or the UnitedStates. The concentration of income and wealth among therichest in these societies is higher than most other similarlyeconomically developed states and signiﬁcantly higher thanin a cluster of such states in Northern Europe, while there hasa been a trend toward higher inequality among more or lessall such states since the mid-1980s (see, e.g., OECD 2011).Unless we are to believe that Swedes were particularly saintlyor oppressed in the 30 or so years after WorldWar II, there isno reason to think that non-intrinsic egalitarianism as suchfails to meet Bernard Williams’s criteria of using “defensiblepolitical power” to apply “aspirations for equality and a senseof community . . . to a world which is signiﬁcantly drivenby other sorts of motivations” (1997, 57). A political orderthat avoids domination and status hierarchies, and the ser-vility, lack of self-respect, and mutual indifference and evenhostility that go with them through high levels of materialequality does not require members whose altruism is beyondthat of which humans are typically capable. Equally, suchan order does not have to rely on coercive police power tosustain itself but can, in spite of their differences, rest on itscitizens’ acceptance of the way it structures their relations.In themost general terms then, as long asO’Neill’s deep socialfact holds, non-intrinsic egalitarianism articulates a politicaldemand in a way that G. A. Cohen’s demand that our politicalcommunities must realize a profoundly self-sacriﬁcing prin-ciple of community does not.However, the details of the claims that non-intrinsicegalitarians make matter. O’Neill tends to present the viewas drawing on “a complex social and political ideal of howpeople should best live together,” which then provides an“account of the plurality of ways in which inequality can bebad” (2008, 139). “A complex social and political ideal ofhow people should best live together” will, though, becauseof its complexity and ambition, inevitably be subject to ex-tensive disagreement in the circumstances of politics. Ratherthan a mechanism to contain disagreement to provide civilorder and the accompanying peace and security, it assertsthe superiority of a particular vision of the good life andbases a political order around it, ignoring its unacceptabil-ity to many of that order’s members and the risk its ascen-dancy poses to civil order. Putting it in Rawlsian rather thanconventionally realist terms, as an account of how best tolive together, its comprehensiveness will make it subject to20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsthe burdens of judgment and mean it is not available as thebasis of an overlapping consensus. Under what Rawls calledand economic inequalities” are “serious evils and the atti-tudes they engender great vices” and only then goes on to682 / Real Value of Equality Robert Jubb“the fact of oppression,” it would require “the oppressive useof state power” to serve as the basis of a political community(2005, 37).Rather than O’Neill’s perfectionist non-intrinsic egalitar-ianism, it would be better to instead emphasize the way thatnon-intrinsic egalitarianism links together a set of widelyunderstood and acknowledged harms to form a case forhigh levels of material equality. In political terms at least, the“badness of servility, exploitation, domination, and differ-ences in status” is not best “understood by virtue of the con-trasting value of certain kinds of fraternal, egalitarian so-cial relations” (2008, 130). Much as the liberalism of fearis founded on “the only certainly universal materials of pol-itics . . . power, powerlessness, fear, cruelty,” non-intrinsicegalitarianism should be seen as based on avoiding forc-ing people into positions of degradation that it is easy to agreeare wrong or undesirable (Williams 2005b, 59). Humiliation,craven behaviour, invidious hierarchies of esteem, and thelike are bad in a variety of ways. Those who suffer them tendnot to like them and to be made unhappy by them. Bothbecause of the dissatisfaction and even misery that accom-panies them and because of the way they subordinate someto others and so fail to respect their agency, status inequal-ities can also be seen as attacks on human dignity. Evenmore, the experience of being treated as less than others alsoseems to be bad for human health in general, as the stress ofbeing the tool of another and so having conﬁdence in yourown abilities undermined appears to have damaging effectsfor the cardiovascular system in particular (see Marmot2004; O’Neill 2010). At least in political terms, the ideal issupported by the badness of what it avoids, rather than theother way round. We cannot expect enough agreement onan egalitarian ideal for it to make sense of a political orderto that order’s members, while it at least seems reasonableto hope that they may accept an order’s explanation in termsof the harms against which it aims to protect them.In this sense, to be acceptable to realists, non-intrinsicegalitarianism should be described as a negative ideal, withits appeal based on what it prevents. Although this is nothow O’Neill presents the view, it is more faithful to thetheorists whose views he is trying to reconstruct as well asappropriately political. Typically, one of the works O’Neillrefers to in characterizing non-intrinsic egalitarianism iscalled “The Diversity of Objections to Inequality” (2008,122, n. 10).5 A long passage O’Neill approvingly quotes fromRawls, for example, ﬁrst observes that the “effects of social5. The reference is to Scanlon (2003).This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tdiscuss how these problems can be remedied by a norm ofequal citizenship favouring distributive mechanisms whichonly allow beneﬁts when all receive them (O’Neill 2008,126; Rawls 2001, 130–32). Similarly, Rousseau’s Discourseon the Origins of Inequality, which both Rawls and O’Neillacknowledge as inﬂuential, seems better characterized as con-cerned with avoiding harm than realizing an ideal (O’Neill2008, 129; Rawls 2001, 131, n. 50). The human desire forstanding in the eyes of others is terrible because, left un-checked, it generates a crippling and debasing obsessionwith our position in various rankings that which can neversatisfy any but those at their very top and continually feedscycles of violence and domination (Rousseau [1750/1755]1997a, 130–222). Amour-propre must be controlled not be-cause doing so will achieve the ultimate good, but becauseotherwise little or nothing of any real value will exist.This also changes the role of O’Neill’s deep social factconnecting equality of status and equality of condition.Rather than forming an especially strong connection be-tween material equality and a complex social ideal, the deepsocial fact now has to form such a connection between ma-terial equality and the avoidance of various widely agreedupon harms. This seems to have two beneﬁts. First, whereasdifferent goods tend to exclude each other, particularly themore fully they are realized, so that, for example, a life ofcontrol and moderation may not be very open to new ex-periences, these harms are connected and tend to clustertogether. A low status leads to being dominated, which leadsto being servile, which undermines conﬁdence in judgmentand capacities. Evidence presented in favour of the deepsocial fact is consequently more widely acceptable and lessvulnerable to challenges about its relevance to the valuesthat are expected to be achieved. The question of conﬂictbetween equality and liberty, for example, is more difﬁcultto raise because being dominated is straightforwardly badfor both.Second, and relatedly, there is social scientiﬁc evidencesuggesting that greater material equality does connect insomething like the relevant way to avoiding harms. RichardWilkinson and Kate Pickett show high levels of correlationbetween a wide range of harms and income inequality inThe Spirit Level, arguing that this is explained by the effectthat income inequality has on status hierarchies, which thencause the poor outcomes correlated with income inequality(2009). Although they are able to correlate higher levels oftrust with income equality, higher levels of trust alone donot count as realization of an egalitarian ideal. The deep so-cial fact establishing the relation between non-intrinsic egal-20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsitarianism as a negative ideal is better established than theanalogous claim in non-intrinsic egalitarianism presented assacriﬁce oneself in pursuit of it may be connected to variouskinds of excellences, which we would rather not our soci-Volume 77 Number 3 July 2015 / 683a positive ideal.Negative non-intrinsic egalitarianism has a range of ad-vantages over positive non-intrinsic egalitarianism then, par-ticularly in terms of its ﬁt with realism as I understand it. Itis appropriately political, not drawing on unavailable moralagreement, and has better grounded claims about the rela-tion between particular social forms and the values it tries toachieve, as well as plausibly being a more accurate charac-terization of the relevant tradition. In particular, not relyingon controversial claims about what is desirable about cer-tain states of affairs or valuable in human life makes it com-patible with realism’s general emphasis on the importanceof disagreement in understanding politics. Realism is not justabout the character of politics in general though. It also em-phasizes the importance of situated reasoning, which drawson the resources for containing disagreement found in par-ticular circumstances (see, e.g., Rossi and Sleat 2014, 694).There are no political agents in the abstract, only concreteones in particular situations, so unless non-intrinsic egali-tarianism can show that it responds to the details of a realsituation, it will still be faced with the question of for whatand whom it is. Wilkinson and Pickett suggest that the egal-itarianism they advocate can respond to worries about thedisappearance of community and high levels of acquisitive-ness and alienation, but there are at least three worries aboutwhether it represents a real option here and now.These are complex issues with which I do not have thespace to deal here, and to which solutions will most probablyrequire collaboration with scholars with other kinds of ex-pertise. However, even if I cannot do more than gesture inthe direction of answers to the following three worries, itseems worth raising them for at least two reasons. The ﬁrstof these is that the identiﬁcation of problems and what so-lutions to them might look like is one of the services onemight hope that political theorists and philosophers wouldprovide to their colleagues. The second is to be open aboutthe limits of what I hope to have done with the argumentsI have made here. It would be dishonest to pretend that Ihave met all the demands that realists might properly makeof an egalitarian political theory simply by showing thatit can deal with conﬂict and disagreement in the abstract.With these caveats in mind, then, let me point in the di-rection of what I cannot do here.First, there is a concern about non-intrinsic egalitarian-ism’s costs. One of the symptoms of the degrading strugglefor status Rousseau found in the societies around him wasan urge “to renounc[e] life in order to acquire immortality”([1762] 1997a, 187). That desire for glory and willingness toThis content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Teties were without, or which we need for our lives to bemeaningful. Perhaps without damaging competition overstatus, we would lose a sense of the importance of somevery great goods which can exclude other values from andeven be destructive for individual human lives. Relatedly,the desire to distinguish oneself may also be linked to in-egalitarian societies by fostering and ﬂourishing in an en-vironment of pluralism. It is clear that Rousseau’s viewthat Corsica was the only European nation capable of livingunder a genuine social contract was in part motivated byworries about the sophistication and diversity of other Eu-ropean societies (1997b, 78 (2.10.6)). Relatively simple so-cieties are more capable of containing disputes over statusbecause there are fewer ways of differentiating oneself andso less opportunity to attempt to gain advantage by open-ing up a new mode of distinction. Certainly the history ofegalitarian societies suggests that homogeneity and so ex-clusivity may be important. Declining levels of equality inSweden partly coincide with the growth of immigrationfrom non-Nordic countries and so increases in ethnic andcultural pluralism, for example (see, e.g., OECD 2011, ﬁg. 1;Swedish Integration Board 2006, 19). Equally, Bernard Wil-liams suggests that the solidarity among those who strug-gled for the British welfare state may have been related totheir “xenophobia, brutality and sexism,” that without thatintolerance he claims was present in, for example, a tradeunion movement based around the often very male worldof the industrial working class, the strong demands for ma-terial equality might have fallen away (1997, 55). The costsof equality may not, then, be ones that we should pay.Second, there is the question of whether, politically andeconomically, high levels of material equality are possible.There are two problems here. First, there is the issue ofwhether, in the course of normal politics, the beneﬁciaries ofan egalitarian politics can dominate the domestic politicalscene to the extent necessary to restructure the content anddistribution of property rights. Even if the challenge of over-coming domestic barriers to egalitarianism can be over-come, there is then the further, if not entirely separate,worry of whether implementing egalitarian policies will notmake a society uncompetitive internationally and so be eco-nomically unsustainable. Wilkinson and Pickett point tohigh levels of trade union membership as one of the stron-gest drivers of high levels of material equality, yet unionmembership has been declining through much of the de-veloped world under the inﬂuence both of political assaultsand the decline of the traditional heavy and nationalizedindustries it thrived in (2009, 245). They also mention the20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsrole of crises in creating moments of political opportunityfor egalitarians, but it seems that recent crises have typicallynon-intrinsic egalitarianism is not only compatible with,but may be required by, realism in political theory. If non-means states can never be full legitimate for realists.684 / Real Value of Equality Robert Jubbundermined, rather than strengthened, egalitarian politicalforces. Despite the recent success of Syrzia in Greece, at thetime of writing, for example, only two of the membersof the G7 have governments led by members of straight-forwardly left-wing parties. One of these, the Prime Min-ister of Italy, Matteo Renzi, is anyway from the ChristianDemocrat wing of his Democratic Party, while the other,the French President Francois Hollande, is spectacularlyunpopular. The increasing opening-up of domestic econo-mies to international markets, perhaps particularly in ﬁ-nance, may well have signiﬁcantly undermined the scopefor domestic equality.Third, non-intrinsic egalitarianism will have to makesense as a way of responding to the concerns of its beneﬁ-ciaries. Wilkinson and Pickett try to argue that material equalitybeneﬁts everyone, but the evidence here is unclear, even inthe strongest case of poor health (see, e.g., Sreenivasan 2009),and even if it were not, the persistence of voting blocks againsthigh levels of material equality suggests that plenty of peoplevalue dominating others more than they disvalue being dom-inated themselves. In the United Kingdom, support for mea-sures to decrease material inequality is falling with the poorlyoff increasingly seen as feckless and responsible for their ownfate (see Hills et al. 2009). Contemporary political conscious-ness seems to stigmatize various out-groups instead of focusingon the material inequalities which trouble non-intrinsic egali-tarians. It is not obvious then that there is a political constitu-ency for non-intrinsic egalitarianism, perhaps in part becauseof the political and economic changes that have made it moredifﬁcult for those intended as its constituency to collectivelyexercise self-determination.It may be, of course, that an egalitarian society does nothave to be boring or illiberal, that imaginative political ac-tors are capable of gathering a dominant political coalitionbehind the demand to realize one, and that the economicand political environment is less hostile than often supposedto achieving that goal. Rather than trying to assess the extentto which these are realistic possibilities here and now,I merely point to a range of difﬁculties that non-intrinsicegalitarianism faces in our particular historical situation.My main concern in this section, after all, has been to showthat at a suitably abstract and general level, non-intrinsicegalitarianism can meet realism’s methodological demands.It does not have to rely on a set of justiﬁcatory resourcesthat the mere fact of politics will necessarily deny to it as,unfortunately, many other prominent forms of contempo-rary philosophical egalitarianism do. Having shown that, Inow want to move on to consider is the question of whetherThis content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tintrinsic egalitarianism is required, then realists themselvesmay be compelled to take up the challenges that contempo-rary conditions present it or face their theory condemningitself as unrealistic given anyone who might be reasonablytaken as an audience.NON-INTRINSIC EGALITARIANISMAS A LEGITIMACY CONDITIONRealism standardly requires that a political order aims, ifeven it may not always succeed, at explaining itself to all thosewhom it purports to govern (see Hall 2013).6 It has to try toanswer Hobbes’s ﬁrst political question of “the securing oforder, protection, safety, trust, and the conditions of cooper-ation” in a way that makes sense for all those over whom itclaims authority (Williams 2005a, 5). A political order whoseanswer to that question is rejected by too many of those itexpects to recognize its right to rule lacks that right to ruleover them. This may well leave the political order’s authorityover its other members fully intact, but equally, its failure toadequately explain itself to all its members may imperil theexplanation it offers to some towhom itwould otherwisemakesense.The inability to satisfy a dissidentminority seems tohavebeen part of what brought down the former Warsaw Pact re-gimes, for example. Their failure was not, I think, a failure ofthe sort BernardWilliams claims was involved in the Spartan’srule over the Helots. That was, onWilliams’s account, no kindof political order at all, really. As I notedwhen ﬁrstmentioningWilliams’s comments about the Spartans and the Helots, apolitical order is not automatically legitimate simply because itis a political order and not a particularly persistent form ofextortion. There need to be other criteria, criteria of the sortthat perhaps we might see the formerWarsaw Pact regimes ashaving ceased tomeet once they fell. Here I argue these criteriainclude avoidance of at least some of the harms that non-intrinsic egalitarianism aims at avoiding. At least under con-temporary conditions, a political order that routinely subjectssome of its members to the kinds of status harms on whichnon-intrinsic egalitarianism focuses cannot offer the objectsof that disrespect a full explanation of why they ought to ac-cept it. Or so I will claim.It is important that my question is about social ordersaround here and now. Indeed, as we will see, one issue forthe argument I make is how to describe and decide whatcounts as “around here and now.” For realists, moralism’s6. Matt Sleat (2014) has suggested that it is impossible for a politicalorder to offer a satisfactory explanation to all its members, and that this20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsuniversalist ambitions are problematic, since they preventit from addressing difﬁculties anyone actually faces by re-tration of aspirations those lacking a full status could havemet, had they not been denied that status. If the hierarchyVolume 77 Number 3 July 2015 / 685quiring it to ignore the particularities of the situation inor for which it is formulated. Political situations could notbe entirely sui generis and still be grouped together underthe same label, but they are different enough to require re-sponses to be distinctive if they are to make sense. A struc-ture for organizing their lives together that would be ap-propriate for groups living in precolonial Papua New Guineais unlikely to seem persuasive in the United Kingdom todayand vice versa. Focusing on the speciﬁcs of a given contexttherefore matters. That focus also avoids certain kinds ofdifﬁculties. Consider Rousseau’s Second Discourse and thephilosophical anthropology it provides. Amour-propre hasto be a universal human characteristic which, at least whencombined with certain widespread technological and socialdevelopments, necessarily generates extremely destructivecompetition over status.7 Such an account faces a weightyburden of proof, since it aspires to be true of all peopleeverywhere. On the other hand, a more contextual accountdoes not need to consider anything like the same range ofevidence, even if its judgments may have to be correspond-ingly more ﬁne-grained.My case for realism needing to be comparatively stronglyegalitarian around here and now depends on an argumentabout modernity and its character whose political impor-tance Bernard Williams stressed throughout his career,from when he ﬁrst he made it in his 1962 article, “The Ideaof Equality,” up until the very end of his career. The emer-gence of the idea that someone’s “role in society is itself insome part the product of social arrangements,” that it isnot “somehow foreordained or inevitable that there shouldbe these orders,” alters the ways that strongly hierarchicalsocieties can be justiﬁed (2005c, 105). After the emergenceof that idea, such societies can no longer be seen as satis-factory from what Williams called the “human point ofview,” which is “concerned primarily with what it is forthat person to live that life,” rather than, say, merely theroles and titles they occupy (103). In the absence of suchan idea, a strongly hierarchical society could sustain itself“without compulsion” and retain “human understanding”between the classes into which it divided its members, sincethat division would be unavoidable and so not a sensible fo-cus of resentment (104). Once such a view spreads, however,markedly unequal membership becomes a deliberate frus-7. See, e.g., Rousseau (1997a), where he says that “iron and wheatcivilized men, and ruined Mankind,” and native Americans did not sufferfrom the pathologies of corrupt amour-propre precisely because theylacked agriculture and metallurgy (168).This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tis to be maintained without naked compulsion, it must beby preventing others from coming to see the necessitiesthey have structured their lives around are nothing of thesort, and that they have been systematically deluded. Thisis not acceptable from the human point of view, not evento those who beneﬁt from or favour the hierarchy. Re-ﬂecting on one’s role in society and understanding it notas divinely ordered or in some other way required makessystematic inequality unacceptable, at least from a prettyminimally moral perspective.Williams’s references there to “a sentimental picture ofthe Middle Ages” make it clear that this “reﬂective con-sciousness” was something he thought his contemporariescertainly had but those who lived earlier perhaps did not(2005c, 105). Likewise, in Ethics and the Limits of Philos-ophy, for example, he says that the extent of our “urge toreﬂective understanding of society and our activities” makesrecreating the “supposedly contented hierarchical societiesof the past” impossible “since measures would have to betaken to stop people raising questions that are, by now,there to be raised” (2011, 181–82). The reference to Weberand disenchantment he makes there is repeated in Realismand Moralism in Political Theory, while an obviously sim-ilar distinctively post-Enlightenment attitude toward truthis central to the political consequences of a commitment toit in Truth and Truthfulness (Williams 2002, 231; 2005a, 9;2011, 183). The most important of those consequences hereis that “the “legitimations” of hierarchical states are per-ceived to be mythical” (Williams 2005a, 7), and that theirjustiﬁcation from the human point of view requires polit-ical orders to be transparent in the way that JeremyWaldronhas argued is foundational for liberalism (1987; Williams2005a, 9). Consequently, modern political orders must beliberal to be legitimate.For Williams at least then, a central feature of modernityis that it has destroyed the possibility of justiﬁcations ofsocial and political order which rest on treating that or-der as anything but a human construction. A major conse-quence of this is that the demands on explanations andjustiﬁcations of those orders have increased. Raising “ex-pectations of what a state can do” by making the social or-der it sustains a matter of human choice generates “moredemanding standards” for an acceptable answer to the ﬁrstpolitical question (2005a, 7). Hierarchies will now be thesubject of resentment, and that resentment must be ad-dressed in terms those who have it can understand. Mem-bers of societies’ hopes and ambitions may now range be-yond the social and political position they happen to occupy,20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsand they can sensibly demand an explanation when thatposition stiﬂes or frustrates them (2005c, 104). This expla-(2005, xxi ff.). That principle states that “political power isfully proper only when it is exercised in accordance with a686 / Real Value of Equality Robert Jubbnation must address them in something like their terms,since an order beyond human understanding can no longerbe taken for granted and explanations that do not makesense to them can and will be rejected. The obverse of dis-enchantment’s removal of a certain kind of explanation ofhierarchy is the thinning out of the material that legiti-mations can draw on by increasing the range of people andperspectives to which they must be accessible. Certain hi-erarchies cease to be acceptable, and the barriers to justify-ing any political system are raised.Obviously, there is a question about the accuracy ofWilliams’s account, both of modernity and of its conse-quences. Both the temporal and the geographical bound-aries of modernity have to be drawn very tightly to captureonly states whose populations will not accept them unlessthey are liberal. Modernity will clearly not include, for ex-ample, the former Warsaw Pact states before the fall of theBerlin Wall, let alone rising powers like China. Williams’saccount must be more parochial than it seems to claim.8Still, it does seem true that in the North Atlantic demo-cratic states with which Williams was familiar, from theend of World War II and so for all his adult life, a basicallyliberal consensus of the sort he seems to have had in mindprevailed. Political hierarchies among citizens based on raceor gender have at least usually needed a surface justiﬁcationin terms that are ostensibly open to all, for example. Re-stricting my discussion to those North Atlantic democracies,as in effect much Anglophone political theory and philos-ophy anyway does, it seems reasonable to accept the set ofconstraints Williams sees as characterizing modernity asbearing on the discussion here.9 How egalitarian are therequirements of the demand that political orders be trans-parent generated by the human point of view and disen-chantment?One way of understanding the transparency require-ment would be to contrast it with Rawls’s liberal princi-ple of legitimacy, another egalitarian norm of transparentpolitical justiﬁcation allegedly appropriate for modernity8. I owe being pressed on this point to both Matt Sleat and ananonymous referee.9. I am not sure what exactly to say about the scope of Williams’saccount of modernity. It may well rule out teleological ideologies likeMarxism because of the way in which they can appear deterministic. Thatmay seem an odd implication of an account of modernity. My argumenthere is meant to be conditional on Williams’s account of modernity beingaccurate in at least the places I suggest it is. Whether it is a satisfactoryaccount of modernity and what it implies about other societies is beyondthe scope of my inquiry here.This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tconstitution the essentials of which all citizens as free andequal may reasonably be expected to endorse in light ofprinciples and ideals acceptable to their common humanreason” (137). States that do not keep to the terms the prin-ciple lays out lack authority. A realist demand for transpar-ency will of course reject the idea that endorsement needs tobe “in light of principles and ideal acceptable to commonhuman reason,” since moral and other disagreement will makethat unlikely, if not impossible. A realist principle of trans-parency will therefore, presumably unsurprisingly, be lessdemanding and less moralistic than Rawls’s liberal princi-ple of legitimacy.However, that does not mean that realists can dismissthe kinds of alienation produced by the status harms whichmotivate negative non-intrinsic egalitarianism as irrelevantto political legitimacy. We have already seen that drawingon the badness of humiliation and domination does notrequire moral or psychological resources realists take to benecessarily unavailable in political situations, as, for ex-ample it seems likely the duty of civility Rawls derives fromhis principle of legitimacy does (2005, 217). The question isnot whether the harms that non-intrinsic egalitarianism triesto avoid necessarily imply elaborate moral theorizing thatcannot be the basis of properly political solutions and com-promises. We know they do not. The question is rather whetherthose harms are serious enough that their victims cannotsensibly regard their political order as having provided themwith the beneﬁts of peace and security, at least on terms theycan understand and at a cost they can accept. Which kindsof harms might be serious enough to do that?Here, the human point of view becomes central. Living alife from the inside gives us certain criteria for assessingcomplaints members of an order might make against it.From that perspective, the avoidable, systematic frustrationor stiﬂing of ambitions, the cramping of a life, is unaccept-able. This is Williams’s point about “sentimental picturesof the Middle Ages.” Once the legitimations provided fortheir hierarchies come to seem mythological, or worse, ideo-logical, it becomes impossible to endorse them from thehuman point of view since they depend, if not on bruteforce, on most of their members being dupes of the re-mainder. Sympathy for and identiﬁcation with another’shopes and aspirations is not, for long at least, compatiblewith interactions governed by overwhelming threat advan-tage or conducted from behind an enchanter’s cloak. A so-cial structure that is sustained only by coercive power ormass delusion cannot claim to be concerned with the in-dividual lives of its members since it crushes or distorts so20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsmany of them. Unless a political order treats its membersas entitled to an opportunity for a life that is governed onrather than a failure for which the agent themselves is re-sponsible, for example.Volume 77 Number 3 July 2015 / 687their terms, then it will not be justiﬁable from the humanpoint of view and so will fail to be legitimate, at least underWilliams’s conditions of modernity. Basic respect for indi-vidual agency is required by a realist principle of transpar-ency because such respect is a requirement of the humanpoint of view.Egalitarian requirements will be included as part of arealist account of legitimacy, then, if they fall under thecriteria of basic respect for individual agency. The require-ments of negative non-intrinsic egalitarianism seem well-placed here. One way of understanding the harms thategalitarianism tries to forestall and avoid is to see them asassaults on the dignity of individual agents with their ownlives to lead. Domination involves one person dictatinganother’s choices. Servility panders to an oppressor in orderto soften but never loosen their grip. Both are produced bystatus hierarchies, which, at least when steep and ubiqui-tous enough, are themselves public proclamations of the in-signiﬁcance and unimportance of those further down them.That the harms with which negative non-intrinsic egalitarian-ism is concerned are of the right type to matter for whethera political order can be endorsed from the human pointof view is not enough though. To be incorporated into arealist account of legitimacy, those harms must be seriousenough to systematically frustrate or constrict the ambi-tions of those who suffer from them. If they do so, they willclose off the possibility that the system and the way it dis-tributes its costs and beneﬁts could make sense to the victimsof those harms. Although they will acknowledge they live ina political order, they will tend to see it as an alien and ex-ploitative force.Measuring the gravity of harms inﬂicted by a social sys-tem is obviously partly an empirical matter. For example,Wilkinson and Pickett’s claim that violence is correlatedwith levels of income inequality, serving there as a proxy forthe gradient of class hierarchies, seems to suggest there isa correlation between sufﬁciently low status and a level ofalienation such that massive breaches of the political order’sostensible structure seem appropriate (2009, 129–44). Awillingness to commit massive breaches of the political or-der’s ostensible structure is in turn suggestive of it havingsystematically frustrated or constricted ambitions in a waythat gives the lie to its claim to authority. As well as thatempirical evidence, though, we need a philosophical frame-work in which it can be placed. We cannot be sure what doesand does not count as systematic frustration or constric-tion of ambitions without having at least a grasp on thequestion of why something is a frustration or constrictionThis content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR TAn idea of reciprocity can, it seems, do the work here.Reciprocity requires that beneﬁts taken are shared or re-paid. Unlike reliance on naked coercion or systematic de-ception, features of a political order that paradigmaticallycause it to fail to be acceptable to all its members, reci-procity treats others not as obstacles to be pushed or re-shaped until they ﬁt our plans but as fellow agents. Whenwe act toward another reciprocally, we treat them as enti-tled to a return for the beneﬁts we have been able to derivefrom them and so as having projects of their own of whichwe must take note. Reciprocity is characteristic of the hu-man point of view then. It operates with the notion of a fairexchange or return that assistance or forbearance is dueand so takes the sacriﬁces they involve seriously. Operatingwith such an idea of fair exchange is a kind of respect foragency since it requires that other’s projects are treatedwith respect, not as mere instruments. Because politicalorders are not voluntary, they cannot rely on their mem-bers having chosen to be treated in a particular way toground a claim to respect them as having lives of theirown to lead. Instead, their treatment must be appropriateon its own terms. It must be reciprocal or, to put it nega-tively, not be exploitative. Hierarchies that share their ben-eﬁts among their members are, in this sense at least, accept-able from the human point of view. It is, after all, preciselybecause the beneﬁts of hierarchies that no longer seem fore-ordained appear to be directed entirely toward those at thetop that those hierarchies cease to be acceptable from thehuman point of view.As this observation shows, judgments of reciprocitymust be relative to some kind of baseline. In the now-ideological hierarchy, the baseline for judgments of reci-procity has shifted from one where receiving your due ac-cording to God’s plan is a beneﬁt to one where it is not,because God’s plan no longer dictates your role. It wouldnot make sense then to judge a set of hierarchies reciprocalsimply because the more powerful do not ruthlessly exploitor oppress the weak, or because they are better off than in theabsence of any political order at all. That those criteria aremet simply shows that this is a political situation, that is not asituation like that of the Spartans and the Helots, and so thata political order is being provided at all. Political orders are notreciprocal and so acceptable from the human point of viewsimply because they are political orders. The baseline chosenhas to reﬂect this and so cannot treat the basic goods of or-der that make systematic mutually beneﬁcial interaction pos-sible as beneﬁts. These goods must be guaranteed. Under abroadly liberal political consciousness like ours, these presum-20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsably include the basic freedoms of person, movement, andspeech and action the liberalism of fear focuses on.breath we insist on our agnosticism about the differentlives we all lead while with the next we proclaim some worse12. The British Crime Survey suggests that 6 in 1,000 working ageomen in the United Kingdom were seriously sexually assaulted in 2010/1 (Chaplin et al. 2011, 66, table 3.02) and there are nearly 21 million such688 / Real Value of Equality Robert JubbThe issue for the inclusion of an egalitarian threshold inrealist accounts of legitimacy is what counts as a fair returnover that baseline. For people like us, accepting the persistenceof reasonable and irreconcilable disagreement about thesources of value in human life and that interests do not haveto be malign to clash or compete, access to those beneﬁts isenough to demonstrate a fair return. We cannot be surewhich speciﬁc opportunities count as beneﬁts, given ourdiversity, so tend to defer to those who are to receive themto judge whether they are a fair return on their submissionto authority. Typically, it would be paternalistic of us toassume that the plan of life someone followed had resultedin the systematic frustration or constriction of their ambi-tions, that for them, it was empty and so no return on theiracceptance of the claims of others. We would not have givenproper respect to them. In this sense, our understanding of thefair return relevant to the legitimacy of political ordersis relatively minimal.10However, this realist principle of transparency has, de-spite its minimalism, egalitarian implications. This is be-cause it condemns status hierarchies that are systematicallyreproduced across a political order, particularly when wheresomeone is placed in the hierarchy is not the consequenceof conscious choices.11 Such hierarchies are a quasi-ofﬁcialjudgment on the worth of those within them and the livesthey lead. If we systematically treat certain kinds of lives andactivities as markedly superior to others, we must eitherensure that they are really open to all or else accept that wepublicly condemn those who cannot achieve them as infe-rior. This does not meet the requirement of reciprocity oncewhat counts as a beneﬁt over and above the bare minimumof the most basic liberties is no longer a matter on which thepolitical order may pronounce. Those whom the hierarchiesscorn are confronted by a political order that doubly wrongsthem. Not only does it tell them that their lives are worthless than those that the hierarchies elevate but, in doing so,it also undermines their ability to make their lives mean-ingful by placing that barrier of public contempt in the wayof their doing so. We cannot expect our attempts to makesense of our political order to be successful if with one10. Exactly how minimal is not my question here, although of courseit is a sensible one. Discussions over what analytically-minded liberals andliberal egalitarians tend to call neutrality are of course sophisticated anddifﬁcult. See, e.g., Gaus (2010) and Quong (2010). I hope that my basicpoint is robust across the various plausible views at stake in these debates11. In a certain sense, my argument here may be an example of theradical potential of a principle of formal equality explored by Jane Mans-bridge (2005) in her “Cracking through Hegemonic Ideology: The Logic oFormal Justice.”omen in the United Kingdom (2011 Census, table 1), while there weress than 6,000 convictions for all sexual offences that year (Ministry ofstice 2013, 43, table Q4.1).13. It seems unlikely that income inequalities of the sort seen in thenited Kingdom are unavoidable, given that income inequality is muchwer in many other developed and seemingly stable and successful states.ee OECD (2011).This content downloaded from 134.22All use subject to JS.f5.109.1TOR Tthan others, indifferent to the circumstances they are livedin. Combining neutrality and hierarchy in that way does nottreat those lives it condemns as gaining a fair return for theiracceptance of the political order, despite the necessity of thatacquiescence for the lives in the shadow of whose superi-ority they must live. Once that order must be transparentto those left at the wrong end of its hierarchies, it cannotbe acceptable to them. The order’s attempts at justiﬁcationdeny that the meagre return it provides to its worst-offmembers is really worth having in spite of any identiﬁcationthey may have with it, at least in comparison to what othersget. In doing so, the regime undermines their conﬁdenceand only makes it more difﬁcult for them to achieve any-thing they can see as signiﬁcant.Non-intrinsic egalitarianism will be mandated then if theharms it aims to avoid are associated with nonvoluntary andencompassing hierarchies of the sort which prevent a po-litical order from being reciprocal. In the United Kingdom atleast, it seems to me that the relevant hierarchies are sufﬁ-ciently general, steep, and unavoidable. Around half the dif-ference between Britons’ incomes appears to be determinedby differences between their parents’ income (d’Addio 2007,32), while data on income by ethnicity and gender showthat white Britons earn more than members of every otherethnic group and that typically men earn more than womenfor doing the same work (Perfect 2013; Platt 2011). This isto say nothing of systematic failures to respect or adequatelyprotect the rights of disadvantaged groups, so that less than5% of rapes result in a conviction,12 and black Britons areseven times more likely to be stopped and searched than theirwhite fellow citizens (Ministry of Justice 2011). An order thatsystematically raises barriers against attempts to leave yourparents’ class, and which leaves women and members ofethnic minorities poorer than white men cannot, in the ab-sence of a theological or otherwise otherworldly explana-tion for its continual privileging of white, middle and upperclass men, reasonably claim to offer anyone else a fair returnon their submission to it.13w1wleJuUloS20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and ConditionsConsequently, those whom the British political orderdisdains and discounts may reasonably refuse to acknowl-a political order has to constrain the levels of inequality init so as not to do too much damage to some of its mem-Volume 77 Number 3 July 2015 / 689edge it as having a right to command them. Equally, vic-tims of other societies’ similarly steep and unavoidable hi-erarchies may do likewise. Giving up their authority overthemselves to those orders would be a submission to anexploitative process which does not treat them as havingthe same sort of claims as some of its other members. Theyget little if anything back for what they put in, and sincetheir return is not a matter of divine command, this canhardly be adequate. If a political order’s legitimation mustbe transparent in Williams’s sense, then that order must,if its legitimation is not to fail for many of its members,also avoid status hierarchies of the sort non-intrinsic egal-itarianism condemns. Realists, round here and now, needto be pretty egalitarian—at least if Williams is right aboutwhat round here and now is like.Indeed, evidence from the United Kingdom’s last ma-jor episode of social unrest supports the idea that a cer-tain level of equality is a requirement of realist legitimacyaround here and now. A team of researchers from the LSEinterviewed hundreds of those involved in the riots of thesummer of 2011 which, at their peak, involved serious dis-turbances in 22 of London’s 32 boroughs, as well as severalother cities across England (Lewis et al. 2011). They foundwhat they described as a “pervasive sense of injustice” (2011,24). Whereas on average more than 90% of Britons describethemselves as part of British society, barely half of thealienated and marginalized interviewees did (25). The in-terviewees, almost two-thirds of whom were from the poor-est ﬁfth of council wards in the United Kingdom, complainedabout joblessness, social exclusion, changes in governmentpolicy that they felt demonstrated a lack of regard for them,and a culture of conspicuous consumption that created andthen exploited desires for status they could not legally meet(2011). They also had an overwhelmingly negative view ofthe police. Interviewees were 8 times less likely to have a pos-itive view of local police than Britons on average, and fre-quently described them as “the biggest gang out there” (18).This may be connected to 73% reporting having been stoppedand searched in the last year (19). Socially excluded and mar-ginalized rioters apparently felt that they were disregardedand mistreated by a political system, whose forces of law andorder then targeted them. It is easy to understand why theywould reject that system’s claim to authoritatively order theirsocial world by, for example, engaging in unrest which Lon-don’s Metropolitan Police described as “unprecedented inthe capital’s history” (17).Realists may not all be very happy about legitimacy re-quiring a certain level of socioeconomic equality around hereand now. It may seem excessively moralistic to think thatThis content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tbers’ self-respect, to condemn stark class systems as an in-adequate return on submission to authority. Yet there isconceptual or theoretical afﬁnity between realism and egal-itarian demands of this sort. In the same structural sensethat G. A. Cohen’s socialism is not political, realism itself isbuilt around an egalitarian demand, a demand for a certainkind of respect. An order is only legitimate if it offers somekind of explanation of why its massively structuring, coer-cive power should be treated as authoritative rather than asan unfortunately extremely successful, highly sophisticatedprotection racket. People are entitled to reject coercion, totreat it as an affront to their dignity and those who use it asenemies, if some kind of justiﬁcation they can accept cannotbe given. That is itself an egalitarian commitment which,for example, refuses to demand that people sacriﬁce them-selves for the beneﬁt of others, which treats them as properlyauthoritative over themselves, as reasonable when they re-fuse to acquiesce in naked domination or exploitation bytheir supposed political authorities. Both realism and non-intrinsic egalitarianism focus on the importance of beingable to govern your own life, of a life lived from the insideand not controlled by external forces. Given that, it is notentirely surprising that realism most likely will, under cer-tain conditions, require that political orders are egalitar-ian or face losing their legitimacy for parts of their popu-lation.CONCLUSIONIn this article, I have argued that realism’s hostility tocontemporary political philosophy’s tendency to see itselfas a form of applied moral philosophy need to not extendto contemporary political philosophy’s interest in distrib-utive equality. First, I tried to show that realism is com-patible with a certain kind of egalitarianism, that that kindof egalitarianism can be generically political, even if ques-tions remain about whether it is appropriate in the hereand now. Negative non-intrinsic egalitarianism does not re-quire the suppression of conﬂicts of interest or of moraldisagreement to act as a basis for a political order and so canbe political in the way that realists require. I then moved onto argue that, because of a particular set of conditions po-litical legitimations seem to have to fulﬁl here and now,that kind of egalitarianism may be required of political le-gitimations here and now, that some contemporary po-litical orders cannot rightly claim the allegiance of all theirmembers unless they reach some threshold of material equal-ity. Those orders will seem exploitative to many of theirmembers, who will rightly see the hierarchies they erect andsustain as depriving them of the chance to beneﬁt from the20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditionsorder and so denying them a fair return on their submissionto it. As such, they will not be legitimate for those members.Cohen, G. A. 2009. Why Not Socialism? Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-versity Press.D’Addio, Anna Cristina. 2007. Intergenerational Transmission of Disad-690 / Real Value of Equality Robert JubbMy discussion made it clear that both of these argumentsrelied on quasi-empirical claims in the direction of whosejustiﬁcation I have at best gestured. First, Martin O’Neill’sdeep social fact, connecting avoiding various status harmsand humiliations with high levels of material equality, needsto hold for non-intrinsic egalitarianism to be a coherent po-litical theory. I believe that work like that of Marmot, andWilkinson and Pickett suggest that it does, but I am not asocial psychologist or epidemiologist, and so I cannot showthat it does. Second, and I assume more controversially,drawing on Bernard Williams’s work, I claimed that mo-dernity has a particular character and that this imposedcertain requirements of transparency on political legitima-tions around here and now, at least for some values of aroundhere and now. There, beyond an appeal to Williams’s au-thority among realist political theorists and philosophers inparticular, I can really only point to the plausibility of theconclusions he, if not I, was able to draw from those claims.I was also vague about exactly where the egalitarian thresh-old I drew from Williams’s work ought to fall, avoidingsaying more than that the United Kingdom is below it. Itseems tome that these are the areas where further work needsto be done. Realism has articulated a powerful and to mymind compelling critique of the general tenor of much po-litical philosophy. What remains is the question of withwhat to replace it, of what political philosophers ought tosay instead, if indeed they should say anything. It is to issueslike the relationship between material equality and variouscommonly accepted harms and the way our historical sit-uation limits the available legitimations that our attentionshould now be turning then.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis article was presented at the 2013 MANCEPT Work-shop in Political Theory, Real Realist Legitimacy and alsoas part of the MANCEPT Seminar Series in 2014, and Iwould like to thank the audiences at both those eventsfor their helpful and penetrating comments. I would alsolike to thank the two anonymous referees for their equallyhelpful and insightful comments, which have made thearticle clearer and stronger, and especially Lisa Ellis, for herjudicious editorial guidance.REFERENCESAnderson, Elizabeth. 1999. “What Is the Point of Equality?” Ethics 109 (2):287–337.Chaplin, Rupert, John Flatley, and Kevin Smith. 2011. Crime in Englandand Wales 2010/11. London: Home Ofﬁce.Cohen, G. A. 1989. “On the Currency of Egalitarian Justice.” Ethics 99 (4):906–44.This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR Tvantage: Mobility or Immobility across Generations? A Review of theEvidence for OECD Countries. Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.Galston, William. 2010. “Realism in Political Theory.” European Journal ofPolitical Theory 9 (4): 385–411.Gaus, Gerry. 2010. The Order of Public Reason. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Hall, Edward. 2013. “Bernard Williams and the Basic Legitimation De-mand: A Defence.” Political Studies, forthcoming. doi:10.1111/1467-9248.12070.Hills, John, Tom Sefton, and Kitty Stewart. 2009. Towards a More EqualSociety? Poverty, Inequality and Policy since 1997. Bristol: Policy.Jubb, Robert. 2011. “On the Signiﬁcance of the Basic Structure: A PrioriBaseline Views and Luck Egalitarianism.” Critical Review of Interna-tional Social and Political Philosophy 14 (1): 59–79.Lewis, Paul, Tim Newburn, Matthew Taylor, Catriona Mcgillivray, AsterGreenhill, Harold Frayman, and Rob Proctor. 2011. Reading the Riots:Investigating England’s Summer of Disorder. London: London Schoolof Economics and Political Science and The Guardian.Mansbridge, Jane. 2005. “Cracking through Hegemonic Ideology: TheLogic of Formal Justice.” Social Justice Research 18 (3): 335–47.Marmot, Michael. 2004. Status Syndrome: How Your Social Standing Di-rectly Affects Your Health. London: Bloomsbury.Ministry of Justice. 2011. Statistics on Race and the Criminal Justice System2010. London: Ministry of Justice.Ministry of Justice. 2013. Criminal Justice Statistics Quarterly UpdateSeptember 2012. London: Ministry of Justice.O’Neill, Martin. 2008. “What Should Egalitarians Believe.” Philosophy andPublic Affairs 36 (2): 119–56.O’Neill, Martin. 2010. “The Facts of Inequality.” Journal of Moral Phi-losophy 7 (3): 397–409.OECD. 2011. An Overview of Growing Income Inequalities in OECDCountries: Main Findings. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooper-ation and Development.Perfect, David. 2013. Gender Pay Gaps, 2012. Brieﬁng Paper 6. London:Equality and Human Rights Commission.Platt, Lucinda. 2011. Inequality within Ethnic Groups. York: Rowntree.Quong, Jonathan. 2010. Liberalism without Perfection. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Rawls, John. 2001. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. Edited by Erin Kelly.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Rawls, John. 2005. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.Rossi, Enzo. 2012. “Justice, Legitimacy and (Normative) Authority forPolitical Realists.” Critical Review of International Social and PoliticalPhilosophy 15 (2): 149–64.Rossi, Enzo, and Matt Sleat. 2014. “Realism in Normative Political The-ory.” Philosophy Compass 9/10:689–701.Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. (1750/1755) 1997a. “Discourse on the Origin andFoundations of Inequality amongMen, Or Second Discourse.” In VictorGourevitch, ed., The Discourses and Other Early Political Writings.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 130–222.Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. (1762) 1997b. The Social Contract and OtherLater Political Writings. Edited and translated by Victor Gourevitch,Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 39–152.Scanlon, T. M. 2003. “The Diversity of Objections to Inequality.” In T. M.Scanlon, ed., The Difﬁculty of Tolerance. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-versity Press, 202–18.Sleat, Matt. 2014. “Legitimacy in Realist Thought: Between Moralism andRealPolitik.” Political Theory 42 (3): 314–37.20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and ConditionsSreenivasan, Gopal. 2009. “Ethics and Epidemiology: The Income De-bate.”Public Health Ethics 2 (1): 45–52.Swedish Integration Board. 2006. Pocket Facts—Statistics on Integration.Williams, Bernard. 2005a. “Realism and Moralism in Political Theory.” InB. Williams and G. Hawthorn, eds., In the Beginning Was the Deed:Realism and Moralism in Political Argument. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonVolume 77 Number 3 July 2015 / 691Stockholm: Elanders.Tomlin, Patrick. 2012. “Should We Be Utopophobes about Democracy inParticular.” Political Studies Review 10 (1): 36–47.Waldron, Jeremy. 1987. “The Theoretical Foundations of Liberalism.”Philosophical Quarterly 37 (147): 127–50.Wilkinson, Richard, and Kate Pickett. 2009. The Spirit Level. London:Allen Lane.Williams, Bernard. 1997. “Forward to Basics.” In J. Franklin, ed., Equality.London: IPPR, 49–58, 57.Williams, Bernard. 2002. Truth and Truthfulness. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.This content downloaded from 134.225.109.1All use subject to JSTOR TUniversity Press, 1–17.Williams, Bernard. 2005b. “The Liberalism of Fear.” In B. Williams andG. Hawthorn, eds., In the Beginning Was the Deed: Realism and Moral-ism in Political Argument. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,52–61.Williams, Bernard. 2005c. “The Idea of Equality.” In B. Williams andG. Hawthorn, eds., In the Beginning Was the Deed: Realism and Moral-ism in Political Argument. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,97–114.Williams, Bernard. 2011. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. London:Routledge.20 on Thu, 24 Sep 2015 05:10:14 AMerms and Conditions