ABSTRACT: 
This paper examines emerging possibilities for use of the Internet in human service fundraising. Human service managers must compete for limited funds with their counterparts in educational, religious, health, and other nonprofit organizations. There is enormous potential for raising funds over the Internet; yet, this approach to resource development may not be appropriate or effective in some instances for certain human service agencies. The selection of fundraising approach must be consistent with the organizational context in which it is used. This paper provides examples of cases where use of the Internet may prove to be an effective method for human service fundraising. It also examines cases where use of the Internet may not be a good match for the organizational context, whether in terms of ethics or dollars raise. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we investigate the relationship between the nature of a corporation s giving and its relationship to its stockholders .<n> in particular , we study the relationship between a corporation s giving and its ability to make large donations .<n> we find that a corporation s giving is determined by its ability to raise money , while its ability to make large donations is determined by its ability to raise money .<n> we show that a corporation s giving is determined by its ability to raise money , while its ability to make large contributions is determined by its ability to raise money .<n> we also show that a corporation s giving is determined by its ability to raise money , while its ability to raise money is determined by its ability to raise money .<n> we study the relationship between a corporation s giving and its ability to make large donations .<n> we study the relationship between a corporation s giving and its ability to make large donations .<n> we find that a corporation s giving is determined by its ability to raise money , while its ability to make large contributions is determined by its ability to raise money .<n> we study the relationship between a corporation s giving and its ability to make large donations .<n> we show that a corporation 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 University of New HampshireUniversity of New Hampshire Scholars' RepositorySocial Work Scholarship Social Work2000Online fundraising in the human servicesJerry D. MarxUniversity of New Hampshire, Jerry.Marx@unh.eduFollow this and additional works at: https://scholars.unh.edu/socwork_facpubPart of the Social Work CommonsThis Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Social Work at University of New Hampshire Scholars' Repository. It has been acceptedfor inclusion in Social Work Scholarship by an authorized administrator of University of New Hampshire Scholars' Repository. For more information,please contact nicole.hentz@unh.edu.Recommended CitationMarx, J.D. (2000). Online fundraising in the human services. Journal of Technology in Human Services, 17(2/3), 137-152.This article was downloaded by: [University of New Hampshire]On: 27 August 2012, At: 08:44Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKJournal of Technology in Human ServicesPublication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wths20Online Fundraising in the Human ServicesJerry D. Marx DSW aa Graduate Social Work Program, University of New Hampshire, Murkland Hall, Durham, NH,03824 E-mail:Version of record first published: 21 Oct 2008To cite this article: Jerry D. Marx DSW (2000): Online Fundraising in the Human Services, Journal of Technology in HumanServices, 17:2-3, 137-152To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J017v17n02_03PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLEFull terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsThis article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematicreproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form toanyone is expressly forbidden.The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contentswill be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses shouldbe independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims,proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly inconnection with or arising out of the use of this material.Online Fundraisingin the Human ServicesJerry D. MarxSUMMARY. This paper examines emerging possibilities for use of theInternet in human service fundraising. Human service managers mustcompete for limited funds with their counterparts in educational,religious, health, and other nonprofit organizations. There is enormouspotential for raising funds over the Internet; yet, this approach to re-source development may not be appropriate or effective in someinstances for certain human service agencies. The selection of fundrais-ing approach must be consistent with the organizational context inwhich it is used. This paper provides examples of cases where use ofthe Internet may prove to be an effective method for human servicefundraising. It also examines cases where use of the Internet may not bea good match for the organizational context, whether in terms of ethics ordollars raised. [Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth DocumentDelivery Service: 1-800-342-9678. E-mail address: <getinfo@haworthpressinc.com> Website: <http://www.haworthpressinc.com>]KEYWORDS. Internet, online, fundraising, human services, technologyThe distinctive challenges faced by managers in private nonprofithuman services are increasingly recognized. These include fundrais-ing in a time of increased demand for services and decreased publicJerry D. Marx, DSW, is Assistant Professor, Graduate Social Work Program,University of New Hampshire, Murkland Hall, Durham, NH 03824 (E-mail:jdmarx@hopper.unh.edu).[Haworth co-indexing entry note]: ‘‘Online Fundraising in the Human Services.’’ Marx, Jerry D.Co-published simultaneously in Journal of Technology in Human Services (The Haworth Press, Inc.) Vol.17, No. 2/3, 2000, pp. 137-152; and:Human Services Online: A New Arena for Service Delivery (ed: JerryFinn, and Gary Holden) TheHaworth Press, Inc., 2000, pp. 137-152. Single ormultiple copies of this articleare available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery Service [1-800-342-9678, 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.(EST). E-mail address: getinfo@haworthpressinc.com].E 2000 by The Haworth Press, Inc. All rights reserved. 137Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY138support; motivating volunteer governing boards; volunteer recruit-ment in the era of two-income families; and measuring outcomeswhen the product is ‘‘a changed human life’’ (Kelly, 1998; Drucker,1990). Given this complexity, there is a growing body of literature onnonprofit management. It is expected that this emerging literature willincreasingly address the use of new information technology for avariety of purposes including financial management (billing, budgets),case management (client case histories and other documentation) aswell as fundraising.In terms of human service fundraising, new software can help ad-ministrators manage information regarding donor gifts and pledges,prospective donors, receipts, and related reports and letters. The newsoftware can be used in various types of fundraising: planned giving,special events (walkathons, auctions, etc.), major gifts, direct mail,capital campaigns, telemarketing, grant proposals, and membershipdevelopment. CD-ROMs can be purchased that list board affiliationsand biographical information on thousands of corporate, foundation,and nonprofit board members. CD-ROMs are also available that pro-file thousands of corporate and foundation giving programs. Further-more, databases in DOS, Macintosh, and Windows versions provideinformation on federal grant opportunities as well as private and cor-porate foundations (The Chronicle of Philanthropy, 1998).Yet only a few publications in the nonprofit management literature(Allen, Warwick, and Stein, 1996; DeAngelis, 1997; Finn, 1999; John-ston, 1999; Kelly, 1998; Miller and Strauss, 1996; Zeff, 1996) explorethe potential impact of using the Internet for resource development.Today, development staff can participate in online discussions of fun-draising through the Internet. There are World Wide Web sites thatfocus on specific fundraising methods such as planned giving andgrant proposals. Other Web sites offer links to hundreds of founda-tions, while others provide data on federal grants (The Chronicle ofPhilanthropy, 1998).The purpose of this article is to assist human service professionalsinvolved in fundraising in examining the emerging possibilities andlimitations of online fundraising. Although there is enormous potentialfor fundraising over the Internet, this approach to resource develop-ment may not be appropriate or effective for all human service agen-cies. The selection of a fundraising approach must be consistent withthe organizational context in which it is used. In other words, theDownloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 139choice of fundraising methods must be an extension of the organiza-tion’s mission, long-term objectives, and program development strate-gies (Howe, 1991).ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXTToo often in human services, professionals responsible for raisingfunds proceed with the ‘‘cart before the horse.’’ That is, they pursuefunding opportunities and strategies with little regard for organization-al context. If they are lucky enough to obtain a large grant, for exam-ple, they then try to adjust the organization’s mission and long-termobjectives to coincide with the terms of the grant. Former low-income‘‘housing’’ agencies become ‘‘substance abuse treatment’’ facilitiesovernight. Such an approach leads to vague organizational missions,conflicting and irrelevant long-term objectives, confused board members,high staff turnover, and poor quality (Drucker, 1990; Howe, 1991).A more professional approach to human service fundraising startswith an organizational mission that identifies the agency’s purpose(what it does for whom) and related agency values (Howe, 1991). Themission is based upon an assessment of community needs as well asorganizational strengths and weaknesses. Long-term objectives areestablished to fulfill this mission and programs are then developed toachieve the organization’s objectives. Only after this foundation ofplanning is completed should human service fundraisers consider vari-ous fundraising approaches-including the use of the Internet.Emerging Online Fundraising OpportunitiesOnce a human service organization decides to develop a program,typical sources of funds include individuals, government agencies,corporations, private foundations, and other nonprofit service organi-zations like United Way of America. These potential funding sourcesare traditionally solicited through one or more ways: written propos-als, direct mail, telephone appeals, special events (auctions, raffles,etc.), and planned giving (bequests, etc.). Human service organiza-tions are now starting to add a new medium to their portfolio offundraising approaches- the Internet. The Internet can be used at everystage of the development process: identification, cultivation, solicita-tion, follow-up, and finally, stewardship (Kelly, 1998; Semple, 1993).Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY140Identification. First, potential funders need to be identified. Thisoften takes much background research by fundraising professionals.The great strength of the Internet is the easy access to unlimitedinformation throughout the world. This information includes the for-mal funding priorities of thousands of foundations, including private,community, and corporate foundations. In addition to foundations,many corporations make donations directly to nonprofit organizations.The funding priorities of these corporate ‘‘direct giving’’ programscan also be found on the Internet. Furthermore, some Web sites in-clude news of actual grants recently awarded by foundations andcorporations to various nonprofit organizations. For example:S The Foundation Center maintains a World Wide Web site [http://www.foundationcenter.org] that provides links to over 600 grant-maker Web sites (The Foundation Center, 1999).S The Philanthropy Journal Online [http://www.pj.org] providesnews articles on a variety of philanthropy topics including recentcorporate and foundation grants (The Philanthropy Journal On-line, 1999).Cultivation. The next stage of the development process is the ‘‘cul-tivation’’ stage. Once prospective donors have been identified, theseprospects need to be informed about the human service organizationprior to solicitation. Donors are more likely to give to groups andcauses with which they are familiar. Once interested in a specifichuman service organization, prospective donors may choose to getfurther involved in the organization, perhaps through volunteering ormembership. A 1996 survey of giving and volunteering in the UnitedStates, done by The Gallup Organization for the Independent Sector,indicates that those who volunteer in human service organizations arefive times as likely to make a donation (Marx, in press).The Internet can be used as one of several ways to cultivate pro-spective donors (Johnston, 1999; Allen, Warwick, and Stein, 1996).Nonprofit organizations are increasingly establishing Web sites on theWorld Wide Web. These Web sites provide much more informationabout the human service organization and its cause than can be pro-vided in most direct mailings or agency brochures. An informativeWeb site will provide information on the organization’s mission, histo-ry, facilities, board of directors, executive director and other staff,agency finances, and specific programs and services. What is more,Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 141the Web site should allow potential donors to get further involved withthe organization as volunteers or advocates. For example:S The American Red Cross Web site [http://www.redcross.org] of-fers detailed information on all of its many programs, includingthe latest news on current disaster relief services. This informa-tion is complemented by color photos of people assisted by theseservices. The agency also offers a virtual tour of its museum anda ‘‘this month in history’’ calendar with historical facts about theRed Cross. For disaster relief, there is a ‘‘How you can help link’’with a ‘‘give your time and skills’’ option for those interested involunteering (The American National Red Cross, 1999).S Second Harvest [http://www.secondharvest.org], the nation’s largestchain of food banks, attempts to build interest in the organizationby providing an online version of its magazine and the results ofits quadrennial survey on hunger in America on its Web site(Demko & Dundjerski, 1998, p. 39).S Similarly, the Enterprise Foundation [http://www.enterprisefoundation.org], which promotes neighborhood development inMaryland, publishes an online magazine that highlights peopleand organizations involved with various community projects(Marchetti & Wallace, 1997).S Some organizations, particularly advocacy organizations like theRainforest Action Network [http://www.ran.org], give their visitorsa chance to get involved with the cause by providing contact infor-mation on individuals or institutions that are the target of advocacycampaigns. Better yet, some organizations enable their supporters tosend an e-mail or fax a letter directly from their Web site to a politi-cian or company on a specific issue (Johnston, 1999).S Amnesty International [http://www.amnesty.org] uses its Website to sign up supporters for specific campaigns, such as the 50thAnniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights. Supporterssigned an online petition that was later presented to the UnitedNations (Johnston, 1999).S Two advocacy groups, Third Millennium [http://www.thirdmil.org] based in New York and Economic Security 2000 Action[http://www.economicsecurity2000.org] based in Washington D.C.,co-sponsored an online march on Washington in January of 1999.‘‘The Billion Byte March,’’ as it was called, asked supporters toDownloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY142sign an e-mail letter regarding social security reform. The e-mailmessages were then sent to Congress and the White House enmasse to coincide with the President’s State of the Union message(Economic Security 2000, 1999; Demko, 1998).Solicitation. After the prospective donor is acquainted, preferablyeven involved, in the human service organization, that person may beready to make a financial gift to the agency. Although it sounds ob-vious, those that are asked to give are much more likely to make adonation. ‘‘The ask,’’ therefore, needs to take place. Most donors startout making relatively small contributions, often as part of an organiza-tion’s annual giving campaign or through special events.The Internet can be a useful solicitation vehicle for small donationsfrom individuals (Johnston, 1999; Zeff, 1996). An effective site on theWorld Wide Web will provide the prospective donor with severaloptions for giving. The first and fastest way is to donate online using apersonal credit card. Although many people are still apprehensiveabout sharing personal credit card information on the Internet, it isexpected that this fear will dissipate as ever more secure transactionmethods are developed and as the practice becomes a common part ofour culture. The successful online bookstore, amazon.com, has 1.5million customers and no record of credit card security problems(Johnston, 1999).However, for more cautious donors, the Internet can facilitate moretraditional giving by telephone or mail. For those who wish to donateby phone, the Web site may provide 1-800 telephone numbers withEnglish and Spanish (or other language) options. For those who preferto send a check or pledge card by mail, the best Web sites provide acontribution form to printout as well as the organization’s mailingaddress. To illustrate:S The American Red Cross does all of the above on its World WideWeb site. In addition, since it is a national organization withmany local chapters, the Red Cross gives the potential donor theoption of giving directly to the national office or to a specific lo-cal chapter. In the latter case, the Red Cross helps the donor tofind the address of the nearest chapter by asking the person to en-ter their local zip code (The American National Red Cross,1999).Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 143For those apprehensive about the use of credit cards online, about150 nonprofit organizations around the nation are now allowing sup-porters to make pledges online that are charged to their telephone bills.The telephone company subsequently makes the donation directly tothe charity. In this way, the donor’s credit card number does not haveto be given out online (Blum & Hall, 1998).Memberships are also used by many human services to generaterevenue to support their programs. The Internet can enhance member-ship recruitment also. The Web site can be used to describe the bene-fits that individuals receive as a result of their membership contribu-tion. Color photos can show the attractive merchandise that membersreceive, including items such as magazines, t-shirts, computer screensavers, or bumper stickers. Individuals (or other organizations) simplymake their membership contribution in one of the several ways de-scribed earlier-by credit card online, phone, or mail. Examples oforganizations that have used the Internet to boost membership include:S The Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network [http://www.glsen.org] based in New York works to eliminate homophobia inschools all over the country. The group recently found that aboutfive percent of its membership first found out about the organiza-tion through the Internet (Demko & Moore, 1998).S The World Wildlife Fund USA [http://www.worldwildlife.org]averaged 70 new online memberships per month from April of1997 to April of 1998 (Johnston, 1999).Another way for human service organizations to solicit donationsfrom individuals is through special events. Auctions, raffles, walk-athons, road races, home and garden tours, bake sales, car washes,fashion shows are all traditionally used by human service organiza-tions to raise funds for programming. The Internet is increasingly usedas a vehicle for conducting auctions. Human service organizations caneither list their items with an online auction house or create their ownonline auction site. An online auction house will typically charge acommission fee (ranging from 2.5% to 5.0%) and many also charge asmall listing fee (Johnston, 1999). For most human service organiza-tions, however, the auction house will generate more potential biddersand pay for the expensive cost of advertising on major search enginessuch as AltaVista and Yahoo. Although some online auctions may endDownloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY144up losing money (like any special event), some examples of successfulonline auctions include:S Operation USA [http://www.opusa.org], an international reliefgroup headquartered in Los Angeles, raised $135,000 in a com-bination live and online auction in 1997. Over 100 of the bidswere placed online (Demko & Moore, 1997).S Ken Margolis Associates manage the ‘‘Artrock Auction,’’ whichraised $15,000 for the Save the Earth Foundation [http://www.savetheearth.org] (Allen et al., 1996).Follow-up. After the ‘‘solicitation’’ stage of the development pro-cess comes the ‘‘follow-up’’ stage. Follow-up is crucial to successfulfundraising. Prospective donors need to be reminded of their pledges.Donors need to be thanked after sending their contribution. The entireprocess needs to be evaluated. The Internet can assist human serviceprofessionals in all of these areas. E-mail messages can be employedto periodically remind prospective donors about their pledges. Thankyou notes and receipts can be electronically sent via e-mail or the Webto donors almost immediately after receiving a contribution.S UNICEF [http://www.unicef.org], for example, sends a thankyou note on agency letterhead via its Web site that can be printedby the donor if a temporary receipt is desired. The thank you noteincludes the name and the address of the donor, the dollar amountof the gift, the date of the gift, and a statement of tax deductibility(Johnston, 1999).S Amnesty International USA [http://www.amnesty.org] sends ane-mail message confirming each gift (Johnston, 1999).With respect to evaluation, human service organizations are able toget feedback from donors and other supporters on various organiza-tional issues through the Internet. The Children’s Defense Fund[http://www.childrensdefense.org], for instance, gives supporters theoption on its Web site to e-mail suggestions for adding to its parentinformation and resource list. Organizations can evaluate their solici-tation process by asking for feedback on various aspects of their Website-including their contribution pages. A short questionnaire can befilled out online by organization members, other donors, and othervisitors to the site. Survey participants do not have to search for a penDownloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 145with which to complete the questionnaire or walk the completed ques-tionnaire to a mailbox.Stewardship. The ‘‘stewardship’’ stage of the development processrefers to the need to attend to your donors all year long, not justimmediately after a gift. Agency supporters want to stay connected tothe cause; they want to keep abreast of agency developments andevents; they want to see the tangible benefits and outcomes related totheir donations. Human service agencies have historically accom-plished all of this through agency newsletters, annual reports, newspa-per articles and editorials, and periodic open houses.The Internet, once again, can assist in this phase of the develop-ment process. With more and more people using the Internet, agencysupporters can check in on the organization frequently without hav-ing to leave their homes. Agency newsletters, brochures, and annualreports can be displayed on the Web site. Donors can e-mail ques-tions to agency personnel, while agency leaders can send periodice-mail messages to loyal agency supporters. Virtual tours of newfacilities can be offered. The minutes of past board meetings as wellas the agendas for future agency meetings can be provided on theWeb or through e-mail. Furthermore, if appropriate, photos of agencyclients can add an online face to program service statistics. To illus-trate:S United Way of America [http://www.unitedway.org] provides itssupporters with online annual reports and IRS 990 forms (UnitedWay of America, 1998).S Mothers Against Drunk Driving, better known as MADD [http://www.madd.org], regularly gives relevant articles from the Asso-ciated Press and other sources to its supporters in its Web site(Mothers Against Drunk Driving, 1999).S Junior Achievement of New York [http://www.ja.org] uses itsWeb site to provide an up-to-date schedule of organizational ac-tivities in the New York area (‘‘Junior Achievement Takes ItsCause To The Web,’’ 1997).S The Children’s Wish Foundation [http://www.childrenswish.org],based in Atlanta, Georgia, regularly updates an online journalfeaturing pictures and stories of ill children and wishes that havebeen filled by the foundation (‘‘Children’s Wish Foundation Es-tablishes Web Site,’’ 1998).Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY146Limitations to Human Service Online FundraisingThere are several instances where the use of the Internet for humanservice fundraising may prove to be relatively ineffective, whether interms of ethics or practical outcomes (i.e., dollars raised). For exam-ple, organizations that regularly cultivate prospective large donors(i.e., major gifts from individuals), in an effort to fulfill their missionsin their respective communities, should not depend on the Internet forsuch solicitation (Kelly, 1998). The cultivation of major donors needsto be as thorough and effective as possible. The relatively small num-ber of major donors allows human service organizations to give fullattention to these prospects. With major gifts, face-to-face contactbetween organizational leaders and the donor is considered critical tofundraising success. This might include regular visits in person to theprospective donor. The more personal the approach, the better. Face-to-face contact allows for close proximity, which promotes intimacy,trust, and caring- all prerequisites for major gifts. Usually major giftsare solicited after a person has shown substantial interest, even in-volvement in the organization (Dean, 1993). Dependence on the Inter-net in this method of fundraising would be considered superficial,perhaps resulting in the loss of sizeable donations.This is not meant to suggest that the Internet cannot be of some usein soliciting major gifts. As previously stated, the Internet can be usedto generate interest and involvement by prospective large donors,thereby building the foundation for a major gift. And as discussedearlier, the Internet can be employed in researching prospective majordonors (Kelly, 1998). Such online research can provide information onan individual’s stock transactions and other property holdings, theexistence of a family foundation, membership on corporate andfoundation boards, as well as relevant demographic information suchas the age of the individual. For-fee online search services includeDialog [http://www.dialog.com], and Nexis [http://www.nexis.com].A second instance where the Internet may prove to be less effectivefor fundraising is the case of small, grassroots human service organi-zations, which comprise the vast majority of human service organiza-tions. As stated earlier, many prospective donors are hesitant to makeonline donations or buy a nonprofit’s merchandise (e.g., t-shirts, caps,calendars, etc.) over the Internet using their personal credit cards; thefear of online fraud, including online impostors and fraudulent sites, isDownloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 147still prevalent in America and around the world. Yet, using a creditcard is the fastest way to purchase organizational merchandise or tomake an individual donation over the Internet. Much of the willing-ness by the public to use credit cards online depends upon namerecognition (Johnston, 1999). In this respect, large national and inter-national human service organizations with ‘‘brand names’’ like theSalvation Army, the Red Cross, United Way of America, and the GirlScouts of America have a major advantage over local grassroots hu-man service organizations, which are not recognized nationally. Thesegrassroots organizations with local missions and service objectivesmay not find the staff expense of maintaining a high quality Web sitejustified by the dollar amount of online donations and purchases.To address this limitation, small, local organizations may want toorganize national networks with similar human service organizations andincrease their public service announcements as a group to promote bettername recognition nationally. Another strategy would be the inclusion oflinks by a national organization such as United Way of America tosmall organizations, perhaps grouped according to related causes orgeographic regions. United Way of America already does this to someextent by including links to local United Way agencies, which thenprovide information on their local member human service organizations.Small, local human service organizations, given their limited bud-gets, may also be more negatively affected than larger agencies by thecost of doing nationwide fundraising online. States and municipalitieshave the right to impose regulations on charitable solicitations includ-ing registration fees. These fees and the staff time needed for properregistration nationwide could conceivably cost an agency severalthousand dollars- up to $10,000 or more (Mercer, 1998). Organiza-tions that ignore these responsibilities, or employ other organizationssuch as an auction house that neglect regulations, could face legalliabilities (Williams, 1998). All organizations looking to do onlinefundraising need to stay informed of their legal responsibilities. Oneway to do this is by reviewing the American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel Trust for Philanthropy’s publication, ‘‘Annual Sur-vey of State Laws Regulating Charitable Solicitations’’ (Mercer, 1998).Controversial human service agencies offer a third instance inwhich a specific organization and the Internet may not be an effectivematch. As previously discussed, human service organizations are be-ginning to use online auction houses to raise funds for their humanDownloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY148services. However, many online auction houses avoid working withcontroversial organizations due to fear that they may upset other clientorganizations and many of their regular bidders (Johnston, 1999). Inaddition, controversial agencies run the risk of ‘‘civil disobedienceonline’’ (Johnston, 1999, p. 185), given the ability of hackers to dis-rupt Web site and e-mail operations by blocking access to certain Websites or inundating an agency with e-mail. Organizations that mightexperience these difficulties include:S The Boy Scouts of America due to its controversial stance on theparticipation of the gay population in the organization’s activi-ties.S Planned Parenthood because of its connection in the minds ofPro-Life groups with the abortion issue.S Needle Exchange Programs because of the public debate over theappropriateness of supplying drug addicts with clean needles inan effort to prevent the spread of AIDS.Another source for online fundraising, corporations, may also proveto be problematic, and therefore, ineffective for some human serviceorganizations. Corporations are increasingly using ‘‘strategic philan-thropy’’ and ‘‘cause-related marketing’’ to further various strategicbusiness goals and objectives (Marx, 1998, 1997, 1996). In the former,strategic philanthropy, corporations (e.g., a publishing house) makedonations to nonprofit organizations (a literacy project) with the ex-pectation that the gift will produce positive benefits to the corporation(increased sales from a more literate population) at some point in thefuture. In the latter case, cause-related marketing, a corporation mayenter into a formal agreement to make a contribution to a selectednonprofit organization for each purchase of a company product.The Internet is a perfect tool for promoting such partnerships be-tween corporations and nonprofit organizations. To illustrate:S IGive [http://www.iGive.com], a membership organization head-quartered in Evanston, Illinois, offers members the opportunityto donate to their favorite charity when they buy products fromparticipating merchants. A percentage of the purchase price goesto the buyer’s favorite cause. As of March 11, 1999, 42,383members had donated a total of $288,128, which helped support4,236 causes (iGive.com, 1999).Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 149S Anheuser-Busch Inc., maker of Budweiser Beer, has links on itsBudweiser Web site [http://www.budweiser.com/linkinfo.html] toThe Nature Conservancy [www.tnc.org] and other wildlife and con-servation nonprofit organizations. Anheuser-Busch gets to asso-ciate its product with the great outdoors, much like Coors andRolling Rock beers, while building support for these groups.S The International Red Cross runs an online lottery in partnershipwith a commercial organization called the International Lotteryin Liechtenstein Foundation or ‘‘InterLotto’’ for short (Johnston,1999). InterLotto [http://www.interlotto.com] runs the lottery,while the Red Cross gets 25 percent of the gross revenue.For many human service organizations, such online partnershipswith corporations may not be an option for ethical reasons. It is diffi-cult to imagine a substance abuse prevention and treatment agencydoing a partnership with a beer company. Such a relationship, whilegood for a company claiming to promote responsible drinking, mayeven result in decreased support from the general public for the non-profit organization. The corporate partnership contradicts the missionand long-term objectives of the human service organization. There-fore, use of the Internet to raise funds in such a manner would beinappropriate, and possibly ineffective. Similarly, it is hard to imaginean agency that provides service to people addicted to gambling or aprogram that provides financial management counseling to low-in-come families entering into an online partnership with a lottery com-pany, even one promoting responsible gambling, if there is such athing. Again, such fundraising efforts by human service organizationsmay, in fact, produce a public relations backlash for the nonprofit,resulting in decreased community support. In these situations or moresubtle examples such as support from corporations that have poor man-agement-labor relations, the human service agency should consider itsorganizational value system before deciding on the corporate support.A final instance where the Internet may prove to be less than effec-tive is in planned giving. Organizations that solicit a significant num-ber of planned gifts should not rely on the Internet for such solicita-tion. In a ‘‘planned gift,’’ an individual donor makes a decision tomake a gift of an asset to a charitable organization, yet the charityusually does not receive the actual financial benefit of the gift untilsome time in the future, typically after the individual donor dies (Kel-Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY150ly, 1998). This is why planned giving is often referred to as ‘‘deferredgiving.’’ The benefit to the nonprofit organization is deferred untilsome future time. The simplest and most basic instrument for plannedgiving is the charitable bequest, which is a gift made through anindividual’s will. However, other more complex and technical instru-ments for planned giving are increasingly being employed, includingcharitable remainder trusts, charitable gift annuities, pooled incomefunds, and charitable lead trusts (Kelly, 1998). Dependence on theInternet to administer these planned giving instruments is not prudent,given the technical complexity of this type of philanthropy. Also,because a small percentage of donors are in a position to do plannedgiving and since the benefits to charitable organizations of this type ofphilanthropy are typically large, face-to-face communication is mosteffective. Web sites can be used to provide introductory information toprospective donors on planned giving, but as with any major gifts, anyrequests for information should be followed by more personal atten-tion and ultimately face-to-face communication.CONCLUSIONThe number of human service and other nonprofit organizationsusing the Internet is growing rapidly (Demko & Moore, 1998). From1992 to June of 1998, the number of registered Internet addresses thatend in ‘‘.org,’’ the designation most often used by nonprofit organiza-tions, increased from 500 to about 114,000.Similarly, the number of prospective donors using the Internet toresearch and contribute to various charitable organizations is increas-ing. Today, for example, GuideStar [http://www.guidestar.org], a Website established by Philanthropic Research, Inc., provides prospectivedonors with program and financial information, including IRS Form990 data, on over 650,000 nonprofit organizations (GuideStar, 1999;Vimuktanon, 1997).Professionals responsible for fundraising in human service organi-zations need to be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of the Inter-net as well as the opportunities and threats presented by this newtechnology. Used with insight and precision, the Internet can comple-ment other fundraising efforts of human service organizations, per-haps leading to greater support for needed human services.Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 Jerry D. Marx 151REFERENCESAnheuser-Busch, Inc. (1999). Other Anheuser-Busch sites. Retrieved July 20, 1999from the World Wide Web: http://www.budweiser.com/homepage/default.html.Allen, N., Warwick, M. & Stein, M. (Eds.).(1996). Fundraising on the Internet.Berkeley, CA: Strathmoor.Blum, D.E. & Hall, H. (1998, December 17). Phone billing option offered to encour-age donations. The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, p. 35.Children’sWish Foundation establishes web site. (1998, January).FundraisingMan-agement 28 (11), 7.Dean, J.C. (1993). The two faces of development. Fundraising Management 9, 26-28.DeAngelis, J. (1997). The grantseeker’s handbook of essential Internet sites. Alexan-dria, VA: Capitol Publications.Demko, P. (1998, September 24). Advocacy groups marching for changes in socialsecurity. The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, p. 45Demko, P. & Dundjerski, M. (1998, March 12). Anti-hunger group updates web site.The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, p. 39.Demko & Moore. (1998, Oct. 8). Charities put the web to work. The Chronicle OfPhilanthropy, pp. 1, 41-44.Demko & Moore. (1997, Nov. 13). On-line charity auction nets promising results.The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, p. 35.Drucker, P. (1990).Managing the non-profit organization. NewYork: HarperCollins.Economic Security 2000. (1999). Billion byte march. RetrievedMarch 19, 1999 fromthe World Wide Web: http://www.economicsecurity2000.org/signup.html.Finn, J. (1999). ‘‘Seeking Volunteers and Contributions: An exploratory study of nonprofitagencies on the Internet.’’ Journal of Technology in Human Services, 15(4), 39-56.GuideStar. (1999). Charity search. Retrieved March 18, 1999 from the World WideWeb: http://nonprofit.guidestar.org/ search/search.cfm.Howe, F. (1991). The board member’s guide to fundraising. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.IGive.com.(1999). Statistics retrieved March 18, 1999 from the World Wide Web:http://www.iGive.com/html/splash.cfm.Johnston, M. (1999). The fund raiser’s guide to the Internet. New York: Wiley.Junior Achievement takes its cause to the web. (1997, September). FundraisingManagement 28(7), 8.Kelly, K.S. (1998). Effective fund-raising management. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Marchetti, D. & Wallace, N. (1997, December 11). New Internet magazine on com-munity development. The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, p. 43.Marx, J.D. (1998). Corporate strategic philanthropy: Implications for social work.Social Work, 43(1), 34-41.Marx, J.D. (1997). Corporate philanthropy and United Way: Challenges for the year2000. Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 8(1), 19-30.Marx, J.D. (1996). Strategic philanthropy: An opportunity for partnership betweencorporations and health/human service agencies. Administration in Social Work,20(3), 57-73.Marx, J.D. (in press). Women and human service giving. Social Work.Mercer, E. (1998).How canwe use the Internet for fundraising?Retrieved November 24,1998fromtheWorldWideWeb:http://www.nonprofit-info.org/misc/981027em.html.Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 HUMAN SERVICES ONLINE: A NEW ARENA FOR SERVICE DELIVERY152Miller, J.D. & Strauss, D. (1996). Improving fundraising with technology. San Fran-cisco: Jossey-Bass.Mothers Against Drunk Driving. (1999).Hot issues. Retrieved March 19, 1999 fromthe World Wide Web: http://www. madd.org/hot_issues/default.shtml.Semple, R.F. (1993). The development process. Unpublished manuscript.The Chronicle of Philanthropy. (1998). The non-profit handbook. Washington D.C.:The Chronicle of Higher Education.The Foundation Center. (1999).What is The Foundation Center? Retrieved July 19, 1999from the World Wide Web: http://www.foundationcenter.org/ about/whatisfc.html.United Way of America. (1998). United Way of America’s Annual Reports and 1996Form 990. Retrieved March 18, 1999 from the World Wide Web: http://www.uni-tedway.org/usaway.html.Vimuktanon, A. (1997, October). Non-profits and the Internet. FundraisingManage-ment, 28(8), 25-28.Williams, G. (1998, December 3). Court upholds registration of fund-raising consul-tants. The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, p. 30.Zeff. R. (1996). The nonprofit guide to the Internet. Somerset, NJ: Wiley.Zeff, R. (1996). Cyber-fundraising. In N. Allen, M. Warwick & M. Stein. (Eds.),Fundraising on the Internet (pp. 8.1-8.18). Berkeley, CA: Strathmoor.Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 08:44 27 August 2012 