ABSTRACT: 
Countries such as Iran and Turkey do not fit comfortably into the democratic and authoritarian categories. In these countries, elections are held regularly, and the will of the people is accepted as one source of sovereignty. At the same time, both constitutionally and in practice the elected officials have to share the exercise of political power with institutions that do not draw their power directly from the will of the people. In such systems, the judiciary has two important political functions. First, the judiciary acts as a politically insulated decision-maker through which the unelected head can exercise some degree of control over the actions of the elected head. Second, the judiciary's direct involvement in the political arena increases political tensions and legitimates the continuation of the two-headed system. In systems based on divided sovereignty, the tensions created by the judicialization of politics contribute to the stability of the regime. The first two sections of the article develop the theoretical framework of the study. I will then look at the constitutional structures of Iran and Turkey and discuss the role assigned to the judiciary in the two systems. The final section examines the politically important court cases of Recep Tayyip Erdoǧan, a former mayor of Istanbul (1994-98), and his Iranian counterpart Gholamhussein Karbaschi, a former mayor of Teheran (1990-98). However, at the outset I should point out that my interest is not in establishing the guilt or innocence of the individuals involved. Rather, I hope that the analysis provided here will shed some light on the role of the judiciary in the politics of countries with two-headed executives. © 2004 Cambridge University Press. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we show that the presence of a mass in a system of interacting oscillators can be used to determine whether the oscillations are periodic or chaotic .<n> we demonstrate that the presence of a mass in a system of interacting oscillators can be used to determine whether the oscillations are periodic or chaotic .<n> we show that the oscillations of a system of interacting oscillators can be used to determine whether the oscillations of the system are periodic or chaotic .<n> we demonstrate this by considering the case of a system of interacting oscillators , in which the oscillations of the system are determined by the interaction of the oscillators with the environment .<n> we show that the presence of a mass in a system of interacting oscillators can be used to determine whether the oscillations of the system are periodic or chaotic .<n> we show that the presence of a mass in a system of interacting oscillators can be used to determine whether the oscillations of the system are periodic or chaotic . <n> we show that the presence of a mass in a system of interacting oscillators can be used to determine whether the oscillations of the system are periodic or chaotic .<n> we demonstrate this by considering the case of a system of interacting oscillators , in which the oscillations of the system are determined by the 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Int. J. Middle East Stud. 36 (2004), 253–275. Printed in the United States of AmericaDOI: 10.1017.S0020743804362057Hootan ShambayatiA TA L E O F TW O M A Y O R S : C O U R T S A N DP O L I T I C S I N I R A N A N D TU R K E YCountries such as Iran and Turkey do not fit comfortably into the democratic and au-thoritarian categories. In these countries, elections are held regularly, and the will of thepeople is accepted as one source of sovereignty. At the same time, both constitutionallyand in practice the elected officials have to share the exercise of political power withinstitutions that do not draw their power directly from the will of the people. In suchsystems, the judiciary has two important political functions. First, the judiciary acts asa politically insulated decision-maker through which the unelected head can exercisesome degree of control over the actions of the elected head. Second, the judiciary’sdirect involvement in the political arena increases political tensions and legitimates thecontinuation of the two-headed system. In systems based on divided sovereignty, thetensions created by the judicialization of politics contribute to the stability of the regime.Two caveats, however, are in order. First, a double-headed executive system is not anecessary condition for the judicialization of politics. Judicialization of politics is alsocommon in a number of countries with single-headed executive systems, such as theUnited States. However, as the discussion here suggests, the conditions for judicializa-tion of politics are particularly ripe in countries with divided sovereignty. Second, thepolitical systems in Turkey and Iran are not exactly the same. Having begun its firstdemocratic experience in 1945, and despite three formal military interventions (1960,1971, and 1980), Turkey is an old democracy among developing countries. Despite thislong experience with democracy and democratic institutions, however, Turkish democ-racy remains unconsolidated. Iran’s experience with democratic institutions is muchshorter in duration. Although since the Constitutional Revolution of 1906–1907 Iranhas periodically experimented with free elections and multi-party politics (1907–21 and1941–53), these experiments have generally been short-lived. The victory of MohammadKhatami in the presidential elections of 1997 and 2001 has once again opened the po-litical system. Iran’s overall political system nevertheless continues to display strongauthoritarian tendencies. In short, Turkey is an unconsolidated democracy, while Iranis an unconsolidated authoritarian regime. Despite the differences, however, the Iranianand Turkish political systems have enough similarities to warrant a comparison. AsI will show, these similarities include a commitment to constitutionalism, divisionof sovereignty between elected and unelected institutions, and the prominence of thejudiciary in the political arena.Hootan Shambayati is Assistant Professor in the Department of Political Science and Public Administration,Bilkent University, 06533 Bilkent, Ankara, Turkey; e-mail: hootan@bilkent.edu.tr.© 2004 Cambridge University Press 0020-7438/04 $12.00https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at254 Hootan ShambayatiThe first two sections of the article develop the theoretical framework of the study.I will then look at the constitutional structures of Iran and Turkey and discuss the roleassigned to the judiciary in the two systems. The final section examines the politicallyimportant court cases of Recep Tayyip Erdogˇan, a former mayor of Istanbul (1994–98),and his Iranian counterpart Gholamhussein Karbaschi, a former mayor of Teheran (1990–98). However, at the outset I should point out that my interest is not in establishing theguilt or innocence of the individuals involved. Rather, I hope that the analysis providedhere will shed some light on the role of the judiciary in the politics of countries withtwo-headed executives.J U D I C I A L I Z AT I O N O F P O L I T I C S A N D R E G I M E S TA B I L I T YSome observers view the active role of the courts in the political arena, particularly indeveloping countries, as a manifestation of the politicization of the judiciary. Such aview implies that the courts are dependent on political actors. Judicialization of politics,however, assumes that the judiciary enjoys some level of independence vis-a`-vis otherpolitical actors. Whereas politicization of the judiciary points to the influence of politicalactors in the judicial arena, judicialization of politics refers to the expansion of thejudiciary’s political role. Although the expansion of the political role of the judiciary isa global reality, its consequences are not clear. In a democracy, of course, the judiciaryplays an important role in both maintaining the rule of law and safeguarding the rights ofthe citizens. As Larry Diamond notes, “[E]lected executives, state bureaucrats, soldiers,and police cannot be held accountable without a judicial system that has the constitutionaland political autonomy to ensure a genuine rule of law.”1 The judiciary not only servesas an obstacle to the tyranny of the majority; it also serves as an important restraint onthe activities of the other branches of the state and provides an additional mechanism ofaccountability.These goals are often achieved through “judicial review,” the power of the courtsto rule on the legality of the actions of the other branches of government. Despite thegeneral recognition that some form of judicial review is desirable, if not necessary,for the functioning of democratic regimes, the practice remains controversial. First,of course, the power of an unelected and politically insulated judiciary to review theactions of popularly elected branches of government is in tension with the ideal ofpopular sovereignty, which is at the heart of democracy. Second, critics warn that thejudiciary’s active involvement in policy-making undermines the democratic process.When the regime-supporting coalition loses its cohesion, political actors will try toremove controversial issues from the political agenda by referring them to the courts orother so-called neutral institutions. While the objective is to decrease political tensions,such practices can lead to further polarization and can accelerate the breakdown of theregime.2 As Juan Linz notes, “The legitimacy of having judicial bodies make what areessentially political decisions in a democracy is always doubtful, and in countries wherejudicial bodies have been established only recently, their judgment is even less likely tobe considered binding.”3The authority of “neutral” institutions in making binding political decisions is furtherundermined by the loss of impartiality. Although institutions such as the judiciary mightremain structurally independent, their active participation in the decision-making processhttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 255undermines their ability to act as impartial arbiters.4 Over-reliance on the courts can fanpolitical tensions and further undermine the cohesiveness of the polity.The effects of judicialization of politics on non-democratic regimes are less clear.In general, we tend to associate an independent judiciary with democracy.5 However,authoritarian regimes, too, might be willing to work with an independent judiciary.First, a strong and independent judiciary can be an effective instrument of ensuring thatlower-ranking officials implement decisions made at the top.6 Second, there might be ageneral convergence of views between the members of the judiciary and the authoritarianleadership.7 Furthermore, an authoritarian regime, unlike a democratic one, which atleast in theory has to abide by the rule of law, might not feel obligated to implementthe decisions of a disagreeable judiciary. Finally, an independent judiciary can providethe authoritarian regime with some level of legitimacy.8 Nevertheless, the available data,although limited, suggests that the breakdown of authoritarian regimes follows a patternsimilar to that of democratic regimes as far as the role of the judiciary is concerned.9In short, in both democratic and non-democratic regimes, over-judicialization of poli-tics indicates and contributes to tensions that can undermine the stability of the system andlead to the breakdown of the regime. As tensions increase, those who lose in the electoraland legislative processes might appeal to the courts for a more favorable outcome. Atthe same time, political leaders might prefer to refer highly contentious political issuesto the courts, or to court-like institutions, to prevent an open split among the ruling elite.Relying on the judicial process to resolve divisive political issues not only is unlikelyto reduce tensions, but it has the potential of creating new ones. The legislative process,particularly in democracies, is based on bargaining and compromise. It creates neitherabsolute winners nor absolute losers. The judicial process, however, is based on find-ing “Truth” and establishing guilt. The judicial process creates absolute “winners” and“losers.” As Stephen Krasner notes, “[J]udicial procedures are designed to judge the guiltor innocence of individuals, but developing stable democratic societies. . . requires[s]prudent political calculations, not judicial findings.”10 Reliance on the judicial processto resolve political issues undermines support for the regime and can pose a threat to theconsolidation of democracy.D I V I D E D S OV E R E I G N T YMany modern regimes are hybrids of electoral democracy and authoritarianism.11 In hy-brid regimes, an elected executive and unelected institutions jointly exercise sovereignty.In many cases, the military forces constitute the unelected executive, but as the Iranianexample shows, this need not be the case. Although the military, because of its accessto the means of violence and its hierarchical structure, is obviously more capable ofperforming the role of an unelected partner in the exercise of power, some civilianinstitutions, such as a well-entrenched religious establishment, might also be capable offulfilling this function.Political systems based on divided sovereignty are distinguished from authoritarianand democratic regimes by two characteristics. First, unlike in purely democratic orpurely authoritarian systems, the two heads jointly exercise power. While it is true that theunelected head limits the powers of the elected head, the latter’s powers are not residual.Elections are held regularly; governments change as a result of these elections; and thehttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at256 Hootan Shambayatielected governments, both in theory and in practice, render considerable power. Electionsin such countries are not mere window-dressing, as is often the case in authoritariansystems. Nor are the elected governments mere puppets. The unelected head, despite itsprivileged position, cannot ignore the results of elections or the powers of the electedhead. Although the unelected head might be able to influence policy on a large numberof issues, it cannot ensure the outcome of the policy-making processes. In other words,unlike in authoritarian systems, there is a high level of uncertainty, and the unelectedhead cannot get its way all the time.12 At the same time, however, the elected executivehas to share power with an unelected executive.Second, systems of divided sovereignty, or what Daniel Brumberg calls “dissonant in-stitutionalization,” by definition embody a high level of tension. The adoption of a systembased on divided sovereignty itself indicates a division in the ruling coalition concerningthe nature of sovereignty. As Brumberg notes, “[D]issonant institutionalization occurswhen competing images of political community and the symbolic systems legitimatingthem are reproduced in the formal and informal institutions of state and society.”13This institutionalization of competing ideologies means that the political structure willcontinue to generate tensions and encourages conflict within the polity. These tensions,however, are not necessarily destabilizing and are needed for the survival of the overallsystem. If the tensions between the two heads of the system are resolved in favor of ei-ther one of them, the system will experience an out-of-type transformation. It will eitherbecome fully democratic or fully authoritarian. A regime based on divided sovereigntymust prevent social and political tensions from boiling over and threatening the stabilityof the system while generating enough tension to justify the continued presence of bothheads of the executive.These regimes use a number of tactics to achieve this mix. One common tactic isto try to remove potentially controversial issues from the political agenda by relyingon detailed constitutions and legal codes. A second useful tactic is the referral of po-tentially controversial issues to formally sanctioned, but “non-political,” autonomouspolicy-making bodies.14 Both tactics tend to encourage a more active political role forthe judiciary. Heavy reliance on detailed constitutions and legal codes automaticallyexpands the powers of the judicial bodies that have to interpret and implement the laws.Furthermore, a politically “insulated” judiciary can be an effective restraint on the powersof the elected head. Hence, it is not surprising that out-going authoritarian regimes oftentry to pack the judiciary with their supporters as a means of guaranteeing their privilegesafter the transition.15Another important function of the courts in systems based on divided sovereignty isthe control and creation of tensions that are necessary in legitimating the regime. A statebased on divided sovereignty lacks a hegemonic ideology and “can become vulnerable toefforts by competing social forces to radically redefine its ideological foundations.”16 Asthe examples of Turkey and Iran show, the appearance of these social forces encouragesthe state—or, at least, those parts opposing change—to turn to the courts. Taking poten-tially divisive political issues to court might prevent an open confrontation between thetwo heads. However, as this article suggests, the population at large might not find thecourts’ politically significant decisions binding. The instability created by this disregardfor legal decisions in turn tends to justify the unelected head’s threat perception and tojustify the continuation of its guardian role. Thus, what appears to be regime-threateninghttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 257political instability becomes a mechanism for preserving the division of sovereigntybetween elected and unelected institutions.T H E C O N S T I T U T I O NA L S T RU C T U R E O F I R A N A N D T U R K E YShortly after the success of the Iranian Revolution of 1978–79, a clergy-dominatedassembly was elected to prepare a constitution suitable for the new regime.17 Afterreceiving Ayatollah Khomeini’s support, the draft constitution was submitted to a nationalreferendum on 2–3 December 1979. According to official figures, it received 15,680,339positive votes against 78,516 negative votes.18 Support for the constitution was closelylinked to the personal popularity of Ayatollah Khomeini, who automatically assumedthe highest position in the system as the Supreme Leader.As students of Iranian politics are well aware, the Islamic Republic simultaneouslydisplays totalitarian, authoritarian, and democratic tendencies.19 The openness of Islamto different interpretations and the pluralism of the politicized sections of the religiouselite has prevented the development of a full-fledged totalitarian system, and combinedwith Iran’s constitutional tradition and the mass mobilization of the revolution, it hasencouraged competitive politics.20 Iranian voters have genuine, although limited, choicesin parliamentary and presidential elections, making Iran unique among non-democraticcountries. Furthermore, parliamentary debates are often passionate and challenge theexecutive.21 At the same time, however, both the Parliament and the president are subjectto the limitations imposed by the Supreme Leader. As H. E. Chehabi notes, “[W]hile theregime is somewhat responsive to the citizenry, it is not accountable to a demos.”22According to the constitution, absolute sovereignty belongs to God. However, theconstitution also provides a role for the people in the exercise of sovereignty. It reads,Absolute sovereignty over the world and man belongs to God, and it is He who has made manmaster of his own social destiny. No one can deprive man of this divine right, nor subordinate it tothe vested interests of a particular individual or group. The people are to exercise this divine rightin the manner specified in the following articles. [Article 56]Accordingly, the constitution creates the office of the Supreme Leader of the Revo-lution. Article 5 of the constitutions stipulates that “During the Occultation of the Walial-Asr (may God hasten his reappearance), the wilayah and leadership of the Ummahdevolve upon the just [↪adil] and pious [muttaqi] faqih, who is fully aware of the circum-stances of his age; courageous, resourceful, and possessed of administrative ability, willassume the responsibilities of this office.” Article 57 charges the Supreme Leader withthe duty of supervising the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branches. At thesame time, however, the constitution also endorses the principle of popular sovereigntyand representative government by creating a popularly elected legislature and presidency(Articles 114 and 62, respectively).Over the past twenty years, Iran has devised a number of mechanisms to deal withtensions created by this dichotomy. During Khomeini’s tenure as the Supreme Leader,his personal charisma was used to diffuse the tension, while institutions such as theGuardian Council (shurayi negahban), half of whose members must be Islamic juristsappointed by the Supreme Leader, reviewed all laws passed by the legislature to ensuretheir conformity with Islamic principles. Another example is the Regime’s Expediencyhttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at258 Hootan ShambayatiCouncil (majma‘i tashkhis-i maslahat-i nizam), which is charged with resolving conflictsbetween the legislature and the Guardian Council. Finally, of course, it is the SupremeLeader himself who is the ultimate arbiter of disputes among the various institutions ofthe state.23A similar dual executive system, although with important differences, is in operationin Turkey under the 1982 constitution. The 12 September 1980 military coup took placeat a time that the Turkish political system appeared paralyzed and political violence hadbecome a daily problem. Hence, the coup and its leadership enjoyed a high level ofsupport among the population. From the beginning, the generals made it clear that theydid not intend to stay in power indefinitely and that they intended to return power toelected civilian politicians in the near future. They also made it clear that the status quoante was unacceptable and that they intended to restructure Turkish politics. To preventthe political polarization that was blamed for the problems of the 1970s, they introduceda new constitution and put in place a number of new laws and regulations that could notbe amended by future governments.After the coup, the five generals who had staged the coup reconstituted themselves asthe Council of National Security (CNS)24 and convened a special assembly to composea new constitution. Notably absent from the assembly were politicians, most of whomhad been banned after the coup. The assembly presented the draft of the new constitutionto the CNS, where it was further modified before being formally adopted in a nationalreferendum on 7 November 1982. Some 91.27 percent of the electorate took part in thereferendum and gave the constitution an overwhelming approval rating of 91 percent.25A number of steps were taken to ensure a high approval rating in the constitutionalreferendum. All eligible Turkish citizens were legally required to participate in thereferendum. Failure to do so would have disqualified them from participating in the nextparliamentary elections. Approval of the constitution was linked to support for the popularleader of the coup, General Kenan Evren. General Evren personally took over the taskof officially explaining the draft constitution to the public. Furthermore, the approval ofthe constitution meant that General Evren would automatically become the president ofthe Republic for a seven-year term.26 Finally, like its Iranian counterpart, the Turkishconstitution was adopted under extraordinary conditions, and support for it representeda desire for return to normalcy.27The 1982 constitution established “a dual system of executive decision making.”28 Theexercise of political power is shared between the popularly elected civilian authoritiesand the military. This duality is also well recognized by the general public, who makea sharp distinction between the popularly elected civilian leadership constituting thegovernment (hu¨ku¨met) and the military-dominated state (devlet). While the constitutionestablishes a parliamentary democracy based on popular sovereignty, it limits the exerciseof popular sovereignty by providing for the formal participation of unelected actors inthe decision-making process.An important manifestation of this duality is the ambiguous position of civilian institu-tions with regard to the armed forces. The most important constitutional instrument of thearmed forces’ involvement in the political arena is the National Security Council (MilliGu¨venlik Kurulu). The National Security Council (NSC) first received formal recognitionin the military-inspired 1961 constitution that was put in place after the 1960 militarycoup. From the beginning, the NSC was envisioned as a forum for joint policy-makinghttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 259by military and civilian officials. A series of constitutional amendments adopted afterthe military intervention of 1971 curbed some of the freedoms guaranteed by the con-stitution and augmented the powers of the NSC. The 1980 military intervention led tofurther strengthening of the military’s role in the decision-making process. Article 118of the 1982 constitution enumerates the membership and the duties of the NSC:[t]he National Security Council shall be composed of the Prime Minister, the Chief of the GeneralStaff, the Ministers of National Defense, Internal Affairs, and Foreign Affairs, the Commandersof the Army, Navy, and the Air Force, and the General Commander of the Gendarmerie, under thechairmanship of the President of the Republic.Depending on the particulars of the agenda, Ministers and other persons concerned may beinvited to meetings of the Council and their views be heard.The National Security Council shall submit to the Council of Ministers its views on takingdecisions and ensuring necessary coordination with regard to the formulation, establishment, andimplementation of the national security policy of the State. The Council of Ministers shall givepriority consideration to the decisions of the National Security Council concerning the measuresthat it deems necessary for the preservation of the existence and independence of the State, theintegrity and indivisibility of the country, and the peace and security of society [emphasis added].The new constitution specified who the civilian members of the NSC were and ensuredthe numerical equality of the civilian and military members. The Parliament could nolonger increase the number of civilians on the council through ordinary legislation.29The constitution instructs the cabinet to give “priority consideration to the decisions ofthe National Security Council.”30 Under this system, the NSC no longer makes “recom-mendations”; instead, it makes “decisions.” The NSC has a permanent secretariat, thusmaking it a permanent actor in the decision-making process. While the “decisions” of theNSC are theoretically only advisory, and the final decision for their implementation is leftto the council of ministers and Parliament, it is clear that the framers of the constitutionconceived of the NSC as an important actor in the decision-making process.31 As oneobserver has noted, “[Under the 1982 constitution], far from returning to the barracks,the military retained considerable influence over governmental policy making throughits majority representation in the National Security Council.”32The NSC enjoys wide-ranging discretion in setting the agenda for its monthly meet-ings. Through the mechanism provided by the NSC, the military leadership has par-ticipated in making policies that range from lifting the parliamentary immunity of themembers of the (pro–Kurdish) Democratic Party to offering Arabic in secondary schools,and from stand-by agreements with the International Monetary Fund to bank failures.33The wide range of topics covered by the NSC has meant that there has been a highlevel of tension between the military and the civilian leadership, irrespective of thepolitical ideology of the government in power. However, this does not mean that theTurkish military has been able to “get its way” in every decision. Nor does it meanthat the military is involved in every decision made. In contrast to the decisions of theIranian Supreme Leader, the decisions of the NSC are only “advisory,” and their finalimplementation is left to the civilian politicians in the cabinet and Parliament. In manyinstances, the civilian leaders, ever mindful of their popularity, have resisted the wishesof the military.34 This resistance, however, is often used by the military as a sign of the“irresponsibility” of the civilian politicians who are willing to support the decisions ofthe NSC on paper but then fail to implement them.35https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at260 Hootan ShambayatiIn sum, Iran and Turkey have two-headed political systems in which executive poweris jointly exercised by popularly elected officials and by institutions drawing their le-gitimacy from sources other than popular sovereignty. While in the Turkish case theexercise of sovereignty by the elected officials is subject to the approval of the military-dominated NSC, in the Iranian case it is the Supreme Leader who limits the powerof the elected president.36 The extent to which the unelected head actively participatesin the decision-making process varies across issue areas and time. The potential forthe unelected partner’s involvement in the decision-making process, however, is alwayspresent. The result is that a high level of tension is inherent in the political system ofboth countries.One consequence of the division of sovereignty is a tendency toward the de-politicization of political issues by trying to remove controversial issues from the politicalarena. The length of the Iranian and Turkish constitutions (177 articles each) and thedetails into which they go in discussing political, social, and economic issues is to alarge extent a reflection of the desire of the framers of these constitutions to removea number of issues from the political arena. This distrust for politics is also reflectedin constitutionally sanctioned non-political specialized agencies, councils, and boardsthat are found in the two countries. In the Iranian case, the constitution sanctions botha Guardian Council, consisting of six Islamic jurists appointed by the Supreme Leaderand six jurists selected by Parliament from a list proposed by the head of the judiciary,himself appointed by the Supreme Leader, and the Regime’s Expediency Council, whosemembers are appointed by the Leader (Articles 91 and 112, respectively). While the firstis charged with the duty of reviewing legislation to ensure its conformity to Islamicprinciples and the constitution, the second is given the task of resolving differencesbetween Parliament and the Guardian Council (Articles 4 and 112, respectively).Reliance on non-political councils is even more pronounced in the Turkish case, wherethere are constitutionally sanctioned specialized councils or boards to arbitrate strikes(Article 54), supervise elections (Article 89), and administer institutions of higher edu-cation (Articles 130–32). There is also a separate body to supervise radio and televisionbroadcasts. What is significant about these boards and councils is that the elected politicalbranches have little control over their membership. The members of the Higher Edu-cation Council (Yu¨kseko¨gˇretim Kurulu), which supervises all matters related to highereducation, for example, are appointed by the president of the Republic, a non-partisanoffice holder, from among candidates nominated by the Council of Ministers, the Chiefof the General Staff of the military, and the universities (Article 131).37Finally, the desire to rely on neutral institutions to resolve essentially political issuesis also reflected in the structure and functions of the judiciary. As I discuss in the nextsection, in both Iran and Turkey the judiciary is assigned a wide range of political roles,which it performs in isolation from the political head of the executive branch. At thesame time, however, the judiciary is expected to perform these functions in accordancewith the views of the unelected head.D I V I D E D S OV E R E I G N T Y A N D T H E J U D I C I A RYThe structural independence of the judiciary is constitutionally guaranteed in both Turkeyand Iran. However, independence in both cases means only political insularity of thehttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 261judiciary from the popularly elected executive. The views of the unelected head aremade known not only through public announcements and frequent “briefings” given tothe various groups, including members of the judiciary, but also through a socializationand selection process that—at least, at the higher levels of the judiciary—reproduces thedesired ideology and values among the courts’ personnel.This is most clear in the Iranian case, where, according to Article 157 of the constitu-tion, the head of the judiciary is appointed by the leader of the Revolution without anyformal input from the elected president or Parliament. According to Article 156 of theconstitution, “the Judiciary is an independent power.” The constitution further addressesthe structural independence of the judiciary in Article 164:[a] judge cannot be removed, whether temporarily or permanently, from the post he occupiesexcept by trial and proof of his guilt, or in consequence of a violation entailing his dismissal. Ajudge cannot be transferred or redesignated without his consent, except in cases when the interestof society necessitates it, that too, with the decision of the head of the judiciary branch afterconsultation with the chief of the Supreme Court and the Prosecutor General.At the same time, however, the judiciary is expected to follow a certain ideological line.The preamble of the constitution defines the role of the judiciary in following terms:[t]he judiciary is of vital importance in the context of safeguarding the rights of the people inaccordance with the line followed by the Islamic movement, and the prevention of deviationswithin the Islamic nation. Provision has therefore been made for the creation of a judicial systembased on Islamic justice and operated by just judges with meticulous knowledge of the Islamiclaws. This system, because of its essentially sensitive nature and the need for full ideologicalconformity, must be free from every kind of unhealthy relation and connection.Thus, independence from political influences is seen as a guarantee that the judiciarywill enforce the correct ideological line. While judicial independence is valued, theconstitution sees the judiciary as the enforcer of the ideological line defined in practiceby the Supreme Leader. To achieve this mixture, the judicial branch and the security forcesare cut off from the legislature and the elected executive. The fact that the judiciary hasan official head and his direct appointment by the leader of the Revolution suggest thatthe judicial branch is viewed as an equal, or perhaps even superior, partner of the electedexecutive and legislative branches. The superiority of the judiciary is also alluded to bythe head of the judiciary’s role in the appointment of the minister of justice, a memberof the president’s cabinet. According to Article 160 of the constitution, the minister ofjustice is chosen from among candidates nominated by the head of the judiciary.Although the judicial branch in Iran does not have the power of judicial review,a power that is specifically reserved for the Guardian Council, it is constitutionallyassigned certain duties in supervising the activities of the elected head of the executivebranch. The head of the judiciary supervises the proper implementation of the laws andalong with the president and speaker of Parliament supervises the state-controlled radioand television (Articles 156 and 175, respectively). He is to draft judicial laws fitting forthe Islamic Republic (Article 158), and he reviews the accumulation of wealth by high-ranking members of the executive branch. The head of the judiciary is also a member ofIran’s NSC, and in the case of the Supreme Leader’s untimely death or incapacitation willserve on the Leadership Council (Articles 142 and 111, respectively). The judiciary is alsoformally represented on the council for the Revision of the Constitution (Article 177).https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at262 Hootan ShambayatiHence, the constitution formally assigns a number of political functions to the judiciarywhile attaching it to the unelected head of the political system.A similar phenomenon can be seen in the Turkish case. Article 138 of the 1982 con-stitution guarantees the independence of the judges by prohibiting outside interferencein the adjudication of disputes and forbids the National Assembly from discussing thecases before the courts. The constitution also guarantees security of tenure for judgesand public prosecutors and provides them with a high degree of internal autonomy inpersonnel matters through the constitutionally sanctioned Supreme Council of Judgesand Public Prosecutors (Article 159).38The length to which framers of the Turkish constitution were willing to go to insulatethe judiciary against pressure from politicians is perhaps nowhere more clear than in theappointment process to the Constitutional Court (Anayasa Mahkemesi). The court notonly has the power of judicial review; it also has a number of other political functions,including the power to try high-ranking officials and to supervise political parties. Theseprinciples were first introduced in the 1961 constitution, in which a Constitutional Courtmodeled after the German Constitutional Court was created.39 In the German case, thetwo houses of Parliament appoint the sixteen members of the Federal ConstitutionalCourt. Furthermore, while six of them are drawn from the judges serving on the federalbench, the political parties nominate the other ten. The German constitutional courtstands out as a “political court.”40In contrast, political branches do not have a direct role in determining the compositionof the Constitutional Court in Turkey. Seven of the eleven members and three of thefour substitute members of the court are appointed by the president of the Republicfrom among candidates nominated by the High Court of Appeals (Yargıtay), the Councilof State (Danıs¸tay), the Military Court of Appeals (Askeri Yargıtay), the High MilitaryAdministrative Court (Askeri Yu¨ksek ˆIdare Mahkemesi), and the Court of Accounts(Sayıs¸tay). The president also appoints one member from among academic personnel ofthe universities nominated by the Higher Education Council and three members and onesubstitute from among high civil servants and lawyers (Article 146). In short, professionaljudges and senior civil servants dominate the Turkish Constitutional Court. Influence ofpolitical parties is also limited by the fact that the presidency under the 1982 constitutionis a non-partisan office and the fact that the constitution does not foresee any role for theprime minister and the cabinet, or Parliament, to influence appointments to the court.Despite its non-political composition, the court has political functions. In additionto the judicial review of legislation, the Constitutional Court is also the venue for thetrial of the president of the Republic, members of the council of ministers, members ofParliament, members of the Constitutional Court itself and the other high courts, publicprosecutors, and the members of the Supreme Council of Judges and Public Prosecu-tors (Article 148). The court is also responsible for overseeing political parties and fordissolving those political parties found in violation of the Constitution or the PoliticalParties Law (Article 69), a function that it has exercised with zeal, closing seventeenpolitical parties since 1983.41 As Yekta Gu¨ngo¨r ¨Ozden, at the time the president of theConstitutional Court, noted, “[T]he functions of the court are of a political character.”42Similarly, Mehmet Turhan, a rapporteur at the Constitutional Court, notes, “[T]he ju-diciary [is] given a considerable power in the exercise of sovereignty,” with the aim of“put[ting] an end to the principle of the supremacy of the Parliament.”43https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 263The judiciary’s political functions are also exercised through special courts, partic-ularly the State Security Courts (Devlet Gu¨venlik Mahkemeleri). State Security Courts(SSCs) were first organized in the 1970s but were shut down by the Constitutional Courtfor violating the constitutional guarantee of trial before a constitutionally designatedjudge. They were resurrected under Article 143 of the 1982 constitution “to deal withoffences against the indivisible integrity of the State with its territory and nation, the freedemocratic order, or against the Republic whose characteristics are defined in the Cons-titution, and offences directly involving the internal and external security of the State.”These courts are presided over by a three-judge panel. Until June 1999, when the cons-titution was amended, one of the judges was an active-duty military officer serving onthe military courts.44 The vagueness of the term “internal and external security of thestate” means that SSCs deal with a wide range of issues, including terrorism, freedomof expression, organized crime, bank failures, and corruption.Like its Iranian counterpart, the Turkish judiciary sees itself as the defender of theregime in power. The chief justice of Turkey’s Constitutional Court opened the 1993session by noting that “the Constitutional Court was the guardian of the regime” andthat “the state that does not protect itself is not a state.”45 This sentiment is also sharedby Turkey’s current minister of justice, who in February 2001 referred to the Courtof Cassation Chief Prosecutor’s Office as the “guardian of the regime.”46 The Turkishjudiciary sees itself as the defender of such concepts as republicanism, secularism, theindivisible integrity of the state, and democracy. These concepts are enumerated in theconstitution, but their meaning is, of course, subject to interpretation. Although fewjudiciaries can match the Iranian record of the past few years, the Turkish judiciary’spresence in the political arena is a constant feature of Turkish political life.In both Iran and Turkey, provisions are in place to insulate the judiciary from politicalpressure from elected officials. In neither country, however, is the judiciary an “impartial”actor when it comes to matters concerning the state. As it is discussed in the next section,in recent years both Iran and Turkey have witnessed a growing split between the viewsof the two heads of the executive. One manifestation of this split has been the expansionof the judiciary’s political role. In both countries, the unelected head has relied on thejudiciary to target popular politicians and political movements.T H E J U D I C I A RY I N AC T I O NIran’s political system was put to the test by the victory of Mohammad Khatami in thepresidential election of May 1997. In a relatively free election by Iranian standards,Khatami won a landslide majority against the candidate publicly endorsed by AyatollahKhamenei, the Supreme Leader of the Revolution. He won by attracting the supportof the younger generation through a campaign promising more personal and culturalfreedoms. Khatami’s victory was interpreted as a rejection of the Supreme Leader andhis control of the political system. In the words of the French diplomat and journalistEric Rouleau, “[T]he cohabitation between the faqih Ayatollah Khamenei, the supremepolitico-religious authority, and President Mohammad Khatami has come to resemblea multi-faceted guerrilla war.”47 President Khatami has seen his proposals defeated bythe so-called conservatives supported by the Supreme Leader who controlled Parliamentuntil the parliamentary elections of February 2000, while the judiciary has shut downhttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at264 Hootan Shambayatipro–Khatami newspapers48 and increased its scrutiny of Khatami’s political allies, in-cluding trying and imprisoning Gholamhussein Karbaschi, the former mayor of Tehran.Born in 1955 to a clerical family, Gholamhussein Karbaschi belongs to a younger gen-eration of politicians. Before the revolution he had studied mathematics at the universitywhile also taking part in classes at religious seminaries. After Khomeini’s triumphantreturn to Iran in January 1979, Karbaschi worked on Khomeini’s personal staff andattracted the ayatollah’s attention. His career took off in 1982, when at age twenty-sevenAyatollah Khomeini appointed him the governor of Isfahan, one of Iran’s most importantprovinces. The years in Isfahan gained Karbaschi a reputation as someone who couldget things done. He was widely praised for his work, particularly for restoring the city ofIsfahan’s historic beauty and charm. In 1990, he was appointed as the mayor of Teheranby President Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani.Karbaschi’s popularity continued to increase as mayor, although his policies alsogenerated considerable controversy. Under his leadership, public services were improvedand new roads and parks were built. The roots of Karbaschi’s popularity, however, aremuch deeper than these material improvements suggest. As Fariba Adelkhah notes,“Karbaschi has been at the point where spirituality (ma’ad) and material things (ma’ash)converge. . . . [H]e has in practice been opening up a space for all sorts of practiceswhich. . . involve reshaping the private and public spheres.”49On 17 January 1996, only three months before the parliamentary elections, Karbaschiand fifteen other technocrats associated with the reform policies of President Hashemi-Rafsanjani formed Kargozaran-i Sazandigi (Executives of Construction) and entered thecampaign in support of the “reformist” candidates. The group showed its true political po-tential in the May 1997 presidential elections when it supported the victorious campaignof Mohammad Khatami. Karbaschi mobilized the resources of the Tehran municipalityin support of the campaigns of Khatami and other reformist candidates.50 Particularlyimportant was the municipality’s popular daily Hamshahri, which, “through its supportfor Khatami, probably brought out more voters than any campaigning could have done.”51Ideologically, Karbaschi and other members of the Executives of Construction belong towhat Farhang Rajaee has described as “Islamic yuppies.” They want to modernize Iranwithout Westernizing it. They might be political liberalizers within the Iranian context,but, like other liberalizers, they have no intention of overthrowing the existing system.52In July 1997, shortly after the presidential elections, in response to a call from theSupreme Leader to intensify the fight against corruption, offices of the Tehran municipal-ity were raided and a number of high-ranking officials were taken into custody. Karbaschihimself was arrested in April 1998.53 His arrest was met with wide-scale public demon-strations and was interpreted as another assault by the conservatives on the reform policiesof President Khatami. The public’s reaction forced Ayatollah Khamenei to ask the headsof the three branches (Ayatollah Yazdi, representing the judiciary; the speaker of Parlia-ment and defeated presidential candidate Nateq-Nouri; and President Khatami), alongwith the chairman of the Expediency Council (former President Hashemi-Rafsanjani), tofind a solution to the crisis. They recommended that Karbaschi be released from prisonwhile awaiting trial for corruption and embezzlement.54 Karbaschi’s trial began on 6June 1998 and concluded with a guilty verdict on 23 July 1998.55In his court defense, Karbaschi admitted that mistakes might have been made andthat high-ranking municipal officials had been given special privileges. However, hehttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 265justified these privileges by arguing that it was for the good of the country, that suchpractices were common in all government institutions, and that without such practices theadministration would not be able to attract qualified personnel.56 At the end, however, hewas found guilty of embezzlement and misuse of government funds. The court sentencedhim to five years in jail and sixty lashes (suspended). He was also ordered to return 1.6billion rials to the municipality and to pay a fine of 1 billion rials. Most important, hewas barred from holding any public office for a period of twenty years. On appeal, thejail term was reduced to two years, and he was barred from politics for ten years. Thelashes were converted into a monetary fine.Despite the conviction, public support for Karbaschi has been strong. The trial wastelevised nationwide, and millions of Iranians remained glued to their TV sets for theduration of the trial. The verdict against the mayor was met with public demonstra-tions and letters and editorials in the media in support of the mayor.57 Most interesting,however, reformist political figures, including President Khatami, continued to supportKarbaschi. In a phone conversation with Karbaschi’s wife the day after his imprison-ment, the president expressed his dissatisfaction with the outcome of the trial and hisregrets “that the country is deprived of [Karbaschi’s] services for the time being.”58 Theconservatives reacted to the continued support for Karbaschi and the attempts to freehim from prison by pointing to the contradiction between talking about the rule of lawand civil society, two favorite themes of President Khatami, and asking for clemencyfor a convict. The Tehran Times, for example, chastised both President Khatami andHashemi-Rafsanjani for expressing “regret” over Karbaschi’s conviction,59 while Resalatwrote,The most important gain of the trial of Mr. Karbaschi was not the conviction of a violator or amember of the rival political group but the revelation of the faces of the “factionalists” who claimto be “law abiding.” . . . The factionalists claiming to be law abiding once again have auctioned offall their past claims and are now building trenches against the law. Apparently, in the civil societyclaimed by these gentlemen, “law” is the first and last word. But will anything remain of civilsociety by pursuing this method?”60Under pressure from both the public and the reformers, Ayatollah Khamenei pardonedKarbaschi on 25 January 2000.61 Continued support for Karbaschi is particularly inter-esting not only in that it is coming from sources high within the regime but also in thathe was convicted of embezzlement and mismanagement of public funds. This outcomesuggests that the Iranian public has rejected the moral authority of the courts in makingjudgments and dispensing punishment. The Iranian courts share this problem with theirTurkish counterparts.Turkey’s dual-executive system was first challenged in the 1983 parliamentary elec-tions, when in a three-party race the Motherland Party led by the late Turgut ¨Ozalemerged victorious, even though the military had declared its preference for anotherparty. Although ¨Ozal was not the military’s candidate, the military did not find himobjectionable as prime minister. First, ¨Ozal was well known to the military and hadserved as deputy prime minister in charge of economic affairs under the military regime.Second, ¨Ozal and his Motherland Party did not openly challenge the privileged positionof the NSC; nor did they try to amend the constitution radically.62 Finally, any potentialreservations that the military might have had were mitigated by the fact that ¨Ozal had tohttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at266 Hootan Shambayatiserve under General Evren as president. By 1989, when ¨Ozal himself was elected to thepresidency, he was clearly acceptable to the state.A more severe shock was the victory of the Refah (Welfare) Party in the parliamentaryelections of December 1995. An Islamist party, Refah was led by the veteran politicianNecmettin Erbakan. Although it won only 21 percent of the national vote, it emerged asthe single largest party in Parliament. After months of maneuvering by the “secularist”parties and the military to prevent Refah from coming to power, Erbakan formed acoalition government with former Prime Minister Tansu C¸iller’s True Path Party. Havingfailed to prevent Refah from coming to power, the state turned to the judiciary. Underpressure from the military, the coalition government resigned in June 1997.63 Refah wasput on trial before the Constitutional Court for attempting to undermine Turkey’s secularsystem and was closed on 16 January 1998. The closure of the Refah Party did not endthe struggle against political Islam. An important part of this struggle has been attemptsto undermine the local network of Refah and its successor, the Fazilet (Virtue) Party.64In this regard, one of the most important steps was the trial and imprisonment of RecepTayyip Erdogˇan, the former mayor of Istanbul.65Born in 1954, Erdogˇan began his political career in the youth branch of Refah’s pre-1980 coup predecessor, the National Salvation Party (Milli Selamat Partisi).66 After theformation of Refah in 1984, he joined that party and become the head of its Istanbulbranch. In 1994, Erdogˇan was elected mayor of the greater Istanbul municipality.Erdogˇan’s tenure as mayor was controversial. Under his leadership, as even criticsagree, there was a marked improvement in municipal services. While some of theseimprovements were due to policies that were initiated before Erdogˇan took office, itis generally agreed that he played a positive role. However, charges of corruption andmismanagement accompanied Erdogˇan’s successes, although all agree that neither cor-ruption nor mismanagement is limited to Istanbul or the Islamists and that corruption is aproblem in all Turkish public institutions irrespective of the political party or individualpolitician in charge. In general, it is also agreed that Erdogˇan has not personally benefitedfrom corruption.67The legal case against Erdogˇan was initiated because of a speech he had deliveredon 6 December 1997 at a Refah-organized meeting in the city of Siirt, in southeasternTurkey, where Kurds form a significant part of the population.68 The location and timingof the speech made the Turkish authorities particularly sensitive to its content. The localprosecutor found the two lines of poetry with which Erdogˇan had begun his speechobjectionable. Taken from a poem by the famous Turkish poet and one of the intellectualfathers of Turkish nationalism, Ziya Go¨kalp (1876–1924), the lines in question are partof a fictional dialogue between the Emperor Romanus IV Diogenes (r. 1068–71) and theSelcuk Sultan Alparslan. In the first part of the poem, the Byzantine emperor declares,“I will burn the Koran, I will burn the Kaba; Those coming from the East will not seedomes with minarets.” In his speech, Erdogˇan did not refer to the threat made by theemperor, but he went on to recite the sultan’s response: “minarets are bayonets, domeshelmets; mosques are our barracks, and the believers are soldiers.” The rest of the speechwas a typical political speech, in which Erdogˇan pointed to his achievements as themayor and the unfairness of criticisms directed against him, and mildly complainedabout Turkey’s strict secularism and the restrictions put on public displays of religioussentiments.https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 267On 9 December 1997, the local prosecutor of the Republic filed charges againstErdogˇan in Diyarbakir’s State Security Court. The prosecution argued that the context inwhich the poem was used constituted a threat to the secular state and its institutions andwas prosecutable under Article 312 of Turkish Penal Code, which prohibits “incitingpeople to hatred based on religion or race.” In court, Erdogˇan argued not only that thewords were not aimed at inciting people to hatred, but that the poem belonged to oneof Turkey’s most important political thinkers and literary figures. He also noted thatneither Go¨kalp nor the poem in question was banned, and that the poem was includedin textbooks approved by the Ministry of Education. Erdogˇan’s defense team also foundthe lawsuit in violation of the Turkish constitution and the rulings of the European Courtof Human Rights.Nevertheless, in April 1998 the court found Erdogˇan guilty as charged and sentencedhim to ten months’ imprisonment (under the current regulations he served four months)and payment of a fine. He was also banned from politics for life. The decision was upheldon appeal, and Erdogˇan entered prison on 27 March 1999.69 He was released from prisonin July 1999.Erdogˇan’s conviction and subsequent incarceration were met with negative reactionsfrom both his domestic supporters and the international community. The court verdictwas met with large rallies in his support. There were also supportive demonstrationswhen he reported to prison to begin serving his sentence. He remained popular whilein prison and was visited by a large number of supporters and political figures on adaily basis. Erdogˇan’s conviction also received a negative reaction from the internationalcommunity. Even Turkey’s staunch ally, the United States, issued a statement voicing itsdispleasure with the verdict and, in a public show of support for Erdogˇan, dispatched itscounsel-general in Istanbul, Caroline Hagins, to meet the embattled mayor the day afterthe verdict was confirmed by the Court of Appeals. After the meeting, Hagins noted that“such developments will weaken confidence in the Turkish democracy.”70 The verdictwas also criticized by the European Union, various human-rights organizations, and themore liberal segments of the Turkish society, who, although not necessarily sympatheticto Erdogˇan’s political views, found the verdict incompatible with the basic principles offreedom of speech and democracy.Despite the differences in charges against them and the fact that Erdogˇan was electedwhereas Karbaschi was appointed to his post, the two cases have a number of similarities.First, of course, is the fact that in both trials the accused was the mayor of the most impor-tant metropolitan center in his country. Karbaschi and Erdogˇan used the resources of themunicipality to build an extensive patronage network, which is potentially useful in bothlocal and national politics. In the Turkish case, the economic liberalization of the 1980swas accompanied by attempts at administrative decentralization.71 As a consequence,by the end of the 1980s both the decision-making powers of the municipalities and theirfinancial resources had been augmented, leaving the mayors in control of importantredistributive and organizational mechanisms. A political party’s control of a majormunicipality can put it in a privileged position in national politics by giving it access to apolitical machine capable of providing special services to its constituents. The Istanbulmunicipality, for example, not only is a major employer but has invested in a varietyof economic enterprises. According to the former mayor, it also provides financial aidto 27,500 students.72 Refah-controlled municipalities, like municipalities controlled byhttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at268 Hootan Shambayatiother Turkish parties, have also been known to provide groceries, heating fuel, clothing,and so on to the poorer segments of society free of charge or at highly subsidizedprices. Such practices, of course, not only provide services for the poor, they can alsoprovide economic opportunities for the not so poor, and are important mechanisms formaintaining patron–client networks.Similarly, under Karbaschi the Tehran municipality engaged in a variety of activitiessuch as publishing; investing in various economic ventures, including some in othercities; providing direct or indirect support for political candidates; and so on. At onepoint, the Tehran municipality even made a grant to Columbia University in New Yorkfor the translation of the works of the Muslim historian Tabari.73 The municipality also“encouraged” businessmen to contribute to the campaigns of reformist candidates. Whenasked about this practice by the judge, Karbaschi replied that his aim was to “warm up”the campaign.74Second, it is generally agreed that both Erdogˇan and Karbaschi were relatively suc-cessful in improving municipal services. The success of the Refah Party in Turkey’s 1995national elections was due to the superior performance of the Refah mayors, particularlythe mayors of large metropolitan centers of Istanbul and Ankara. As Jenny White hasnoted, “[I]n municipalities controlled by Refah buses run, the garbage is collected, andsocial services in general have improved.”75Praise has also been strong for Karbaschi. For much of the past ten years he hasbeen a poster boy for the Islamic Revolution and was portrayed as a capable managertransforming Tehran from a barely livable city to a modern metropolis.76 The English-language daily Tehran Times, which in general has not been friendly to Karbaschi, forexample, noted in an editorial published shortly after the start of the trial that “there isno doubt that Karbaschi who has been suspended to act as mayor during the trial periodhas several feathers in his cap. No doubt he and his teammates have transformed the faceof the sprawling capital of the Islamic Republic. No one can deny the fact that changeswhich have taken place for the better in Teheran’s geographical and architectural featuresare praiseworthy.”77Third, at the time of their trials, both Erdogˇan and Karbaschi were regarded as risingpolitical stars with national appeal. Both his supporters and his detractors saw Erdogˇanas one of the most dynamic leaders within the Islamic movement and as a potentialreplacement for the aging Necmettin Erbakan. Similarly, Iranian commentators sawKarbaschi as an increasingly important figure in Iranian politics.Fourth, the reaction to these cases points to the failure of the legitimating functionsof the Iranian and the Turkish judicial systems. Although both Erdogˇan and Karbaschiwere convicted in courts of law and served time in jail, and despite the political banimposed on them, they have remained viable as political actors. Karbaschi continued toserve as the secretary-general of the Executives of Construction while in prison.78 A fewdays after his release he resumed his political activities by publishing a new newspaper,Hammihan, the first issue of which appeared shortly before the parliamentary electionsof February 2000.79 He was also given permission to establish a bank.Similarly, the ban imposed on Erdogˇan has not ended his political life. In 2001,Erdogˇan led the reformist wing of the closed Virtue Party to form the Justice and De-velopment Party, becoming one of its founding members and secretary-general. TheTurkish Constitutional Court, however, ruled that as a banned politician Erdogˇan couldhttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 269not be a founding member of a political party. The party removed Erdogˇan’s name fromthe list of its founders but kept him as secretary-general. Parliament changed the law tolift the political ban on politicians such as Erdogˇan. Accordingly, Erdogˇan was retriedand reconvicted. The Supreme Election Board, composed of justices from the Court ofCassation and the Council of State, rejected Erdogˇan’s candidacy in the November 2002elections because of the conviction. Nevertheless, the Justice and Development Partywon a landslide victory and came to power with an absolute parliamentary majority.Unable to form a government himself, Erdogˇan formed a caretaker government underhis deputy, Abdullah Gu¨l. The new Parliament moved quickly to amend the constitutionto allow Erdogˇan to take part in future elections. The Justice and Development Partyalso challenged the result of elections in the Kurdish-populated city of Siirt, whereErdogˇan had recited the offending poem. The Elections Board accepted the challengeand scheduled new elections for 9 March 2003, allowing Erdogˇan to stand as a candi-date. His victory was certified on 11 March 2003, and he was allowed to take his seat inParliament immediately. Within an hour, Prime Minister Gu¨l handed in his resignation,and President Sezer promptly asked Erdogˇan to form a new government.Finally, the two cases discussed here and other similar cases are a manifestation of theloss of cohesion in the two polities. Erdogˇan’s trial was part of a larger crackdown onthe Islamist movement in general. Similarly, as the Iranian journalist Morteza Mardihapoints out, “[Karbaschi’s trial] in reality was the trial of the modernizations of Hashemi80and the modernity of Khatami, . . . Karbaschi was arrested, humiliated, and convicted sothat Hashemi and Khatami would learn a lesson and discover the sensitivities of theircommon rival.”81 Karbaschi and Erdogˇan are not anti-systemic politicians.82 In fact, theyare products of the very system that convicted them. They were convicted not becauseof what they had done as individuals but because of the rising popularity of the politicalmovements that they represented. They became targets of judicial proceedings only afterelections produced results that were unacceptable to the guardians of the Turkish andIranian regimes.C O N C L U S I O NStudents of democratization and public law often see the extensive involvement of thejudiciary in the political arena as undesirable. They recognize that some level of judicial-ization of politics is necessary for the functioning of the modern state and for the creationof democratic accountability, yet they warn that over-judicialization of politics can be adestabilizing factor. They warn that reliance on the courts in settling controversial polit-ical disputes undermines the regime’s cohesion by discouraging political compromisesthat are part of the political process. These arguments, however, generally draw theirconclusions based on cases of purely authoritarian or democratic regimes. In view of theevidence presented in this article, it is necessary to modify some of these arguments.Iran and Turkey represent political structures that combine authoritarian and demo-cratic practices and institutions. In these countries, sovereignty is divided between electedexecutives and unelected ones who act as guardians of the regime. High levels of tensionand conflict are inherent in such systems. Divided sovereignty is based on a systemof “contending authorities” in which the democratic elements of the system encouragechange while its non-democratic features try to limit the ideological and social aspectshttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at270 Hootan Shambayatiof that change.83 The resulting social conflict encourages the involvement of the courts.This judicialization of politics, however, is not necessarily destabilizing. In fact, judicial-ization is an integral part of the mechanism used by the guardians to maintain the overalldivision of sovereignty. The courts are empowered to decide controversial political issuesto limit the influence of the popularly elected institutions and to preserve the privilegesof the guardians.Relying on the judiciary to limit the influence of elected officials and to remove thosewho are unacceptable has several advantages. First, in countries such as Iran and Turkey,courts are formally designed to serve as checks on the powers of elected officials, whilethey have little or no control over the guardians. Both the Turkish military and the IranianSupreme Leader are exempt from the jurisdiction of civilian courts. Some have even goneas far as to suggest that the Supreme Leader is “infallible.” Second, the courts are likelyto be sympathetic to the views of the guardians. In Iran, the Supreme Leader has directcontrol over the judiciary and can guarantee a favorable outcome through the judicialprocess. Even in Turkey, where the military has no direct control over the judiciary, themilitary is likely to find the courts more sympathetic than elected political institutionssuch as legislatures and city councils. Unlike legislative bodies, courts are not directlyaccountable to voters, and at least in theory, they are not influenced by public opinion.Furthermore, the “merit-based” promotion and selection process used in Turkey producesa judicial system that, at least at its upper levels, where most politically sensitive casesare likely to end up, is sympathetic to the views of the guardians.84Third, the guardians hope that by turning to the courts they can enhance the legitimacyof their actions while creating a dilemma for the elected executive. The rule of law, evenundemocratic law, is at the heart of democracy. Hence, the guardian’s attempt to enforcethe law is presented as legitimate and democratic, while the elected head’s resistancebecomes illegitimate and undemocratic. Fourth, turning to courts is an attempt to bring“finality” to the discussion without a direct confrontation between the guardians and theelected executive. As a former president of the Turkish Constitutional Court noted, onepurpose of going to court is to “put a stop to complaints [and] debates, . . . and to put anend to controversies.”85These two last functions, however, are dependent on the public’s perception of theimpartiality of courts as arbiters and the “justness” of their decisions. Although courts arenot expected to consider public sentiments in making decisions, their power lies in theacceptance of their decisions by the people. This is particularly important in politicallysensitive cases where the real battle is for the hearts and minds of the public. As the Iraniancommentator Akbar Ganji, himself a victim of the crackdown on reformers, notes,“ [I]npolitical crimes the court decision is not binding, if it is not accepted as binding by thepeople.”86 It is here that the failure of the Iranian and Turkish judiciaries is most evident.The public reaction to the convictions of Karbaschi and Erdogˇan, and to similar judicialdecisions, suggests that the judiciary’s active involvement in political controversies haseroded its image as a neutral arbiter among the public. Karbaschi and Erdogˇan are notunique. A similar disregard for the courts’ decisions can be seen in the closure of politicalparties and politically disagreeable publications. Turkey’s two leading Islamist politicalparties, the Justice and Development Party and the Felicity Party (Saadet Partisi), aresuccessors to the banned Fazilet Party. Fazilet itself had replaced the banned RefahParty (closed by the Constitutional Court in 1998), which itself had replaced the bannedhttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 271National Salvation Party (closed after the 1980 military coup), which had replaced theNational Order Party (closed by the Constitutional Court in 1971).87 Similarly, bannedIranian publications have reappeared under different names with seemingly no damageto their reputation. When the press court closed the daily Jame’eh, it reappeared as Tus.When Tus was shut down, Neshat replaced it. Neshat’s closure was followed by thepublication of ‘Asr-e Azadegan as the new reformist newspaper.Surprisingly, however, the failure of the courts to produce popularly acceptable deci-sions contributes to the continued division of sovereignty between elected and unelectedinstitutions. Linz, Arturo Valenzuela, and others are correct in pointing out that judi-cialization of politics points to the breakdown of cohesion in the ruling bloc and that itfans political and social tensions. In countries where elected and unelected executiveshave to cohabit, however, a high level of tension is needed for the survival of the system.The disregard shown for judicial decisions tends to justify the continued vigilance ofthe unelected head. Relations between the two heads of the executive in such systemsare perhaps best described by Turkey’s former President Su¨leyman Demirel, who, whenasked in 1998 for his thoughts on a looming crisis between Prime Minister Mesut Yılmazand the military high command, replied,In an English zoo there was an experiment to have wolves and lambs live together in one cage.Someone asked the director if the experiment was working. The director replied, yes, but sometimeswe have to replace the lambs.88Without a high level of tension to keep the sides at a safe distance from each other,the cohabitation of the wolf and the lamb is not likely. In political systems based ondivided sovereignty, the tensions created by the reliance on “neutral” forces to addressessentially political issues are necessary for the maintenance of the regime.N OT E SAuthor’s note: Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the annual meetings of the AmericanPolitical Science Association (Atlanta, 1999) and the Middle East Studies Association (Washington, D.C.,1999). I am indebted to the following individuals for their comments and suggestions: Faith Childress, ¨UmitCizre, Todd Fogelsong, ¨Omer Faruk Genc¸kaya, Metin Heper, Ahmet Ic¸duygu, Fuat Keyman, Susan Olson,Ergun ¨Ozbudun, and the editor and annonymous reviewers of IJMES. I also thank my research assistant MuratC¸emrek.1Larry Diamond, Developing Democracy: Toward Consolidation (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1999), 111.2Juan Linz, The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Crisis, Breakdown, and Reequilibrium (Baltimore:Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978); Arturo Valenzuela, The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Chile(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978).3Linz, Breakdown of Democratic Regimes, 69.4Valenzuela, Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Chile, 80–81.5C. Neal Tate, “Why the Expansion of Judicial Power,” in The Global Expansion of Judicial Power, ed.C. Neal Tate and Torbjorn Vallinder (New York: New York University Press, 1995), 27–37. In an earlier article,Tate argued that authoritarian regimes, too, might find an independent judiciary beneficiary: see C. Neal Tate,“Courts and Crisis Regimes: A Theory Sketch with Asian Case Studies,” Political Research Quarterly (1992):311–38.6Nathan Brown, The Rule of Law in the Arab Middle East: Courts in Egypt and the Gulf (Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, 1997), 241.7In Chile, for example, while General Pinochet did not interfere with the independence of the judiciary,the Chilean Supreme Court found the policies of the authoritarian regime more agreeable than those of itshttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at272 Hootan Shambayatidemocratically elected predecessor. Before leaving office, General Pinochet packed the Supreme Court withhis supporters: see Jorge Correa Sutil, “The Judiciary and the Political System in Chile: The Dilemmas ofJudicial Independence during the Transition to Democracy,” in Transition to Democracy in Latin America:The Role of the Judiciary, ed. Irwin P. Stotzky (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1993), 89–106.8Tate, “Courts and Crisis Regimes.”9In the Philippines, for example, the number of politically significant cases decided by the Supreme Courtrose during both the crisis of the democratic regime that brought Ferdinand Marcos to power and duringthe demise of his dictatorship: see C. Neal Tate, “Courts and the Breakdown and Recreation of PhilippinesDemocracy: Evidence from the Supreme Court’s Agenda,” International Social Science Journal (1997): 279–91.10Stephen D. Krasner, “A World Court That Could Backfire,” New York Times, 15 January 2001.11Terry Lynn Karl, “Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America,” in Comparative Political Dynamics:Global Research Perspectives, ed. Dankwart A. Rustow and Kenneth O. Erickson (New York: HarperCollins,1991), 180.12J. Samuel Fitch, The Armed Forces and Democracy in Latin America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1998), 38–40.13Daniel Brumberg, Reinventing Khomeini: The Struggle for Reform in Iran (Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, 2001), 33–34.14Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman, The Political Economy of Democratic Transitions (Princeton,N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995), 121.15Both General Pinochet in Chile and General Evren in Turkey used this tactic.16Brumberg, Reinventing Khomeini, 34.17Asghar Schirazi, The Constitution of Iran: Politics and the State in the Islamic Republic, trans. JohnO’Kane (London: I. B. Tauris, 1997).18Ibid., 52.19This typology is based on Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan, Problems of Democratic Transition and Consol-idation: Southern Europe, South America, and Post-Communist Europe (Baltimore: John Hopkins UniversityPress, 1996), chap. 3.20H. E. Chehabi, “The Political Regime of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Comparative Perspective,”Government and Opposition 36 (2001): 48–70.21On parliamentary politics in Iran, see Bahman Baktiari, Parliamentary Politics in Revolutionary Iran(Gainesville.: University of Florida Press, 1996).22Chehabi, “Political Regime,” 65.23On the Iranian constitution and the system that it has created, see Schirazi, Constitution of Iran, and WilfriedBuchta, Who Rules Iran? The Structure of Power in the Islamic Republic (Washington, D.C.: WashingtonInstitute for Near East Policy, 2000).24The Council of National Security (Milli Gu¨venlik Konseyi) consisted of the military generals who had ledthe coup and is different from the National Security Council (Milli Gu¨venlik Kurulu).25Ergun ¨Ozbudun, “Turkey: Crises, Interruptions, and Reequilibriums,” in Politics in Developing Countries:Comparing Experiences with Democracy, 2nd ed., ed. Larry Diamond, Juan J. Linz, and Seymour Martin Lipset(Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1995), 238.26Provisional Article 1 of the constitution specified that, upon the proclamation of the constitution, “theChairman of the Council of National Security and Head of State [General Evren], shall assume the title ofthe President of the Republic and shall exercise the constitutional functions and powers of the President for aperiod of seven years.”27¨Ozbudun, “Turkey.”28¨Umit Cizre Sakalliogˇlu, “The Anatomy of the Turkish Military’s Political Autonomy,” ComparativePolitics (1997): 158. One can also argue that, given the extensive powers of the presidency, what has beenestablished is a triple-headed executive system. On the powers of the Turkish presidency, see Ergun ¨Ozbudun,“The Status of the President of the Republic under the Turkish Constitution of 1982: Presidentialism orParliamentarism?” in State, Democracy and the Military: Turkey in the 1980s, ed. Metin Heper and AhmetEvin (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1988), 37–45.29The participation of the NSC’s secretary-general, always an active-duty military officer, in the council’sdeliberations means that the armed forces enjoy numerical superiority on the council. In October 2001, thenumber of civilians on the council was increased. By itself, however, this change is unlikely to decrease thehttps:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 273military’s influence. As the military chief of general staff has noted, the military does not object to introducing“even 100 civilians to the Security Council if that is the wish of the [European Union],” because the NSC’sdecisions are made “not by majority of votes, but by consensus:” see Eric Rouleau, “Turkey’s Modern Pashas,”Le Monde diplomatique, English ed., 4 September 2000.30The wording was changed in October 2001 to emphasis the advisory nature of the NSC.31¨Omer Faruk Genc¸kaya, “The Impact of Organizational Attributes on Legislative Performance: AStructural–Functional Analysis of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, 1983–1987” (Ph.D. diss., Bog˘aziciUniversity, Istanbul, 1990), 45.32Ahmet Evin, “Demilitarization and Civilianization of the Regime,” in Politics in the Third Turkish Re-public, ed. Metin Heper and Ahmet Evin (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1994), 25; see also ¨Ozbudun,Contemporary Turkish Politics, chap. 5.33Sakalliogˇlu, “Anatomy,” 158.34William Hale, Turkish Politics and the Military (London: Routledge, 1994); Metin Heper and Aylin Gu¨ney,“The Military and Democracy in the Third Turkish Republic,” Armed Forces and Society (1996): 619–42; MetinHeper and Aylin Gu¨ney, “The Military, Political Islam, and Democracy in Turkey,” Armed Forces and Society(2000): 635–57; Ben Lombardi, “Turkey: The Return of Reluctant Generals?” Political Science Quarterly 112(1997): 191–215.35One of the complaints against former Prime Minister Erbakan was that, although he had agreed to thedecisions reached at the NSC meeting on 28 February 1997, he had failed to enact them into law.36Strictly speaking, the Supreme Leader is an elected official. An elected assembly of religious experts, theMajles-e Khobregan, selects him for life. The indirect manner of his election, the permanency of his position,his lack of accountability to elected institutions and the population at large, the limitations put on membershipin the Assembly of Experts, and his claim to quasi-infallibility, however, have meant that in practice he is anunelected official.37These boards have extensive policy-making powers and do not limit themselves to a supervisory role.38Both Turkish jurists and international observers have criticized the presence of the minister of justice andthe under-secretary of the Ministry of Justice on the Supreme Council of Judges and Public Prosecutors as athreat to the independence of the judiciary: see Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and Crowley Programin International Human Rights, Obstacles to Reform: Exceptional Courts, Police Impunity and Persecution ofHuman Rights Defenders in Turkey (New York: Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and Crowley Programin International Human Rights, 1999).39¨Omer Faruk Genc¸kaya, “The Turkish Constitutional Court and the Dissolution of Political Parties: Com-parative Perspectives,” in Suna Kili’ye Armagˇan: cumhuriyete adanan bir yas¸am (Istanbul, 1998), 165–84.40Erhard Blankenburg, “Changes in Political Regimes and the Continuity of the Rule of Law in Germany,”in Law and Politics in Comparative Perspective, ed. Jacob Herbert et al. (New Haven, Conn.: Yale UniversityPress, 1996), 265.41Some of the parties were closed for administrative reasons, such as the failure to file the appropriateforms. Others, however, were closed for ideological reasons. Of these, the most important were pro–Kurdishpolitical parties such as the Democratic Party and the People’s Party. In January 1998, the court closed theIslamist Refah Party, which at the time was the single largest political party in Parliament. Refah’s successor,the Fazilet Party, was closed in June 2001. On party closures in Turkey, see Genc¸kaya, “Turkish ConstitutionalCourt.”42Yekta Gu¨ngo¨r ¨Ozden, “Opening Speech by Yekta Gu¨ngo¨r ¨Ozden, President of the Turkish ConstitutionalCourt,” Constitutional Jurisdiction 9 (1993): 15.43Mehmet Turhan, The Constitutional Court of Turkey (Ankara: Constitutional Court, 1991), 4–5.44The European Court of Human Rights found the presence of the military judge to be in violation of thedefendant’s right to trial before a fair and impartial tribunal: European Court of Human Rights in Incal v Turkey(EHCR 41/1997/825/1031), 9 June 1998. In June 1999, in anticipation of criticism from the European Courtconcerning the trial of the Kurdish separatist leader Abdullah Ocalan, Parliament amended the constitution toreplace the military judges serving on SSCs with civilian judges.45¨Ozden, “Opening Speech,” 9, 22.46Turkish News, 17 February 2001. The chief prosecutor is responsible for filing cases against politicalparties.47Eric Rouleau, “Iran: An Economy in Need of Reform,” Middle East Economic Survey 42 (1999).https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at274 Hootan Shambayati48On the role of the press in Khatami’s victory and the judiciary’s attack on the press, see Zarir Merat,“Pushing Back the Limits of the Possible: The Press in Iran,” Middle East Report 212 (1999), 32–35; RaminKarimian and Sha’banali Bahrampour, “Iranian Press Update,” Middle East Report 212 (1999), 38–39.49Fariba Adelkhah, Being Modern in Iran, trans. Jonathan Derrick (New York: Columbia University Press,2000), 23.50Jahangir Amuzegar, “Khatami’s Iran, One Year Later,” Middle East Policy 6 (1998): 76–93; Shaul Bakhash,“Iran’s Remarkable Election,” Journal of Democracy (1998): 80–94; Stephen C. Fairbanks, “Theocracy ver-sus Democracy: Iran Considers Political Parties,” Middle East Journal (1998): 17–31; Farhang Rajaee, “AThermidor of ‘Islamic Yuppies’? Conflict and Compromise in Iran’s Politics,” Middle East Journal (1999):217–31.51Rajaee, “‘Islamic Yuppies’?” 226.52Ibid.53The charges against Karbaschi were partially based on the “confessions” of arrested municipal officials,some of whom filed a lawsuit against the security officials for allegedly using excessive force and torture inobtaining their testimonies. That trail did result in the conviction of some of the security officers involved.54Kar va Kargar reported that a deal had been struck according to which Karbaschi would be put on trialand found guilty and would receive a reduced sentence but would be permanently discharged from governmentservice. The paper also reported that Ayatollah Yazdi would not seek reappointment as the head of the judiciary:(“Iran: Tehran Paper Predicts Yazdi’s, Tehran Mayor’s Replacement,” IRNA, 22 April 1998, FBIS-NES-98-112,22 April 1998. In June 1999, Ayatollah Yazdi announced that he would not ask for the renewal of his term.55The trial was held in Public Court (Dadgah-e ’am), where the judge also acts as the prosecutor. On Iran’sjudicial system, see Azadeh Niknam, “The Islamization of Law in Iran: A Time of Disenchantment,” MiddleEast Report 212 (1999), 17–21.56See Karbaschi, Muhakimih va Defa‘ (Tehran: Farhang va Andisheh, 1998). This line of defense, asAdelkhah points out, is not uncommon in Iran and fits well within the culture of javanmardi: see Adelkhah,Being Modern in Iran.57At least one newspaper publisher, Abdullah Nouri, was charged with the crime of agitating public opinionagainst the judiciary by publishing a reader’s letter criticizing the court verdict against Karbaschi: see AbdullahNouri, Shukran-i islah: Defa’iyat-i Abdullah Nouri (Hemlock for Advocate of Reform: The Complete Text ofAbdullah Nouri’s Defense at the Special Clerical Court) (Tehran: Tarh-e No, 1999), 102–106.58“Khatami Regrets Iran Deprived of Karbaschi’s Services,” IRNA, 8 May 1999, FBIS-NES-1999-0508,8 May 1999.59“Why Regrets for Karbaschi?” Tehran Times, 10 May 1999, FBIS-NES-1999-0510, 10 May 1999.60Bizhan Moqaddam, “Iran: Political Groupings, Law Abidingness Viewed,” Resalat, 26 July 1998, FBIS-NES-98-239, 27 August 1998.61He will not serve any additional prison time; nor will he pay the 1,600 million rial fine. The ban on holdingpublic office remains intact: Jonathan Lyons, “Teheran Ex-Mayor Freed, Returns to Politics,” Reuters, 25January 2000, available from: http://dailynews.yahoo.com/h/nm/20000125/wl/iran-mayor-2.html. Ironically,the pardon hurt Karbaschi’s reputation, and the reformers criticized him for accepting the pardon: see MortezaMardiha, “Marg-e Qahraman” (The Death of the Hero), reprinted in Akbar Ganji, ↪Alijenab-i Surkhposh va↪alijenab-i khakestari: Asibshenasi gozara beh doulat-i demokratik-i tos↪ehgara (The Red Eminence and theGray Eminences: Pathology of Transition to the Developmental Democratic State) (Tehran: Tarh-e No, 2000),250–52. Mardiha’s column originally appeared in ↪Asr-e Azadegan, 31 January 2000.62Sakalliogˇlu, “Anatomy,” 158.63The military accused the government of being soft on Islamic fundamentalism. Its recommendations tocombat the threat of fundamentalism were adopted by the NSC on 28 February 1997. However, the militarycontinued to criticize the government for not implementing the recommendations.64The Constitutional Court closed the Fazilet Party in June 2001.65The court verdict noted that the case against Erdogˇan was related to the activities of the Refah Party inoffice.66The National Salvation Party and all other political parties were closed after the 1980 military coup.67Ugur Akinci, “The Welfare Party’s Municipal Track Record: Evaluating Islamist Municipal Activism inTurkey,” Middle East Journal 53 (1999): 75–94; Metin Heper, “Islam and Democracy in Turkey: Toward aReconciliation?” Middle East Journal 51 (1997): 32–45; Sabri Sayari, “Turkey’s Islamist Challenge” MiddleEast Quarterly (1996): 35–43; Jenny B. White, “Pragmatists or Ideologues? Turkey’s Welfare Party in Power,”https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available atA Tale of Two Mayors 275Current History (1997): 25–30; Hakan Yavuz, “Political Islam and the Welfare Party in Turkey,” ComparativePolitics 30 (1997): 63–82.68His legal team has published the documents relating to the case: see Faik Is¸ik, ed., Recep Tayyip ErdogˇanDavası (Recep Tayyip Erdogˇan’s Trial) (Istanbul, 1998).69Anatolia Agency, 4 June and 23 September 1998, FBIS-WEU-98-266.70Anatolia Agency, 29 September 1998; U.S. Department of State. “Turkey: Country Report on HumanRights Practices for 1998,” Washington, D.C., 1999.71Metin Heper, ed., Local Government in Turkey: Governing Greater Istanbul (London: Routledge, 1989).72Erdogˇan made this claim during his speech in Siirt.73Karbaschi, Muhakimih va Defa’, 107–108.74Ibid., 216–17, 321–23.75White, “Pragmatists or Ideologues?” 26.76Kaveh Ehsani, “Municipal Matters,” Middle East Report 212 (1999): 22–27.77“Rationality Should Rule in Karbaschi’s Trial,” Tehran Times, 11 June 1998, FBIS-NES-98-167, 16 June1998.78“Remote Control,” Keyhan, 8 May 1999, FBIS-NES-1999-0509, 8 May 1999.79The press court shut down Hammihan on 16 May 2001.80Former President Hashemi-Rafsanjani had differences with Ayatollah Khamenei concerning the modern-ization of the economy and the relaxation of some social restrictions.81Mardiha, “Marg-e Qahraman,” 250–51.82On Karbaschi, see Adelkhah, Being Modern in Iran, and Rajaee “‘Islamic Yuppies’?” On Erdogˇan, seeMetin Heper and S¸oleh Toktas¸, “Islam, Modernity, and Democracy in Contemporary Turkey: The Case ofRecep Tayyip Erdogˇan,” The Muslim World 93 (2003): 157–85.83Brumberg, Reinventing Khomeini, 5.84Promotion of Turkish judges is partially based on the review of their decisions by more senior judges.85¨Ozden, “Opening Speech,” 16.86Akbar Ganji, “Tanaquz dar Guftar, bi ’adalati dar raftar” (Contradiction in Talk, Injustice in Action), inGanji, Red Eminence, 80.87Pro–Kurdish political parties have followed a similar pattern. Since 1993, the Constitutional Court hasclosed two pro–Kurdish political parties; a case against the third is pending: See Nicole F. Watts, “Allies andEnemies: Pro–Kurdish Parties in Turkish Politics, 1990–94,” International Journal of Middle East Studies 31(1999): 631–56.88Fikret Bila, “Baba↪dan ‘kuzu’ benzetmesi,” Milliyet, Internet ed., 23 March 1998, available from:http://www.milliyet.com.tr/1998/03/22/index.html.https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020743804362057Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 05 Feb 2017 at 04:23:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at