ABSTRACT: 
The study of the urban experience in Lisbon, the former capital of the Portuguese empire, creates a specific observatory to interpret the colonial process and its post-colonial developments. Following an itinerary from colonial to post-colonial times, this article examines the continuities and discontinuities of Lisbon's urban dynamics linked with Portugal's colonial history through three interlinked processes. First, the material inscription of policies of national identity in the memory space of the city since the late nineteenth century until today. Second, the expansion of a network of economic relations that affected Lisbon's industrial, commercial and urban life. And finally, the development of a system of social and political organization, where spatial distribution and civil and political rights were unequally distributed.info:eu-repo/semantics/publishedVersio. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we consider the effect of the shape of the local environment on the dynamics of the evolution of a complex system .<n> we show that the shape of the environment has a profound effect on the dynamics of the system .<n> in particular , we show that the effect of the shape of the local environment on the evolution of a system can be explained by the existence of a critical curve in the energy landscape of the system .<n> this critical curve is determined by the geometry of the system , which is in turn determined by the shape of the local environment .<n> we demonstrate the existence of a critical curve in the energy landscape of the system , which is determined by the geometry of the system . <n> the study of the evolution of a complex system is one of the most fundamental problems in physics .<n> the evolution of a complex system is governed by the state of the system , which is the state of the system itself .<n> the state of the system is determined by its past , which can be represented by the state of the system .<n> the state of the system is determined by the history of the system .<n> the history of the system is a result of the state of the system .<n> the state of the 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Urban History, Page 1 of 20 © Cambridge University Press 2018doi:10.1017/S0963926818000366Lisbon: reading the(post-)colonial city from thenineteenth to the twenty-firstcenturyE L S A PE R A L T A and NU N O DO M I N G O SCentro de Estudos Comparatistas, Faculdade de Letras da Universidade deLisboa, Alameda da Universidade, 1600-214 Lisboa, PortugalInstituto de Ciências Sociais da Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Prof. AníbalBethencourt, 9,1600-089 Lisboa, Portugalabstract: The study of the urban experience in Lisbon, the former capital of thePortuguese empire, creates a specific observatory to interpret the colonial processand its post-colonial developments. Following an itinerary from colonial to post-colonial times, this article examines the continuities and discontinuities of Lisbon’surban dynamics linked with Portugal’s colonial history through three interlinkedprocesses. First, the material inscription of policies of national identity in thememory space of the city since the late nineteenth century until today. Second,the expansion of a network of economic relations that affected Lisbon’s industrial,commercial and urban life. And finally, the development of a system of social andpolitical organization, where spatial distribution and civil and political rights wereunequally distributed.Focusing on Lisbon, this article aims to address the continuities betweenthe colonial and the post-colonial periods in the institutions andrepresentations of the city’s imperial past. Some of the presumptionsin which this article is based can be found in studies about imperialmetropolises such as London or Paris. Drawing on studies by, amongstothers, Felix Driver and David Gilbert,1 the article contributes to abody of scholarship that analyses urban developments in metropolitancentres in close relation with the global institution of modern colonialismat a time when, as Anthony King put it, imperial cities operated ascentral nodes of world trade and imperialist expansion throughout1 D. Gilbert and F. Driver (eds.), Imperial Cities: Landscape, Display and Identity (Manchester,1999); D. Gilbert and F. Driver, ‘Capital and empire: geographies of imperial London’,GeoJournal, 51 (2000), 23–32. See also J. Schneer, London 1900: The Imperial Metropolis(London, 1999); D. Sunderland, Financing the Raj: The City of London and Colonial India, 1858–1940 (London, 2013).of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms2 Urban Historythe nineteenth and twentieth centuries.2 This means looking at theimaginative colonial geographies3 set in imperial metropolises, theimprint of exotic architectural styles and the building of monuments tocelebrate imperial triumphs and deeds. It also means looking at the severalways in which empire produced new social and material arrangementsin imperial cities, since the use of peripheral territories for primaryproduction or resource extraction prompted the growth of industrial andcommercial urban centres and the emergence of new urban classes.4The social and material imprint of colonialism in metropolitan centresgoes far beyond the formal end of colonialism to continue influencinghow former imperial centres have been situated in the new local andregional global power arrangements in post-colonial times. Drawing onstudies that place the genealogy of contemporary global cities in thepower architectures inherited from colonial times,5 this article follows theimperial metropolis to the post-imperial city of the global world. Imperialcities operated as centres of power and connection for the complexnetwork of relationships and exchanges which underpins the currentworld system.6 They were important loci of production and circulationof the imperial and modern capitalist culture, thereby contributing greatlyto the reproduction of ideological, economic and cultural orders and tothe control of populations. These same global processes are facets of thepost-colonial experience, from the integration of immigrant populationsand their relationship with the state and the labour market to officialpolicies of imperial memory. Global cities are places of consumption,architectural pastiche and gentrification, where nostalgia for empire isfrequently reinvented by city marketers for tourists and where ethnicity2 A. King, Urbanism, Colonialism and the World Economy: Spatial and Cultural Foundations of theWorld-System (New York, 1990).3 F. Driver, ‘Imaginative geographies’, in P. Cloke, P. Crang and M. Goodwin (eds.),Introducing Human Geographies (London, 2005), 234–48.4 For example P. Chopra, ‘Refiguring the colonial city: recovering the role of local inhabitantsin the construction of colonial Bombay, 1854–1918’, Buildings & Landscapes: Journal of theVernacular Architecture Forum, 14 (2007), 109–25; P. Chopra, The City and Its Fragments:Colonial Bombay, 1854–1918, vol. II (Berkeley, 2003); S. Chattopadhyay, Representing Calcutta:Modernity, Nationalism, and the Colonial Uncanny (London, 2005); P. Kidambi, The Making ofan Indian Metropolis: Colonial Governance and Public Culture in Bombay, 1890–1920 (London,2016); A. Brown-May, Death, Decency and the Dead-house: The City Morgue in ColonialMelbourne (Victoria, 2004).5 A. King, Global Cities: Post-Imperialism and the Internationalization of London (New York,1990); J.M. Jacobs, Edge of Empire: Postcolonialism and the City (London and New York, 1996);J. Eade, Placing London: From Imperial Capital to Global City (New York, 2001); R. Varma, ThePostcolonial City and its Subjects: London, Nairobi, Bombay (London and New York, 2011);M. Matera, Black London: The Imperial Metropolis and Decolonization in the Twentieth Century(Berkeley, 2015).6 I. Wallerstein, The Modern World-System: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the EuropeanWorld-Economy in the Sixteenth Century (New York, 1976); S. Mintz, Sweetness and Power:The Place of Sugar in Modern History (New York, 1985); S. Beckert, Empire of Cotton: A GlobalHistory (New York, 2014).of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 3is often celebrated, although processes of racialization and racism oftenremain ‘a taboo vestige of colonial and neo-colonial exploitation’.7This article contends that the study of Lisbon’s urbanization has topay much greater attention to the influence exerted by the Portuguesecolonial experience. As presented here, Lisbon’s case is comparable toother cities whose urbanization was significantly altered by colonialism.Considered to be the capital of a peripheral empire, Lisbon was also thehead of an imperial power that through most of the twentieth century wasled by a fascist-type regime, whose policies framed the country’s colonialnationalism. The transition to democracy did not obliterate the colonialpast. Instead, it updated it to accommodate former legacies to new globallanguages. These are legacies of the colonial ‘past as it lives now’, as Benoîtde L’Estoile has called them, in reference to the ‘many ways it is present inEurope today, as it is in formerly colonized countries around the globe’.8While connecting the Portuguese colonial history within the urban historyof Lisbon, this article is thus also a contribution to a discussion on thecontemporary legacies of Portuguese colonialism.Imperial space and the politics of national identityFrom the last quarter of the nineteenth century, a transition from an‘informal imperialism’ took place, based on the military control overoverseas territories, to a more direct domination based on effectiveoccupation.9 Conflicting pretensions of different European powers overAfrica were at stake, which resulted in the Berlin Conference (1884–85). Inthis context, internally pressured by the establishment of the liberal regimeand the independence of Brazil, which took place in 1822, a new imperialproject centred in Africa emerged in Portugal. Along with successivedesigns of effective colonization, usually with very limited success, radicalexpressions of imperial nationalism also began to take shape, even duringthe transition to constitutional monarchy in 1822. Imperial nationalismwas especially fostered by the rising Republican party and steadily gainedpopular support.Imperial populism reached an exaggerated expression with the 1890British Ultimatum. Against Portugal’s ambition to unite Angola andMozambique,10 Britain forced Lisbon’s government to withdraw its forcesfrom the territories of the Chire and Upper Zambezi, on pain of severanceof diplomatic relations and attack by the British navy. The Portuguesegovernment promptly withdrew, but the event had a profound impacton the country’s political scene. National newspapers described it as7 M. Cross and M. Keith (eds.), Racism, the City and the State (London, 1993), 8.8 B. de L’Estoile, ‘The past as it lives: an anthropology of colonial legacies’, SocialAnthropology, 16 (2008), 267–79.9 G. Barton, Informal Empire and the Rise of One World Culture (Basingstoke, 2014).10 This ambition was set out in a project known as the ‘Pink Map’ (Mapa Cor-de-Rosa)submitted at the Berlin Conference (1884–85).of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms4 Urban Historya tremendous national humiliation and as a plundering of Portugal’shistorical rights over its inalienable overseas possessions and caused anationalist uproar, on which the Republican party capitalized heavily,turning out to be a major factor in bringing down the monarchy andestablishing the Republic in 1910. These nationalistic demonstrations wereloudest in Lisbon.11Portuguese society became embroiled in the African question, whichbecame an issue of national identity.12 The colonial empire was enshrinedas a key element of Portuguese national history, definitively implanting themyth of the ‘sacred heritage’ of empire; that is, as a heritage to preserveat any cost.13 Without being able to prove the effective occupation andcontrol over the territories Portugal claimed, the Portuguese empire wasbased on the historical past, on the saga of the maritime discoveries ofthe fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Portugal appealed to the legacyof the ‘golden age’ of national history to assert what was considered bythe political and intellectual elites to be the country’s legitimate rights inAfrica: the Portuguese were not only the first to arrive, but had discoveredthese territories, too.In the sphere of colonial policy, the urgency of preserving this ‘sacredheritage’, with the numerous benefits expected from it, resulted in theorganization of military campaigns for the occupation of the Africanterritories, as well as the organization of geographical expeditions toexplore the African interior, in response to the general research movementof the Continent carried out by the other European powers. The newconquerors and explorers – Silva Porto, Roberto Ivens, Brito Capelo, SerpaPinto, António Maria Cardoso, Vítor Cordon, Paiva de Andrada, AlvesRoçadas, Paiva Couveiro and, above all, Mouzinho de Albuquerque –were converted into national heroes and recognized as the re-founders ofthe discoveries. The victory in Mozambique over Gungunhana, sovereignof the Vátuas, in the campaigns of 1895 and the subsequent processionthrough the streets of Lisbon of the defeated king, together with thetriumphant and enthusiastic reception of the victorious expeditionarytroops, were the definitive reasons for the sanctification of the empire atthe end of the nineteenth century.During this period, which was marked by a wave of patriotic exaltation,the discourses aimed at spreading a national-imperialist ideologymultiplied, particularly in the metropolitan capital. It was the ‘age of11 V. Alexandre, ‘Nação e império’, in F. Bethencourt and K. Chaudhuri (eds.), História daExpansão Portuguesa, vol. IV (Lisbon, 1998), 90–142.12 F. Bethencourt and D.R. Curto (eds.), A Memória da Nação (Lisbon, 1991); J. Mattoso,A Identidade Nacional (Lisbon, 1998); F. Bethencourt, ‘A memória da expansão’, inF. Bethencourt and K. Chaudhuri (eds.), História da Expansão Portuguesa, vol. V (Lisbon,1999), 442–80; L. Cunha, A Nação nas Malhas da sua Identidade: O Estado Novo e a Construçãoda Identidade Nacional (Porto, 2001).13 Alexandre, ‘Nação e império’, 132.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 5nationalism’14 and Portugal embarked on a number of commemorativeand celebratory actions to construct a coherent, homogenizing narrativeabout Portuguese national identity.15 The new imperial mythology waskey to this construction. It can be observed in the re-telling of Lisbon’shistory, with the celebration of iconic monuments and spaces linked withthe age of discoveries, the construction of new buildings, the erection ofstatues, the naming of streets and neighbourhoods, the organization ofexhibitions and other symbolic moments of socialization.16The first monumental actions took place with the aim of reconfiguringLisbon as an ‘imperial city’.17 The Jerónimos Monastery, stronglyassociated with the fifteenth-century voyages of overseas expansion, andthe Belém area where it is located, became key symbolic markers in thememorial landscape of Lisbon and focal points for many commemorativeactivities related to empire.18 Notwithstanding its symbolic value, bythe mid-eighteenth century the monastery was in ruins. Its symbolicappropriation as the great representative of the ‘golden age’ of thediscoveries came about with Liberalism, and thenceforth considered as theunique expression of the ‘national style’.19 Refurbishment work began onthe monastery in 1860 and it was classified as a site of national heritagein 1910, the same year the Portuguese Republic was proclaimed. TheJerónimos Monastery was thus definitively enshrined as a symbol of thePortuguese national-imperialist ideology, and has been used at differenthistorical moments by successive regimes as a stage for the most variedcivic celebrations of Portuguese nationality.In 1880, the monastery provided the stage for the celebrations of thetercentenary of Luís Vaz de Camões, author of sixteenth-century epicThe Lusiads, the magnum opus of the Portuguese people. The day wascelebrated nationally and the city of Lisbon was decked out to followthe civic procession to the Jerónimos Monastery, in whose pantheon weredeposited the remains attributed to Camões and to Vasco da Gama,the discoverer of the sea route to India (see Figure 1). Thus began acommemorative cycle dedicated to the glorification of the national epic,20with the aim of recalling the role of the Portuguese in the constructionof modern civilization and the nation’s place in the sharing of the14 H. Kohn, The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in its Origins and Background (New Brunswick,1961).15 S. Campos Matos, Conscien̂cia Histórica e Nacionalismo, Portugal Séculos XIX e XX (Lisbon,2008).16 Bethencourt, ‘A memória da expansão’, 442.17 Driver and Gilbert (eds.), Imperial Cities.18 E. Peralta, ‘A composição de um complexo de memória: O caso de Belém, Lisboa’, inN. Domingos and E. Peralta (eds.), Cidade e Império: Dinâmicas Coloniais e ReconfiguraçõesPós-coloniais (Lisbon, 2013), 361–407.19 Bethencourt, ‘A memória da expansão’, 445.20 In addition to the celebrations of 1880, this commemorative cycle included the fourthcentenaries of the birth of Prince Henry (1894), the discovery of the maritime route toIndia (1898), the discovery of Brazil (1900), the conquest of Ceuta and the anniversariesof Afonso de Albuquerque (1915) and Vasco da Gama (1925), amongst others.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms6 Urban HistoryFigure 1: (Colour online) Celebrations of the tercentennial of Luís deCamões (c. 1524–80). The pavilion set up at the Commerce Square, 1 Jul.1880, in Hemeroteca Digital, O Ocidente: Revista Ilustrada de Portugal e doEstrangeiro, 61, 1 Jul. 1880.world among European powers, while fostering national ‘self-esteem’ andenthusiasm for the imperial cause.21 Following the model of the civiccelebrations of the French Revolution, these commemorations were largelythe result of the initiative of republican men whose intention was tohighlight the contrast between the decadence of the present and the gloriesof the past and who urged a new era – that of the Republic – and a breakwith the past of national decadence, symbolized by the monarchy.Widely participated by society at large and heavily advertised bythe republican press, the main promoter of the celebrations was theSociedade de Geografia de Lisboa, a private institution founded in1875 with the aim of developing scientific studies on the coloniesand promoting expeditions to Africa to explore the territories. TheSociety played a key role in inventing the memory of Portugueseexpansion and in constructing and disseminating knowledge aboutoverseas colonies, promoting conferences, honouring African explorersand conquerors and supporting historical celebrations. The Colonialand Ethnographic Museum operated in the Society’s Lisbon premisesfrom 1892, with a collection related to the history of colonial expansion21 Alexandre, ‘Nação e império’, 117.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 7and to the exploration of the African continent.22 The Colonial School,which specialized in the training of personnel for the Overseas PublicAdministration, was also based on the premises of the Society andinaugurated in 1906, under the supervision of the Ministério da Marinhae Ultramar (Ministry of the Navy and Overseas).The colonial worldview gradually became absorbed into the cityspace through institutional semantics used in the naming of schools,organizations and institutions, and in the creation of museums withcollections dedicated to colonial themes. In 1903, the PortugueseEthnographic Museum, founded in 1893, was installed in an area ofthe western wing of the Jerónimos Monastery. Despite being mainlyan archaeological museum dedicated to the ‘Portuguese Man’, it had aPortuguese Overseas Room focusing on the peoples of the colonies, thusincluding this dimension in the comprehensive representation of Portugaland the ‘Portuguese People’ that was intended in the monastery, the mainstage of Portuguese nationality.23In this period, colonialism also crept into the space of the city in lessexplicit, yet deliberate, ways. For instance, many exotic species of treesfrom Brazil, Africa and Asia were planted around the city, constituting amemory, at the same time visible and imperceptible, of the Portugueseexpansion in the public spaces of the city that thus acquired a colonialflavour. This purpose was also achieved by the creation of BotanicalGardens, such as the Jardim Botânico de Lisboa (1878), located in the citycentre, and Jardim Colonial, established in 1912 in Belém, together withthe Colonial Agricultural Museum, created in 1929.Imaginary geographiesThe memory of the Portuguese expansion and the imaginary geographiesof the empire were also perennially inscribed in the symbolic landscapeof the city through toponymy and, to a lesser degree, statuary. The firstinitiative of this type was the inauguration in 1867 of the statue of Camões,placed in a square also baptized with the name of the poet. In the Belémquarter in 1880, the year of the commemoration of the tercentenary ofCamões, the Praça D. Vasco da Gama was named after the discoverer ofthe sea route to India, and in 1901 the statue of Afonso de Albuquerquewas erected in a square and garden that were named after the viceroyand governor of India. Moreover, in Belém, Rua Bartolomeu Dias was sonamed in 1911 as a tribute to the fifteenth-century navigator. Several newstreets and squares were named in other areas of the city, either after themaritime expansion or for imperial deeds. For instance, the Streets Capelo,Ivens and Serpa Pinto were baptized in 1885, and in 1890, the year of British22 M.I. João, ‘Organização da memória’, in Bethencourt and Chaudhuri (eds.), História daExpansão Portuguesa, vol. IV, 376–402.23 João, ‘Organização da memória’, 392.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms8 Urban HistoryUltimatum, the Streets António Maria Cardoso, Paiva de Andrada andVítor Cordon, all of them explorers of the African territories, were alsonamed. The purpose was to ‘perpetuate in the memory of the peoples andthroughout the generations the names of those who deal with self-denialand value for the greatness of the motherland, and renew today in Africanlands the brilliance of our best traditions’.24After the military dictatorship in 1926, followed by the establishmentof the Estado Novo regime in 1933, the development of a nationalist,integrationist and centralizing colonial policy was accompanied by thepromotion of a true ‘imperial mystique’ related to empire. This mystiquewas based on the cult of heroes and the idea of a linear historicalprogression from the founding of the nation to the maritime empire. Itpermeated the regime’s cultural production, from education programmesand school textbooks to exhibitions and scientific conferences. The AgênciaGeral das Colónias (General Agency of the Colonies), created in 1924,was revitalized by the new regime and swiftly began to create a colonialpropaganda apparatus, which included publishing books, producing filmsand radio broadcasts and organizing courses, seminars and scientificcongresses. As in other imperial contexts, colonial propaganda wasparticularly aimed at an urban audience that supported the emergence ofa popular culture linked with mass consumption.25At the same time, there was a monumental glorification of the empire,particularly in Lisbon. In this glorification, the Jerónimos Monasteryand the Belém area were again key elements and soon became icons inthe dramatization of a mystical imperial discourse.26 One of the finestexamples of this glorification was the Portuguese World Exhibition held inBelém from June to December 1940, which, as the largest of all propagandainitiatives organized by the regime, received more than 3 million visitors,most of them Portuguese, at a time when Europe was being torn apartby war.27 Conceived to mark the anniversary of the founding of thenation in 1143 and the restoration of independence from Spain in 1640, theexhibition included several pavilions and temporary displays dedicatedto the empire, as well as a colonial section in the Jardim das Colóniaswith reconstructed villages and dwellings of the indigenous peoples ofthe colonies. As in other European imperial contexts, so the metropolitanPortuguese were invited to see Portugal’s national community, bothmetropolitan and overseas, as a whole, thereby mobilizing public24 Notice (Edital) of the Lisbon City Council, of 6 Feb. 1890, in Toponímia de Lisboa, https://toponimialisboa.wordpress.com/2015/09/page/2/, accessed 7 Jun. 2017.25 J. Mackenzie, Imperialism and Popular Culture (Manchester 1986); N. Domingos, ‘Culturapopular urbana e configurações imperiais’, in M.B. Jerónimo (ed.), O Império Colonial emQuestão (Séculos XIX–XX) (Lisbon, 2012), 391–421.26 Peralta, ‘A composição de um complexo de memória imperial’.27 D. Corkill and J.P. Almeida, ‘Commemoration and propaganda in Salazar’s Portugal: thePortuguese World exposition of 1940’, Journal of Contemporary History, 44 (2009), 381–99.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 9support for the empire and promoting the colonial policy of theEstado Novo.28The exhibition left lasting landmarks in the Lisbon landscape. A hugesquare called Praça do Império (Empire Square), designed by the architectCottinelli Telmo, was created in front of the Jerónimos Monastery and theBelém area was completely revamped to become a ‘public audience ofpermanent access to the framework of the nation’s sacred references’.29Accordingly, in Belém and elsewhere in the city streets were named afternavigators, protagonists and places related to overseas expansion. Witheven greater emphasis than in the previous period, during Estado Novothe marks of the empire were embedded in the ‘imaginative geographies’of the capital, in an enduring celebration of the imperial feats of nationalhistory.This street naming served as a symbolic response of the regime tothe changing international pressures over Portuguese colonial dominions.Following the independence of India in 1947, and in response to thedemand for the integration of Portuguese India into the Indian Union, in1948 the government created in Belém the squares of Damão, Diu and Goa,as well as several other place names linked to the Portuguese expansion,such as Índia and Dom Vasco da Gama Avenues, Streets São FranciscoXavier and Fernão Mendes Pinto and the Square D. Manuel I. In the1960s, in a context of international pressure for decolonization and thebeginning of the colonial wars in Africa, several other toponyms alludingto Portuguese expansion were assigned in the Belém area and the Restelohill nearby, with several streets named after navigators, missionaries andexplorers of the discoveries. The colonial war itself, which began in Angolain 1961, also played out on the toponymic board of Lisbon. In severalareas of the city, but particularly in the new suburb of Olivais, streets werenamed again after soldiers killed in combat overseas, with the caption‘Died Serving the Homeland’.30The colonial theme was also the target of various symbolic investmentsby the Estado Novo through the opening of a new commemorative cyclerelated to the discoveries as well as through other acts of public memory.In 1960, for example, the Estado Novo celebrated the fifth centenary ofthe death of Prince D. Henrique, the main herald of the discoveries,organizing public ceremonies, academic seminars and conferences andpublishing books and other printed materials. These were accompaniedby other projects, the most relevant of which was the reconstruction of theMonument to the Discoveries in Lisbon. Originally, it was a temporaryplaster structure built for the 1940 Portuguese World Exhibition and28 P.H. Hoffenberg, An Empire on Display: English, Indian, and Australian Exhibitions from theCrystal Palace to the Great War (Berkeley, 2001).29 J.F. Branco, ‘Lugares para o Povo: uma periodização da cultura popular em Portugal’,Revista Lusitana (new ser.), 13–14 (1995), 163.30 In Toponímia de Lisboa, https://toponimialisboa.wordpress.com/2017/02/13/mortos-na-guine-e-angola-em-1963-na-toponimia-de-olivais-norte, accessed 7 Jun. 2017.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms10 Urban HistoryFigure 2: View of the Padrão dos Descobrimentos (Monument to theDiscoveries) on the northern bank of the Tagus River estuary, Lisbon,Portugal, at the time of its inauguration, on 9 Aug. 1960. 32 ships of 14nations were present, in U.S. Navy All Hands Magazine, Oct. 1960, 17.designed by the architects Cottinelli Telmo and Telmo de Almeida, but itlater became permanent, executed in concrete and masonry. As FranciscoBethencourt remarked, it was the ‘first monument that symbolicallymarks, in contemporary times, the “gesta” of expansion, concentrating allthe stereotypes that had been mobilized over time by erudite memoryand collective memory’.31 The monument represents a stylized caravelbow facing the Tagus River, flanked by the sculptures of 32 personages,including the kings, navigators, missionaries, intellectuals and conquerorsinvolved in the saga of the discoveries. In front of them is a larger-sizedfigure of Prince Henry, who symbolically holds a caravel in his hands (seeFigure 2).Once again, imperial symbolism was used by the colonial government,which appealed to Portugal’s seafaring past as arguments to face theoutside threats to the integrity of the empire. The Jerónimos Monasteryhosted the Museu de Marinha, a museum about Portuguese naval historythat opened to the public in 1962 with the ‘mission of safeguarding anddivulging the Portuguese maritime past’.32 At the same time, the Praça doImpério was restored, and 30 flower beds were added to represent the coatsof arms of the capital cities of Portugal and the provinces of the empire31 Bethencourt, ‘A memória da expansão’, 446.32 http://www.marinha.pt/pt-pt/marinha/cultura/Paginas/Museu-Marinha.aspx, acce-ssed 20 Jan. 2017.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 11in alphabetical order, from the province of Angola to Viseu, in northernPortugal. The aim was to reaffirm the unity and indivisibility of thePortuguese empire, achieved through a non-hierarchical representationof the whole Portuguese territory. This was, indeed, the main rhetoricaltool used by the Estado Novo against the international anti-colonialpolicies organized through the United Nations. In this reading, Portugalwas a multicontinental nation, which had neither colonies nor non-autonomous territories, but a territory that had the peculiarity of havingboth metropolitan territories and overseas territories as well, all with anequal status. Therefore, Portugal could not enact the self-determinationregime decreed by the United Nations in 1960.33In this period, the rhetoric of the regime came to be strongly expressedin the toponymy of Lisbon, with the establishment in the Olivaisneighbourhood in the 1960s and 1970s of toponyms alluding to towns andcities in the Portuguese colonies, such as Avenues Cidade de LourençoMarques and Cidade de Luanda, and the Streets Cidade de Benguela,Cidade de Bissau, Cidade da Praia, Cidade de Margão and Cidade deDili. On the outskirts of Lisbon, suburban communities had new streetsnamed after the heroes of the colonial expansion. The Estado Novothus perpetuated in the imagination of the city the geographies of thePortuguese colonial empire after the outbreak of the colonial wars. Ashad occurred in 1933, when the names of places in the empire wereattributed to the so-called Bairro das Colónias (District of the Colonies) inLisbon, with the Streets of Angola, Cabo Verde, Príncipe, São Tomé, Macau,Mozambique, Timor, Zaire and Angola, the toponymical inscriptionsalluding to the geographies of the empire were perpetuated in thememorial landscape of late twentieth-century Lisbon.However, while imperial imagination continued to be imprinted onthe social geography of Lisbon, the concrete reality of colonial life andpopulations remained too far removed from the daily life of the metropolis.In the first half of the twentieth century, the African populationsintroduced in Portugal through slavery since the middle of the fifteenth34century had almost vanished.35 Apart from a few individuals, amongthem students from the African colonies, who gathered between 1944 and1965 in the Home of the Students of the Empire (Casa dos Estudantesdo Império), a facility set up by the Estado Novo to educate the colonialelites,36 the presence of people from African or Indian origin in themetropolis was practically non-existent. It was only in the 1960s that the33 Anti-colonialist Declaration of the UN – General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV), 14 Dec.1960.34 I.C. Henriques, A Herança Africana em Portugal – Séculos XV–XX (CTT Correios de Portugal,2009).35 J.Y. Loude, Lisboa, na Cidade Negra (Lisbon, 2005).36 Mário Pinto de Andrade, Amilcar Cabral, Agostinho Neto and Alda Espírito Santo,amongst others, were some of these students coming from the colonies which later onbecame involved in the colonial resistance. See M.R. Sanches, ‘Lisboa, capital do império:of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms12 Urban Historyfirst contingent of Cape Verdean workers arrived, whose recruitment wasintended to overcome the labour shortage resulting from the emigrationof the Portuguese to Europe and from the military call-up for the colonialwars. It is estimated that around 100,000 Cape Verdean immigrantscame to Portugal between 1963 and 1974, with the majority settling inLisbon’s peripheries. Even so, the percentage of Africans in Portugalremained small, accounting for only 1.5 per cent of total foreigners in1960.37 Coming from rural areas, mostly illiterate or with only basicschooling, they settled on the outskirts of the city, often in slums and self-built neighbourhoods, and supplied the labour needed for the country’seconomic growth.38 Notwithstanding ideas of Luso-tropicalismo39 andracial and cultural equivalence, as imparted by the late propaganda of theEstado Novo regime, racial and class categorizations have subsequentlybeen part of the deep social and spatial segregation visible in post-colonialLisbon.Colonial legacies in the post-colonial global cityIn 1961, Salazar uttered the famous phrase that marked the beginning ofthe colonial war in Angola: ‘To Angola, quickly and in force!’40 The colonialwars Portugal waged against the African independence movementsspread to Guiné-Bissau (1963) and Mozambique (1964) and lasted until1974, when the revolutionary movement led by middle-ranking officersin the Portuguese armed forces overthrew the regime on 25 April andembarked on negotiations that heralded the end of the conflicts and thebeginning of independence. While they lasted, the colonial wars involved1,368,900 men and at least 8,831 died in combat.41 In the metropolis, theivory tower that held the idea of exceptionality of Portuguese colonialismwas finally toppled.In 1975, thousands of, mostly white, Portuguese settlers arrived inLisbon fleeing the growing political conflicts in Angola and Mozambique.They had headed to the African colonies, especially Angola andTrânsitos, afiliações, transnacionalismos’, in Domingos and Peralta (eds.), Cidade e Império,279–318.37 R.P. Pires, ‘O regresso das colónias’, in Bethencourt and Chaudhuri (eds.), História daExpansão Portuguesa, vol. V, 198–9.38 L. Batalha, ‘Cabo-Verdianos em Portugal: comunidade e identidade’, in P. Góis (ed.),Comunidade(s) Cabo-Verdiana(s): As Múltiplas Faces da Imigração Cabo-Verdiana (Lisbon,2008), 25–36.39 The term Luso-tropicalismo was coined by the Brazilian sociologist Gilberto Freyre and usedto describe the exceptional nature of Portuguese colonialism: G. Freyre, O Mundo que oPortuguês Criou (Lisbon, 1951).40 A famous phrase by Salazar, on 13 Apr. 1961, uttered in a speech broadcast on Portugueseradio and television. F.R. de Meneses, Salazar. Uma Biografia Política (Lisbon, 2010), 507.41 J.M. Ferreira, Portugal em Transe (1974–1985), in J. Mattoso (ed.), História de Portugal, vol.VII (Lisbon, 1994), 83, 87.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 13Mozambique, just a few decades before.42 When they returned, thesehalf million Portuguese were pejoratively called retornados (‘returnees’).Many of them were crammed into Lisbon Airport, rescued by the airbridge established by the Portuguese government over these territories, orclustered on the quaysides in the port of Lisbon, where they also arrivedby boat along with the few belongings they managed to salvage. Themigrations to Africa and the colonial wars in the 1960s had already givena tangible dimension to the empire in the social life of the metropolis,but it was the end of Portuguese colonialism that definitively broughtthe reality of the empire to the very heart of the metropolis. This was areality wrought from material and human remains, racial tensions, formsof colonial exploitation and political resentments brought by the returneeswho came to Lisbon in 1975.In the aftermath of the Revolution, the former imperial subjects alsostarted to arrive; that is, the black people who had been regarded asindígenas in Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Mozambique until 1961. The firstarrived as refugees, fleeing from civil wars that exploded in the formercolonial territories, now independent countries, or from persecutionjustified by their collaboration with the colonial ruler. The revision of theNationality Law in 1975, which had reserved Portuguese citizenship forindividuals who could prove their European ancestry, largely excludedfrom Portuguese citizenship individuals belonging to other phenotypesand cultures. The former citizens of empire were now seen as a foreign,potentially immigrant, population.43 The migrant labourers from thePortuguese-speaking countries also started to arrive, especially duringthe 1980s, from Cape Verde, Angola and Guinea-Bissau. While in 1960the proportion of Africans in the total number of foreigners in Portugalwas only 1.5 per cent, by 1981 that figure reached 44 per cent.44 Theindependence of Mozambique in 1975 created a new wave of Indianmigrants, who had moved there after the integration of Portuguese Indiainto the Indian Union in 1961. Most of them were skilled middle-classGoans who held a Portuguese passport, but a group of Ishmaelites alsocame. The Ishmaelites developed a network of commercial interests,visible in areas of Lisbon such as the Avenue Almirante Reis, where theyopened several furniture stores.45 With the worsening of the political-economic situation in Mozambique, other groups of Indian migrants,including Hindus as well as Muslims, also departed for Portugal in42 The white population in Angola stands at 324,000 individuals in 1973 – compared with44,083 in 1940 – and in Mozambique at 190,000 individuals in 1973 – compared with27,438 in 1940: C. Castelo, ‘Colonial migration into Angola and Mozambique: constraintsand illusions’, in E. Morier-Genoud and M. Cahen (eds.), Imperial Migrations: ColonialCommunities and Diasporas in the Portuguese World (Basingstoke, 2012), 137–56.43 Decree Law 308-A, 24 Jun. 1975.44 Pires, ‘O regresso das colónias’, 199.45 J.M. Malheiros, ‘Circulação migratória e estratégias de inserção local das comunidadescatólica goesa e ismaelita. Uma interpretação a partir de Lisboa’, Lusotopie (2000), 377–98.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms14 Urban History1982–84.46 A Hindu community became established in Lisbon, mostlycomposed of people from the Indian state of Gujarat, and settled inmetropolitan residential areas like Quinta da Vitória, as well as close tothe city centre, in the Quinta da Holandesa neighbourhood of Areeiro.47The imperial nationalistic policies were transformed after the empire’scollapse in 1975. However, as in other former metropolises, the relationsof domination and exploitation established under colonialism continuedin many ways in post-colonial times and determined the nature ofpost-independence migration in Portugal, too.48 In the context of apolitical shift from an authoritarian colonialist regime to a democraticregime, the former categorizations of power and racialized representationsthat brought about deeply unequal relations in the colonial periodwere reformulated over time and came to guide social relationships,employment practices and everyday interaction systems that involvedimmigrants from former Portuguese colonies in Africa. For the most part,this population was employed in the construction industry or domesticservice, and usually suffered from social exclusion.49 The expansion ofthe labour market in Portugal was encouraged by a period of relativeeconomic growth, thanks to its membership of the European Unionfrom 1986 and to the country’s entry into the global market economy.Growth in the construction and public works sectors and the creation ofnew roles within Portuguese families, such as domestic service, fed theincreasing demand for immigrant labour from Portugal’s former coloniesfor unskilled jobs.50 These new immigrants settled in Lisbon’s suburbs, inillegal dwellings and self-built neighbourhoods, around the areas createdin the 1960s by internal labour migrations, further changing the social andracial morphology of the city.51 In Lisbon, these neighbourhoods, mostlyinhabited by Afro-descendants, are areas of social marginality, labelledby the media as especially problematic.52 The Diário de Notícias, a majorPortuguese newspaper, identified and described these neighbourhoods46 Ibid.47 R.A. Cachado, ‘Locating Portuguese Hindus: transnationality in urban settings’, Sociologia,Problemas e Práticas, 76 (2014), 109–24; N. Dias, Remigração e Etnicidade: Mobilidade Hindu noTrânsito Colonial entre a África de Leste e a Europa (Lisbon, 2016). According to Malheiros,in the early 1990s, there were 26,000 individuals of Indian origin in Lisbon: Malheiros,‘Circulação migratória, 389.48 Of the 417,042 immigrants registered in 2012, almost half were from Portuguese-speakingcountries (25.3% Brazilian, 10.3% Cape Verdean, 4.9% Angolans, 4.3% Guinean and 2.5%Sao Tome) (Serviço de Estrangeiros e Fronteiras, ‘Relatório de imigração, fronteiras easilo’, Público, 25 Jun. 2012, 6). The migrant population coming from these countries andPortuguese naturalized in the meantime must be added to these figures. The same sourceconfirms the strong urban presence of immigration, especially in Lisbon, with nearly halfthe immigrants in Portugal (181,901).49 Pires, ‘O regresso das colónias’, 197–8.50 J. Vasconcelos, ‘Africanos e afrodescendentes no Portugal contemporâneo: redefinindopráticas, projetos e identidades’, Cadernos de Estudos Africanos, 24 (2012), 15–23.51 J.M. Malheiros, Imigrantes na Região de Lisboa. Os Anos da Mudança (Lisbon, 1997).52 A.R. Alves, ‘(Pré) textos e contextos: media, periferia e racialização’, Revista de CiênciasSociais & Trabalho, 44 (2016), 91–107.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 15according to a racialist discourse associated with crime and violence:for example, the neighbourhood of Cova da Moura settled in 1977 bya largely Cape Verdean population is linked to a great deal of violentcrime in Lisbon. Quinta do Mocho also emerged in the 1970s, mostlyinhabited by immigrants from the former colonies, and is frequently thescene of disputes between rival gangs; while Bela Vista is a neighbourhoodused to re-house refugees and immigrants from the former colonies inthe 1980s and is noted for violent conflicts with the forces of authority.53Once a metropolis, Lisbon became a global, increasingly cosmopolitan, citymarked by social and material barriers between those who belong to it andthose who are excluded, usually the poor and blacks.54The landscape of the city also changed by other means. In the aftermathof 25 April and along with the change of street names linked to theregime, such as replacing Rua 28 de Maio by Rua 25 de Abril, therewere also changes in the toponymy of Lisbon to reflect the reality ofdecolonization. In Lisbon, the Bairro das Colónias (District of the Colonies)was renamed Bairro das Novas Nações (District of the New Nations),and the Praça das Colónias became the Praça das Novas Nações in 1975,to honour the five new nations in the African continent (Guinea-Bissau,Mozambique, Cape Verde, São Tomé and Príncipe and Angola) and replacea nomenclature related to the Estado Novo and colonial rule. In 1983,Amílcar Cabral (founder of PAIGC) and Agostinho Neto (MPLA founder)both of whom had struggled for independence during the colonial wars,were also honoured in the toponymy of Lisbon. However, these toponymicchanges were very limited and partial, as the colonial designations in thecommunes of the empire, such as Avenida Cidade de Lourenço Marques,Rua Cidade da Beira and Rua Vila Pery, amongst others, were largelypreserved.In terms of institutional semantics, the changes were more forceful,with public bodies and cultural institutions abandoning designations thatreferred back to colonial times and adopting more neutral and post-colonial-adjusted ones.55 This is how, for example, the Jardim e MuseuAgrícola do Ultramar (Overseas Agricultural Museum and Garden)came to be renamed Jardim-Museu Agrícola Tropical (Tropical Garden-Museum of Agriculture), the Museu de Etnologia do Ultramar (Museumof Overseas Ethnology) changed its name to the Museu Nacional deEtnologia (National Museum of Ethnology), and the Instituto Superiorde Ciências Sociais e Políticas Ultramarinas (Higher Institute of SocialSciences and Overseas Policies) shortened its name to the Instituto53 Diário de Notícias, 26 Mar. 2010, ‘Bairros de risco são base de tráfico e crime organizado,in http://www.dn.pt/DNMultimedia/DOCS+PDFS/BAIRROS_PROBLEMATICOS.pdf,accessed 1 Sep. 2014.54 M.R. Sanches, ‘Lisboa pós-colonial e outras fortalezas da modernidade’, Buala, http://www.buala.org/pt/cidade/lisboa-pos-colonial-e-outras-fortalezas-na-modernidade,accessed 9 Feb. 2014.55 João, ‘Organização da memória’, 392.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms16 Urban HistorySuperior de Ciências Sociais e Políticas (Higher Institute of Social Sciencesand Politics).While the colonial was removed from the public life of the nation, itbroke out in other, more visible ways in the daily life of Lisbon. Making useof the state support at their disposal to integrate into Portuguese society,many returnees opened businesses with names that referred directlyto the colonial past. Pensão Luanda, Móveis Huíla and Stand Impérioare just a few examples of many names alluding to the colonial realitythat christened many small businesses, such as cafes, grocery stores andhostels in Lisbon. The arrival of African populations also resulted in theemergence of new markets and goods, such as African cuisine restaurants.The post-colonial period has also seen a different approach inthe economic relations between Portugal and her ex-colonies. Thepresumption of a Portuguese-speaking citizenship resulting from theconstitution in 1992 of a geographical area known as the Community ofPortuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP), created on the basis of a principleof cultural and linguistic unity – Lusophony56 – gave rise to a specificcultural market, and it is not uncommon to see in stores references tothe existence of Lusophone music, literature and food. Also, the newAfrican elites, especially from Angola, are usually present in the mostaffluent parts of Lisbon, and an important segment of Lisbon’s luxurystores depend on Angolan money. Angolan money is also behind the urbanfacades of banks and media enterprises. Working under an assimilationistrationale inherited from the colonial period, the structural asymmetries,the circumstances of social marginalization or deprivation experienced bymost of the immigrants from former colonies and their descendants, theracial classifications, commonly expressed in subtle forms of racism thatcondition social relations,57 are rendered invisible through the prevalenceof the Luso-tropicalist dominant discourse of peaceful co-existence withthe racial and cultural difference.Identity politics and post-imperial brandingIt is also within Lisbon’s public spaces that these discourses make theirmark and new identity politics are devised, thereby updating ideas ofrace, class and community in relation to prevailing imperial ideologies.This is evident both in the territorialization of city space and in currenturban development and regeneration processes. Old and run-downneighbourhoods in central Lisbon, such as in Mouraria, which becameinhabited, from the 1980s, by immigrant populations,58 were subjected to56 M. Cahen, ‘Des caravelles pour le futur? Discours politique et idéologie dansl’ institutionnalisation de la communauté des pays de langue portugaise’, Lusotopie (1997),391–433; A. Margarido, A Lusofonia e os Lusófonos: Novos Mitos Portugueses (Lisbon, 2001).57 J. Vala (ed.), Novos Racismos: Perspectivas Comparativas (Linda-a-Velha, 1999).58 J. Mapril, ‘Um lugar estrutural? Legados coloniais e migrações globais numa rua emLisboa’, in Domingos and Peralta (eds.), Cidade e Império, 503–24.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 17urban renewal schemes with the aim of having creative areas of social andcultural diversity emerging from the many national origins found there.The previous Luso-tropical myths have thus been updated and convertedin a marketable interculturality, suitable for post-modern lifestyles andconsumption patterns.59Furthermore, the old imperial myths are still reproduced in thecommemorative spaces of Lisbon, particularly those associated withthe Portuguese seaborne empire, and are today extensively used by thetourism industry. In successive narratives poured into the space ofthe city, the foundational myths of the nation were reworked to accommo-date the symbolic positioning of the country in a modern, multiculturaland cosmopolitan Europe. As early as 1983, the Jerónimos Monastery andthe Belém Tower, two national monuments inextricably linked to Por-tuguese maritime history, were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritagelist. UNESCO justified their inclusion because they are ‘a reminder ofthe great maritime discoveries that laid the foundations of the modernworld’.60 In 1985, the bones of Fernando Pessoa, author of A Mensagem, aliterary work that deals with the glorious past of Portugal, were transferredto the cloister of the Jerónimos Monastery, again functioning as the primalstage for the enthronement of national heroes. Shortly afterwards, in1986, the Treaty of Accession of Portugal to the European Union wassigned in the Jerónimos Monastery. The old symbols of the imperial nationnow served to place Portugal in the western European political arena.In this interpretation, Portugal became recognized as the country of thediscoveries rather than as a former colonial centre. In 1993, the BelémCultural Centre was inaugurated in the western wing of Praça do Império,where the Pavilion of the Portuguese in the World was located in the1940 Exhibition. The new cultural facility was built to host the Portuguesepresidency of the European Union in 1992, and once again places Belémas the centre of political power of the Portuguese nation. History is onceagain utilized to enshrine its symbolic value by designating the entitymanaging the facility as the Foundation of the Discoveries (Fundação dasDescobertas).61The enormous urban renovation undertaken in Lisbon for the 1998World Expo can also be read in this light. Expo ’98 redeemed the notionof Portugal’s national history being linked to the sea and strongly alludedto the discoveries. But the discourse was updated by adopting the theme of‘Oceans’ and relating it to contemporary issues of sustainable managementand environmental protection. The aesthetics of the fair, the regeneration ofthe surrounding area, the construction of modern homes and services and59 N. Oliveira, ‘Lisboa redescobre-se. A governança da diversidade cultural na cidade pós-colonial. A scenescape da Mouraria’, in Domingos and Peralta (eds.), Cidade e Império, 557–602; A. Estevens, A Cidade Neoliberal (Lisbon, 2017).60 http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/263, accessed 10 Jun. 2014.61 Bethencourt, ‘A memória da expansão’, 450; Peralta, ‘A composição de um complexo dememória’, 393.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms18 Urban Historythe functional layout of the site were combined with a powerful allusionto the country’s imperial past. Once the Expo had finished, the site wasnamed Parque das Nações (Park of Nations) and the streets named afterPortuguese navigators or other imperial features. For example, a newtheatre was called the Teatro Camões and the new bridge across the RiverTagus at the north end of the Parque was christened the Vasco da GamaBridge. The Sea (or Oceans) as the route to cultural encounters on a globalscale and as a metaphor for a modern nation that is multifaceted andtolerant was converted into the chief rhetorical tool to locate Portugalin a new European identity space dominated by multiculturalism andcosmopolitanism. The watchwords of the new post-colonial rhetoric aretolerance and cultural contact, appropriate to the globalizing languagesand branding operations of Portugality, linked to tourism, trade betweenPortugal and the former colonial territories and the designs of the so-calledeconomic diplomacy. Gentrification, urban development and heritagemanagement, all processes typical of post-modern consumption on the onehand, and of post-imperial nostalgia on the other, nourish an industry anda policy which is based on the heritagization of history.62 In this context,the wrongs of Portuguese colonialism, such as slavery, forced labour andcolonial violence, are largely absent from political discourse and publicview.63Conclusion: enduring mythologies and contested zonesLisbon is an observatory for a long and complex historical process thatinvolves local, national and imperial communities, comprising specificinstitutions and relationships as well as the global dynamics. The analysisof the construction of an image of Lisbon as the capital of the empireand the urban process that go with it makes it possible to ground thesedynamics in the complex social divisions of labour, the state regulations ofeveryday life and the powerful processes of social and racial stratification.At the same time, as Lisbon took on the features of an imperial city in theearly twentieth century, there was increasing evidence of the clash betweendifferent social realities. Just as colonial modernity was accompaniedby multiple processes of social stratification, so in the metropolis, too,urban modernity was accompanied by different levels of social and urbanintegration, with the increasing creation of urban zoning dynamics basedon socio-economic categories.62 I. Baucom, Out of Place: Englishness, Empire and the Locations of Identity (Princeton, 1999).63 The speeches made during the Expo ’98 opening that took place at the Portugueseparliament were all, from left to right, apologetic of Portuguese colonialism (despite somecaution from the Socialist party compared with the discourse from the Social Democratparty. Assembleia da República, Sessão Comemorativa do V Centenário do Descobrimentodo Caminho Marítimo para a Índia, AR, Lisbon, 15 Jun. 1998.of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core termsLisbon: reading the (post-)colonial city 19It was not until the end of the colonial empire, with the overthrow ofthe regime in 1974, that evidence of the multiple rifts running throughthe imperial ideology was finally brought to the capital, with the arrivalin Lisbon of thousands of returnees and demobilized troops from thecolonies. Even so, in a period of deep political upheaval, the theme ofPortuguese colonialism comes lower down on an agenda marked by theideological polarization of the country. The transition to the post-colonialwas only signalled by the steady arrival of immigrants from the formerAfrican colonies. They were mostly absorbed by domestic work and theconstruction sector and settled on the outskirts of the metropolis in self-built neighbourhoods where phenotype and poverty were the dominantsocial markers. The post-colonial social landscape is thus intersectedby power relations and forms of categorization, which, although notexclusively a colonial legacy, nonetheless relate to obvious continuitieswith the colonial period.Imperial mythologies also came to be rehabilitated in the democraticera, with public and political culture making use of the old mythsof the ‘golden era’ of the discoveries to negotiate the symbolic placeof Portugal in the new European identity space, as it made its wayinto the realm of consumerism and commodification. The myths of theempire woven by successive regimes continued to structure nationalconsciousness, persisting in ways of thinking and acting, in politics, theeconomy and everyday life, influencing models of governance and socialrelationships. A prolonged silence on the wrong-doings of Portuguesecolonialism persisted over decades and only very recently an opendiscussion on the nation’s colonial past has been put forward, especiallyin Lisbon. A good example involves the city council’s controversialproposal, met by public resistance, to remove the coats-of-arms flowerbeds representing the provinces and districts of Portugal from the Praçado Império installed there in the 1960s. Whilst its opponents argued thatit would constitute an attack on the historical heritage of the nation,many supporters welcomed the initiative, believing that it would breakwith a persistent colonialist narrative. A number of museum exhibitionsalso raised objections: the Museu de Arte Antiga’s exhibition ‘The GlobalCity’, which portrayed Lisbon as an old multicultural urban centre,generated fierce debate in newspapers; whilst the exhibition ‘Racisms’,organized by the city council and curated by the historian FranciscoBethencourt at the Padrão dos Descobrimentos, was one of the first effortsto counter the effect of Belém’s ideological landscape. More recently,the inauguration at the Largo da Misericórdia of a statue dedicated tomissionary priest António Vieira (1608–97), who despite his defence of theBrazilian indigenous populations was less critical when it came to Africanslavery, also led to public discussion. Some scholars, journalists, activists,artists and intellectuals have been engaged in claiming the historical truthof Portuguese colonialism, appealing for a recognition of those facetsof use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms20 Urban Historythat contradict the supposed goodness of the Portuguese colonial project,including slavery, forced labour, colonial wars and even the repatriation ofsettlers to the former metropolis at the time of African decolonization.64The emergence of this public discussion about the empire’s memory,which is also an arena for discussing Lisbon’s memory, has beenaccompanied by the denunciation of the social situation experienced bymigrants and Portuguese of African descent in Lisbon’s urban fabric. Classdisadvantage has been reinforced by the prevailing effect of various typesof racism. However, having contributed to change the organization ofthe city’s space, and by intervening in the social space through practicesand representations, these populations have tried to find their placein the city.65 Cape Verdeans, Guineans, Angolans and Brazilians criss-cross cultural elements, both Portuguese and non-Portuguese, to negotiatenew symbolic and class positionings in the city.66 Here, notions likecreolage and Luso-tropicality are often invoked in the city’s daily life andexchanged between immigrants and locals in the process of assigningmeaning to the colonial past and the post-colonial present. This exchangeand the identity clashes that often ensue lead to the constant redefinitionof the categories of ‘us’ and ‘other’, here and there, past and present, localand global, within and across the city space.6764 These claims reached unprecedented proportions following the statements made by thepresident of the Portuguese Republic during his state visit to Senegal in Apr. 2017 on thealleged pioneering role of Portugal in the abolition of slavery.65 F.L. Machado, ‘Etnicidade em Portugal. Contrastes e politização’, Sociologia Problemas ePráticas, 12 (1992), 123–36.66 S. Frangella, ‘Fomos conhecer um tal de Arroios: construção de um lugar na imigraçãobrasileira em Lisboa’, in Domingos and Peralta (eds.), Cidade e Império, 463–502.67 D. Massey, Space, Place and Gender (Minneapolis, 1994).of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963926818000366Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Leeds Beckett University, on 04 Oct 2018 at 08:50:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms