ABSTRACT: 
Patio 29 lies in the northern sector of Santiago's General Cemetery. To the naked eye, it is a grim unweeded field of some twelve hundred rusted tin crosses. But to the families of the 1,197 detained-disappeared during Augusto Pinochet's brutal dictatorship, Patio 29 is both a site of horror and a site of hope. Its story begins in September-December 1973 when 320 early victims of the repression were brought there in makeshift wooden crates that held as many as three bodies each, and buried in unmarked graves. A few years later, two hundred of those graves were exhumed by the military, and the remains presumably cremated. For another decade, the mass grave remained silent, yielding few of its secrets to the families' demands to know: Where are they? Today, nineteen years into the so-called transition to democracy, Patio 29-the most important single finding in relation to Chile's detained-disappeared-still refuses to reveal the identities of those victims, pressing upon the government of Michelle Bachelet a new question: Who are they? First state terror, now state error have conspired to make Patio 29 one of Chile's principal horror-cum-hopescapes. © 2010 by The Regents of the University of California and the National Council on Public History. All rights reserved. 
 
PREDICTION: 
we show that the concept of mass renormalization is not compatible with the theory of natural selection .<n> we consider the mass renormalization of a species in terms of its self - reproducing ability .<n> we find that the mass renormalization of a species is not compatible with the theory of natural selection .<n> we demonstrate this by proving that the theory of natural selection predicts that a species has a different renormalization factor from its own renormalization factor .<n> we show that the theory of natural selection predicts that a species has a different mass renormalization factor from its own mass renormalization factor .<n> we demonstrate this by proving that the theory of natural selection predicts that a species has a different mass renormalization factor from its own mass renormalization factor .<n> we show that the theory of natural selection predicts that a species has a different mass renormalization factor from its own mass renormalization factor .<n> we demonstrate this by proving that the theory of natural selection predicts that a species has a different mass renormalization factor from its own mass renormalization factor .<n> we show that the theory of natural selection predicts that a species has a different mass renormalization factor from its own mass renormalization 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Please direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through theUniversity of California Press’s Rights and Permissions Web site:www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintInfo.asp. DOI: 10/1525/tph.2010.31.4.31.31TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 31Santiago. Within hours, Salvador Allende, Chile’s democratically elected so-cialist president, lay dead, and a military junta presided over by General Au-gusto Pinochet assumed power. It dissolved the congress and eliminated theconstitution. A brutal political repression followed, resulting in political as-sassinations and “disappearances,” the imprisonment or exile of thousands ofChileans, and the wholesale use of torture. The 1973 coup d’état was the cul-mination of a process of political polarization between the haves and the have-nots, between Left and Right, which left Chilean society deeply divided. Someconsidered it an unacceptable interruption of democratic rule; others saw itas a necessary move to prevent an impending civil war.1 Few could imaginewhat was to follow. Historians of Chile have been debating its meaning eversince.2Having thwarted the democratic path to socialism, the military juntavowed to eliminate the “Marxist cancer.” They called their crusade “an inter-nal war,” and branded the Left “the enemy from within.” They imposed a stateof siege, with a dusk-to-dawn curfew, and public gatherings of more than threeindividuals strictly forbidden. Anyone caught violating these orders wouldbe—and many were—shot on sight.The persecution of so-called suspicious elements began in earnest fromthe first. Massive, often random, and apparently senseless, many a personalvendetta was settled in those early weeks and months. Neighbor denouncedneighbor, sometimes prompted by personal rather than political animosities.Landlords pointed the finger at particular workers based on grievances overold industrial disputes.3 Most of the hierarchy of the Socialist and Commu-32  THE PUBLIC HISTORIAN1. Jose Zalaquett, Introduction to the English Edition, Report of the Chilean National Com-mission on Truth and Reconciliation. Truth Commissions Digital Collection: Reports: Chile.http://www.usip.org/ library/tc/doc/reports/chile/chile. Accessed August 2, 2008. p. 2.2. After the National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation Report (Rettig Report) in1991, and the National Commission on Political Imprisonment and Torture Report (Valech Re-port) of 2004–05, many early commentaries on the coup and its aftermath, mainly from writersof the Left, focused on the psychological violence of people associated with the coup, includingsurvivors of torture and families of the disappeared. As the critical distance from the trauma hasincreased, theorists of memory and post-traumatic stress have investigated post-Pinochet Chilein terms of what is remembered, recorded, forgotten, obscured, or silenced in terms of publicand private memory. Monica Echeverría and Carmen Castillo, Santiago a Paris: El Vuelo de laMemoria (Santiago: LOM Ediciones, 2002); Maria Emilia Tijoux, Memorias en Busca de Histo-ria. Mas Allá de los Usos Políticos de la Memoria (Actuel Marx Intervenciones, No. 6, Primer Se-mestre 2008); Steve J. Stern, The Memory Box of Pinochet’s Chile (Vols. 1 and 2) (Durham, NC:Duke University Press, 2006); Peter Read and Marivic Wyndham, “Putting Site Back intoTrauma Studies: A Study of Five Detention and Torture Centres in Santiago, Chile,” Life Writ-ing 5, no. 1, (April 2008): 79–96. Interesting attempts have been made to locate the coup in thecon text of Chilean state violence and its postdictatorship resolution. Radical History Review, TruthCommissions: State Terror, History, and Memory, 97 (Winter 2007). Scholars of state violence,particularly in Latin America, have contextualized the Pinochet repression in terms of analogieswith Guatemala, Argentina, South Africa, Palestine, Israel, etc. Mieke Bal, Jonathan Crewe, andLeo Spitzer (eds.), Acts of Memory: Cultural Recall in the Present (Lebanon, NH: UniversityPress of New England, 1999). See also Javiera Bustamente and Stephan Ruderes, Patio 29: Trasla Cruz de Fierro (Santiago: Ocholibros, 2009).3. Esteban Larrain, Patio 29: Historias de Silencio (Documentary). Fondo de Desarrollo delas Artes y la Cultura, Ministerio de Educación, Chile. Fundación Ford. 1998.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 32nist parties went underground or sought asylum in foreign embassies, butthe rank-and-file—composed mainly of students and laborers—remainedan easy target. In the first weeks alone, there were some fifty thousand detentions across the country.4 Victims of the repression included many professionals—doctors, lawyers, university professors, journalists. Both citiesand the countryside felt the weight of the violence. Santiago suffered thegreatest casualties. Hundreds of dead were left to rot in the streets; over eightybodies were seen floating in the waters of Santiago’s Rio Mapocho in the firstdays of the coup.5 Military operations in rural areas, such as the Caravan ofDeath, also left scores of dead in their wake.6 The carnage of the early period—September–December 1973—accounts for over half the total number of fivethousand who were disappeared and executed in the seventeen-year periodof the dictatorship.7In Santiago, two major sports stadiums—Estadio Nacional and EstadioChile—were converted precipitately into mass concentration, torture, and ex-termination camps.8 Their existence was public knowledge, but not the iden-tities of their hostages. The constant movement of the prisoners in and out ofthe stadiums—and into other makeshift detention centers—kept the fami-lies in a constant state of uncertainty. Almost invariably, the authorities de-nied all knowledge, and often threatened the mother, the wife, or the daugh-ter with detention if she persisted in her search.With no recourse to the judiciary, which like the press, became largely awilling puppet of the Junta,9 families of the detained-disappeared turned toeach other for support. In late 1974, they made common purpose and formedthe Santiago Branch of the Group of Families of Detained-Disappeared. Com-posed almost wholly of women, it became the most powerful—and visible—human rights organization to develop during the dictatorship, and remains so.The women staged a series of peaceful demonstrations, such as hunger strikesand street protests, in order to attract public attention. Carrying photographsof their missing relatives, they decided to break what they called “the circleof silence” surrounding the detained-disappeared. Banner after banner de-manded to know: Where are they? With public gatherings strictly forbidden,the women were exposing themselves to great danger.10Almost from the start, the Catholic Church became a staunch ally: lead-ing a coalition of churches and establishing the Committee for Peace, whichin 1976 became the Vicariate of Solidarity of the Catholic Archdiocese of San-POST-PINOCHET CHILE  334. Mark Ensalaco, Chile Bajo Pinochet: La Recuperación de la Verdad (Alianza EditorialMadrid, 2002), 71–72.5. Larrain, Patio 29.6. Patricia Verdugo, Los Zarpazos del Puma: La Caravana de la Muerte (Santiago: EdicionesChile América CESOC, 1989).7. Elias Padilla Ballesteros, La Memoria y el Olvido—Detenidos Desaparecidos en Chile,http://www.nuncamas.org/investig/ lamemolv/memolv00.htm. Accessed October 15, 2007.8. Ensalaco, Chile Bajo Pinochet, 71–73.9. Zalaquett, Introduction, 3.10. Larrain, Patio 29.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 33tiago. These successive organizations offered critical moral and legal supportto the growing numbers of victims of the repression and to their families. Theycarefully documented every case of a disappeared, and published numerousreports on the general human rights situation in Chile.11 Led by Cardinal RaulSilva Enriquez, the Vicariate posed a formidable challenge to the military au-thorities, which sought to close down the organization on several occasions.12Meanwhile, the search for the detained-disappeared continued. Withindays of the coup, word that the morgue was already overwhelmed with hun-dreds of unidentified bodies led many families to confront the macabre sceneof piles and piles of bodies in advanced stages of decomposition stacked upin corridors and offices. Most were naked and bullet-ridden.13 When thedaughter of a missing farmer from Paine surveyed the scene, she was horri-fied, but would not leave until she had satisfied herself that her father was notthere. When a morgue official wondered at her fortitude, she replied: “I fearthe living, not the dead.”14The carnage without reflected the chaos within. The morgue staff werebeing stretched to the limit. Neither the storage freezers nor the forensicworkers could keep up with the numbers. There was even talk of a plagueoutbreak. This pressing sense of urgency lay behind the decision to performso-called “economic autopsies,” abbreviated autopsy reports that omitted dis-tinctive characteristics of the bodies that might assist identification at a laterdate.15And the bodies kept coming, brought in truckloads by cemetery workers,under orders from the new military director of the General Cemetery to “cleanup the streets.” They found bodies in alleyways, under bridges, washed offthe shores of Rio Mapocho: most showing multiple bullet wounds, many shotfrom the back. Under one bridge alone—the Balamaceda—they found thirtybodies. They re-named the bridge “The Weeping One.”16By the end of the first week, the issue of the permanent disposal of thebodies had reached a crisis. Still, the military authorities were uncertain whatcourse to follow. Early orders to cremate were reversed, and new directivesgiven for secret burials. Patio 29 was a convenient site. Located in the moresecluded northern section of the General Cemetery, it had some 320 vacantlots ready for immediate occupancy.17Patio 29 enters the history of the repression in the early morning of Sep-tember 17, 1973, when truckloads of makeshift coffins began arriving from34  THE PUBLIC HISTORIAN11. Zalaquett, Introduction, 4.12. Jose Aldunate, s.j., Signos de los Tiempos: Crónicas de una Década en Dictadura (Santi-ago: LOM Ediciones, 2004).13. Joan Jara, Víctor Jara, Un Canto Truncado (Madrid: Suma de Letras S.L. 1998) 402–403.14. Larrain, Patio 29.15. Maxine Lowy, “How Patio 29 Was Saved from (Total) Disappearance,” Human RightsToday, 2006, http://memoriayjustice.cl /english/en_rights-patio.htm. Accesed August 2, 2007.16. Larrain, Patio 29.17. Personal interview with Don Rogelio Rodriguez, ex-Inspector General of the GeneralCemetery, Santiago, Chile, September 22, 2007.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 34the morgue. The supply of regular coffins long exhausted, whatever planks ofwood lay about had to be hastily assembled into crates, which sometimes col-lapsed under the strain. Some held two or even three bodies each, depend-ing on their size and the state of their decomposition. Under military watch,cemetery workers unloaded the human cargo into the first four rows of eightygraves, leaving only tin crosses bearing the letters NN to mark them.18The Patio 29 operation took three months to complete, with a surplus ofsome thirty bodies buried in nearby Patio 7: the fate of those bodies still amystery. The job done, the military authorities warned cemetery workers tokeep strict silence. But news still filtered through to the families of detained-disappeared, to the Vicariate and local human rights groups, and to foreignembassies in search of the whereabouts of their nationals. Patio 29 may havebeen off-limits in terms of exhumation and identification of the bodies, butrumors of what it held—or might hold—increasingly fed into the wider imag-inary of the horrorscape that Chile had become. Yet for the families of thedetained-disappeared, it was more complex than that. A site of horror, Patio 29would also become a site of hope. One day it too might yield its awful truths.19The Junta’s declared goal to “exterminate the Marxist cancer” assumed aneven more sinister form in late 1973, when Pinochet created the DINA—theDepartment of National Intelligence—which in effect, institutionalized andsystematized the horror of the early months of the coup. Its staff was com-posed of military and civilian agents, many of whom had already participatedin the interrogations and tortures in the two stadiums and elsewhere.20The emergence of the DINA went hand-in-hand with the emergence ofthe policy of “night and fog” which, together with the grey tunics of theWehrmacht, the military authorities adopted from Nazi Germany. The DINAbecame the Chilean Gestapo. The Nazi strategy was based on the logic that“intimidation can only be achieved through capital punishments, or throughmeans by which the families of prisoners and the population at large cannotknow of their fate.” The new policy of extermination injected a new brand ofterror and intimidation into the population. House arrests gave way to streetdetentions to reduce the risk of identification of the military. Now a facelessmonster was disposing of their relatives without a trace.21The policy of “night and fog”—extermination by stealth—brought hometo the families their condition of utter helplessness. The wife—or is it thewidow?—of Dr. Enrique Paris, one of President Allende’s close personal ad-visers, a detained-disappeared since the morning of September 11, recalls:You have the same sensation described by Kafka. You fight against state ter-rorism, against giant machinery which has fallen over all your loved ones. AndPOST-PINOCHET CHILE  3518. Larrain, Patio 29.19. Agrupación de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos, “Patio 29: Cementerio Generalde Santiago,” 6-page information leaflet, November 24, 2006, p. 1.20. Zalaquett, Introduction, p. 3.21. Ensalaco, Chile Bajo Pinochet, 144–61.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 35that all you’re morally compelled to do is absolutely worthless. Except as therescue of a truth that has to remain for others. It produces great anguish.22The emotional legacy of a disappearance, the wife of a detained- disappeared,Sola Sierrra argues, is not accidental: it is intentional. “They wanted to crushthe families.”23 At what point—if any—do families confront the possibility thattheir missing relatives are dead? Sierra struggles to offer a coherent response.Yes. No. Look. I can’t think. I know he’s dead. I know that rationally. One thinksrationally that no one can be hidden for so long, as prisoners or anything else.And the tortures we heard about in the hands of the DINA for example, it wasn’tpossible for any human to resist. All that makes one think rationally that he isdead. But emotionally, until one confronts that situation, 100%, no, I can’t justassume it. Sometimes, when one hears of cases where remains have been re-cently discovered somewhere, one immediately begins to assume the possibil-ity that the person one was searching for over so many years might be in thatgravesite. But when the remains are identified and they don’t correspond, onefeels a kind of relief. Ah, it wasn’t him. It’s a devastating situation, because oneknows he’s dead, but one can’t be 100% sure. I can’t say with certainty that I’ma widow. I can’t say that. I don’t have my husband, that’s all.24Meanwhile, the Vicariate of Solidarity continued to gather testimonies anddetailed documentation from the families of the detained-disappeared. Basedon this evidence, in 1979 its director made public the fact that illegal burialshad been conducted in Patio 29, and that people from a known massacre sitein Paine—in the outskirts of Santiago—were believed to have been buriedthere.25 Judge Espejo, charged with finding the detained-disappeared of Paine,asked the Vicariate to provide him with relevant set of files. He ordered pho-tographs of Patio 29, constructed a map indicating the location of each of theNN graves, and requested autopsy reports. In the process, he found six casesthat coincided with the characteristics of missing people from Paine. He pre-pared to exhume those graves.26 After six years of silence, Patio 29 was onceagain in the spotlight. What secrets would it yield? And why did Judge Es-pejo not order a larger inquest? We can only speculate. In 1981 Espejo sud-denly declared himself incompetent to carry on the case, and the exercise wasabandoned. Before standing down, however, he issued an order not to exhume,cremate, move, or transfer any of the bodies buried in Patio 29.27But the military authorities had other plans. In 1982, as part of Opera-tion Removal of TV sets—a contemptuous code name for the dead bodies—36  THE PUBLIC HISTORIAN22. Larrain, Patio 29. Spoken by Maria Eugenia Horvitz, widow/wife of detained-disappearedDr. Enrique Paris, a member of President Salvador Allende’s personal staff.23. Ensalaco, Chile Bajo Pinochet, 159.24. Ensalaco, Chile Bajo Pinochet, 160. Extract of interview with Sola Sierra in Santiago,June 1994.25. n.a., ‘Declaran Monumento Nacional al Patio 29’, CIREN, Crónica Digital, October 15,2007, p. 1.26. Lowy, “How Patio 29 Was Saved,” 2.27. n.a., “Declaran Monumento Nacional.”TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 36some 200 of the 320 bodies were exhumed from Patio 29. An anonymouscall from a cemetery worker warned the Vicariate, which made a formal com-plaint to the Military Prosecutor.28 The identities of those bodies, widely as-sumed to have been cremated, remain unknown. Patio 29 had been robbedof two-thirds of its detained-disappeared. The remaining would have to waitanother nine years before a newly elected democratic government would or-der their exhumations.In 1988, a combination of strong international pressure and a growingrecognition from within political circles that the time had come to restore Chileto democracy, led Pinochet to agree to a plebiscite in October of that year.Did the Chilean people wish to continue with military rule or not? The an-swer was a resounding “No” vote. Fourteen months later, in December 1989,Chile had its first free elections in nineteen years. Won by Christian Democ-rat Patricio Aylwin, leader of the Coalition for Democracy—an uneasy allianceof Centre and Left elements—the so-called transition to democracy had fi-nally been achieved.29But at what price? Just months before Aylwin assumed power, the Mili-tary Junta had imposed several restrictions on the civilian government, whichguaranteed military responsibility for key institutions. General Pinochet wouldremain as Commander of the Armed Forces until March 1998, and he wouldappoint nine members of the Senate with mandates until that date.30 The bal-ance of these power-sharing arrangements lay ominously with the military.In his inaugural speech at the same Estadio Nacional that had been thesite of the first mass detentions, tortures, and assassinations of the Pinochetregime, President Aylwin apologized to all the victims and their families onbehalf of the Chilean people. He also lay to rest any hopes that the familiesmay have still harbored about their missing loved ones.31 It was both a brutaland—most likely—truthful statement. One thing is clear: the rush was on tolay the ghosts—and the demons—of the past to rest. The sooner the questionof the whereabouts of the detained-disappeared was settled the better, andPatio 29 would lead the way. But the very nature of the policy of night andfog, and the crime of disappearance, conspired against any quick resolution.Soon after assuming power, Patricio Aylwin named a National Commis-sion for Truth and Reconciliation. Known as the Rettig Commission, it wascharged with gathering information to establish the truth in cases of disap-pearances, illegal execution, and death resulting from torture carried out byagents of the state between September 11, 1973 and March 11, 1990. In itsreport a year later, in 1991, it named 979 detained- disappeared and 1319 po-POST-PINOCHET CHILE  3728. Lowy, “How Patio 29 Was Saved.”29. Amnistía Internacional, “Chile. La Transición en la Encrucijada. Las Violaciones de Dere-chos Humanos durante el Gobierno de Pinochet Siguen Siendo el Problema Esencial,” March1996, p. 3.30. Amnistía Internacional, “Chile.”31. Gonzalo Vial, “Cada Momento que Pasa es Más Remota la Posibilidad de que los RestosAparezcan,” El Mercurio, Santiago, April 30, 2006.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 37litically executed.32 Patio 29, the most important single finding in relation tothe detained-disappeared, again loomed large in the political horizon.The release of the Rettig Report prompted the Vicariate of Solidarity to issuecriminal charges before the courts for alleged illegal burials in Patio 29, withthe objective of identifying the remains. In September 1991, a government-appointed team of anthropologists and forensic doctors began the process ofexhumation and identification. But their mandate reflected the strict condi-tions under which the military had agreed to the operation. This was to be a “humanitarian process” in which judicial procedures were put at the serviceof identification of those in Patio 29. But there were to be no penal consequencesin solving the issue of the identities of those responsible for the crimes.33It was, as a human rights lawyer and the daughter of a detained- disappearedadmitted, the only way of preventing military justice from interfering in orinterrupting the process. The compromise suited the government and the im-mediate needs of the families alike. It also suited the military, which, protectedfrom judicial procedures arising from the findings, could afford to appear con-ciliatory towards the families. Among many things, Patio 29 had become a siteof unusual collaboration between all sides of politics. Everyone had a stakein a successful—and prompt—conclusion to the operation.In 1994, halfway through Operation Patio 29, a third government of theCenter-left Coalition parties was elected. Aylwin’s successor—EduardoFrei—inherited the same urgencies to finalize the process of returning theremains of detained-disappeared to their families. Patio 29 was the country’smost public open wound.34 It fed into the wider debate of an increasingly po-larizing society torn between those who would rather forget the past and thosecommitted to a full disclosure of what happened.The process of exhumation took thirteen days to complete. In the end, only107 graves were found—and in them, the remains of 126 bodies. A large num-ber of victims were between the ages of twenty and thirty, with a significantnumber between fourteen and eighteen, and a few between forty and sixtyyears old. Asked by a reporter what he had to say about the findings—andthe fact that two and even three remains had been found in the one tomb, ajovial Augusto Pinochet is said to have replied; “Que economía tan grande!”—‘Such amazing economy!’3538  THE PUBLIC HISTORIAN32. Amnistía Internacional. By 1996, the total figure had grown to 3,107 victims: politicallyexecuted and detained-disappeared combined. For the category of detained-disappeared, by2004, the figure had grown to 1197. With the emergence of new testimonies and evidence, newnames have been added to both categories since.33. Larrain, Patio 29. Spoken by Pamela Pereira, daughter of a Paine detained-disappearedand human rights lawyer.34. n.a., “Pamela Pereira: Juicios No Se Puden [sic] Cerrar Sin Identificar Restos de De sa-parecidos,” La Nación, http://www.lanacion.el /prontus_noticias/site/artic/20060422/pags/200604 22151030.html. April 22, 2006. Accessed August 2, 2007.35. “El Escándalo del Patio 29: Los Errores de Identificación,” http://www.ercilla.cl /web. No3.293 of May 8–21, 2006. Accessed September 25, 2007.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 38The process of identification of the 126 remains varied, from two weeks totwo years. Each body was formed anatomically to determine sex, age, height,and special characteristics such as bone or pathologies with systematic bonemanifestations, and dental and facial characteristics were examined.36 The rel-atives were keen and active participants throughout the process. Some choseto be present during the exhumation of the remains, and a few recognized—or thought they recognized—their relative at first glance. “This is my son. Iwould recognize him anywhere.” “I recognized him by his skull. My childreninherited the same shape.”37 Throughout the sometimes lengthy identifica-tion process, staff and families worked closely together. Did your husband tendto lean on one side of the foot or the other when he walked? Can you findone of his shoes? Shared and cherished personal objects and bittersweet mem-ories of personal habits of the disappeared forged bonds of intimacy and trustbetween them.38 Relatives were also asked to provide photographs of faces tosuperimpose against images of the skull, ideally, with smiles in order to com-pare tooth with tooth.39The time had come for the families to reclaim their dead.The act of returning the remains was solemn and traumatic both for thefamilies and the staff of the Medical/Legal Institute. Close relatives were takento inspect the assembled bones, laid out on a sheet in skeletal form. The staffmost closely associated with the identification of the remains then explainedin painstaking and painful detail each and every injury detected throughouttheir investigation: fractured ribs, broken arms and legs, punctured skulls.“This is the trajectory of where the bullet entered and exited his brain.” “Thelack of any scar tissue suggests he was still alive when they applied a solder-ing iron to his legs.” “Here we see the impact of the bullet that shattered hisskull.” It was a narrative of horror from which none of the families wished tobe spared. For, devastating as it was, it was their narrative: now an integralpart of their family history. It was truth at its cruelest: but it was the truth.40The return of the remains also had major practical implications for the fam-ilies. They could now join the “normal” community of mourners: decide wheretheir loved one would be buried; place a plaque with the name, dates and aloving message; bring flowers and other offerings to the grave. They could havea physical focus for their grief. For the wives of these detained-disappeared,their status changed immediately to that of widow, with considerable legal andfinancial implications. They were now entitled to compensation, to widows’POST-PINOCHET CHILE  3936. “Memorias del Grupo de Antropología Forense y Su Aporte al Campo de los DerechosHumanos en Chile,” V Congreso Chileno de Antropología, November 8–12, 2004. Simposio:Memoria y Derechos Humanos.37. Larrain, Patio 29.38. Caiozzi. Silvio Caiozzi, Fernando Ha Vuelto, Andrea Films Production, 1998. Documentary.39. Enrique Ahumada, “Dr Patricia Hernández: La Ardua Tarea de Identificar los Cuerposde Detenidos Desaparecidos,” Caso Pinochet, http://www.terra.cl/especial/pinochet-in/entrevista.cfm?num=9. Accessed October 15, 2007.40. Caiozzi, Fernando Ha Vuelto.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 39pensions and their children to health and educational benefits. In social andpsychological terms, they could now claim a status that reflected faithfully theircircumstances.Between 1993 and 1998, 96 of the 126 remains had found their final rest-ing place; the rest had to await further developments in identification tech-niques. Many were buried nearby: some in tombs facing Patio 29, others atthe General Cemetery’s Memorial Wall of the Detained-Disappeared and Po-litically Executed erected by President Aylwin in the early period of his ad-ministration. A few were flown overseas.41 By then, together with excavationsof other mass burial sites, the process of finding and identifying the remainsof Chile’s 1197 detained-disappeared had resulted in the positive identifica-tion of 175. Over a thousand remained missing.For eight years after the return of the last remains in 1998, Patio 29 re-mained the centerpiece of the coalition governments’ claims that they haddone what they could. And for eight years—in some cases ninety-six familiesof detained-disappeared grappled with the narrative of horror they had heardfrom the staff of the Medical-Legal Institute. Over those eight years, ritualsand patterns of visits to the grave had become part of family life. Some wid-ows had re-married. Parents had died confident in the knowledge that theirson’s remains now lay safe in the family plot.42Then came the sudden revelations of April 2006: Eight of the 96 remainshad been wrongly identified, and the rest were in doubt.43 The facts as theystood were devastating enough, but summoned as a group to meet at the head-quarters of the Group of the Families of Detained-Disappeared, the familieswere given no prior warning on what to expect. Once assembled, they weresubjected to a power-point presentation in which appeared lists of names un-der various categories of mistaken identities. It was left to the individual fam-ilies to search for the name of their loved one on the screen.44 The almost ca-sual way in which this devastating information was conveyed to the familiesonly compounded their shock and outrage.Families who had waited twenty-five years to discover the fate and where-abouts of their father, son, husband, now discovered that the remains theyhad laid to rest eight, ten, twelve years before did not, or might not, belongto them after all. First the violence of the original disappearance, and now theviolence of a second disappearance.Misidentified means re-opening the wounds, re-starting the search. It meansour loved ones have disappeared once again: a pain that we never thought wewould live through again.4540  THE PUBLIC HISTORIAN41. Agrupación de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos.42. Caiozzi, Fernando Ha Vuelto.43. Alejandra Chacón, “Patio 29: El Dolor de Verlos Desaparecer Dos Veces,” La Nación,April 22, 2006. http://www.lanacion.cl/prontus_noticias/site/artic/20060422/pags/200604022002758.html. Accessed October 15, 2007.44. Caoizzi, Fernando Ha Vuelto.45. “El Escándalo del Patio 29.”TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 40It also meant exhuming and returning the remains, relinquishing widow pen-sion cards,46 returning the narratives of torture and murder the families hadpainfully made their own over time. All these now belonged to someone else’sfamily. But who? From the nightmare of “where are they?” to the nightmareof “who are they?” From state terrorism, to state errorism: what differencehad the so-called transition to democracy made to these families of Chile’sdetained-disappeared? No sooner had the revelations been made than the recriminations began.The immediate target was the Medical-Legal Institute itself. Pamela Pereira,daughter of a detained-disappeared and human rights lawyer, refused to ac-cept the Institute Director’s public apology and demanded his resignation.Let him go to the church and ask for forgiveness. This is not a matter of for-giveness. This is a question of knowledge and responsibilities. We are not hereto commiserate with anybody.47Others, like a leading figure of the Group of Families of Detained-Disappeared,went beyond, accusing successive coalition governments of indifference: We are living the unimaginable. It is brutal. The human mind cannot compre-hend this. We are going through such pain. . . . There are people responsiblefor this. Of the dictatorship, we could expect anything because they hadsnatched from us our loved ones. That was normal within the brutality of thedictatorship. But what outrage that this should happen in these times. This isthe post-dictatorship period. We speak of the negligence of the Medical-LegalInstitute. But also of the indifference of the authorities who would not listen tous. There are Presidents who would not listen to us—Aylwin, Frei and Lagos—but were prepared to listen to those proposing projects of impunity.48What had gone wrong? Who was to blame? Who knew—and when—that theprocess had miscarried? What now?Two obvious targets, the two officers of the Medical-Legal Institute mostclosely associated with the identification procedures, defended themselves vig-orously. At a press conference they exonerated themselves from any blame,arguing they had done “what they could” in the circumstances.49 Relationsbetween them and the Group of the Families sank to the level of personal in-sults. In one interview, the leading forensic medical officer of the Institutesuggested that “for some” in the Group it was not convenient for the remainsof detained-disappeared to be identified and returned to the families, for itwould deprive them of their public profile and forum.50POST-PINOCHET CHILE  4146. “Anticipan Problemas por Error del SML: Viudas Ahora Vuelven a Estar Casadas,” Políticay Sociedad, La Segunda, Santiago, April 24, 2006, p. 14.47. J. I. Ortiz, C. Urzua and H. Cossio, “Dramática Notificación a Familiares de DD.DD.por Error del SML: Anuncian Acciones Legales,” La Tercera, Santiago, April 22, 2006.48. Chacón, “Patio 29,” p. 2.49. “Ahora Resulta que No Hubo Error en Patio 29,” Crónica. La Cuarta, http://www.lacuarta.cl /diario/2006/05/06/06.02.4a.CRO.PATIO.html, p 2.50. “Patricia Hernández: ‘Lo Digo Abiertamente,’” Política y Sociedad, La Segunda, Santi-ago, June 13, 2003, p. 26.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 41New revelations of government complicity in withholding critical infor-mation tore further at the already fragile relations between the state, the Groupof Families, and the families themselves. It emerged that as early as 1994, ateam of forensic experts from Glasgow University had issued a report to thegovernment on the work-in-progress in Patio 29, urging drastic changes bothto the procedures of identification and to the personnel in charge of them.The report had been quietly shelved, and the process of returning the remainsto the families allowed to continue. A second report issued by an indepen-dent forensic agency in 2003 questioned the professional credentials of theteam of experts assigned to Patio 29, and warned that the staff of the Med-ical-Legal Institute had neither been assessed nor accredited by internationalforensic organizations. The report urged that any remaining identification pro-cedures, anthropological or DNA, be suspended until the matter was cleared.Again, the recommendations were ignored.51The scandal of Patio 29—for that is what it began to be called—threatenedalso to divide the once tightly knit human rights community. The focus of theaccusations, some argued, should be not on the errors made by the Medical-Legal Institute, nor even, some dared to suggest, on the remains themselves.Rather, it should be on the failed responsibilities of the state, past and present.Bones are not a person’s most important thing. If there were no Law of Amnestyand the military involved could give us more precise information, we would bemuch closer to reconciliation. That bodies do not grant, rather the political willto arrive at justice.52It fell to President Michelle Bachelet, heading a fourth successive coalitiongovernment, to respond to these charges, and propose a way forward thatwould restore the government’s credibility and reassure the families of a con-clusive resolution to the crisis. Time would not be an issue, and resourceswould not be spared. Soon after, Bachelet assigned a close personal adviserto head a newly appointed team of international forensic experts with wideexperiences in sites such as the Twin Towers, Bosnia, Argentina, and Gua te -mala.53 Less than two months after the revelations, Bachelet’s governmentalso agreed to declare Patio 29 a national monument.54 It reads:Patio 29El Patio 29 es un lugar emblemático de las violaciones a los derechos humanosocurridas entre 1973 y 1990, pues es testimonio del procedimiento llevado acabo para ocultar los cuerpos y las identidades de los detenidos desaparecidosy ejecutados políticos durante el régimen militar.42  THE PUBLIC HISTORIAN51. Javier Rebolledo and Luis Narvaez, “Patio 29: Muertos Sin Nombre,” La Nación, http://www.lanacion.cl /prontus_noticias/site/aric/20060429/pags/20060429215727.html, pp. 3–4.52. Ibid., 3.53. “Patio 29, en la Hora de las Definiciones,” La Nación, p 1. Accessed September 27, 2007.54. Ministerio de Educación, “Declara Monumento Nacional en la Categoría de MonumentoHistórico el Patio No 29,” Gobierno Transparente, July 10, 2006. http:/mail.anfitrion.cl /GobiernoTransparente/mineduc/NG/DCTO/2006/08/10463.html. Accessed October, 15, 2007.TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 42Algunas de las sepulturas de este patio señaladas como NN o Desconocidosfueron el único rastro que permitió a los familiares el hallazgo de los cuerpos;son testimonio de la política de ocultamiento de los crímenes y son, por lo mismo,símbolos de la lucha por la verdad y la justicia para que NUNCA MAS el dere-cho a la vida sea ultrajado.Declarado un Monumento Nacional en la categoría de Monumento Históricoen Decreto extento no. 91 del 10 de julio de 2006.Patio 29Patio 29 is an emblematic site of the violations of human rights committed be-tween 1973 and 1990 because it is a testament to the procedures that took placeto hide the bodies and the identities of the detained-disappeared and the po-litically executed during the military regime.Some of the tombs in this patio marked NN or Unknown were the only tracewhich allowed the families to discover the bodies; they are a testament to thepolitics of concealment of the crimes and are, therefore, a symbol of the strug-gle for truth and justice so that NEVER AGAIN will the right to life be violated.Declared a National Monument under the category of Historic Monument byDecree No 91 on 10 July 2006.The transition to democracy was never going to be easy. Reconciling the de-mands of the families and human rights groups for Truth and Justice with theever-present threat of another military coup kept successive coalition gov-ernments on the defensive. Patio 29 should and could have been the center-piece of these governments’ claims that they had done “what they could.” Theover thirty-year question of “where are they?” was never going to go awaywith the closure of Patio 29, but the burden of continuing the search for Chile’sdetained-disappeared elsewhere in the country would have eased and fallenon future governments, perhaps less hamstrung by the ominous shadow ofthe military to “forget and move on.”The haste of three successive coalition governments to bring a quick res-olution to Patio 29 set the agenda for the series of unfortunate developmentsthat led to the fiasco of 2006. Key among them were, first, the appointmentof a team of forensic experts who, while well-meaning, may not have had theprofessional training, credentials, and resources for the task entrusted to them;and, secondly, the yet-to-be-explained decisions by the government to ignorethe recommendations of two international forensic agencies casting seriousdoubts on the professionalism of the Medical-Legal Institute and urging thatthe process of identifications be halted until further notice. Expediency wonover care and responsibility.But to what end? In a post-dictatorship political landscape largely devoidof “good news stories,” both the Left and the Right could have rejoiced inwhat had been achieved in Patio 29. Ninety-six remains had been returnedto their families. A warm spirit of co-operation had reigned between the gov-ernment, the families, and human rights groups. Even the Armed Forces andPOST-PINOCHET CHILE  43TPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 43the political Right could claim to have contributed to the spirit of national rec-onciliation by allowing the exhumations to go ahead: a risky experiment in dam-age control, particularly in that early period of the transition. Instead, the re-cent setbacks squandered not only the goodwill of the families and humanrights groups, they also scratched the open wound of the detained-disappearedwhich successive coalition governments had tried so hard to heal. In at-tempting to reconcile the demands of the Left and the Right, in the end, thesegovernments succeeded only in antagonizing both. And prompting the un-thinkable: Patio 29 may be the only political battlefield in Chile where theArmed Forces and the families of the detained-disappeared—in oppositepoles of the spectrum in every other conceivable issue of the past thirty-fouryears—have met in common ground to denounce a common foe.Marivic Wyndham is a Senior Lecturer in Latin American Studies at the Universityof Technology Sydney. Her current research interests are centered on post-dictatorshipChile and include the contestation of ex-sites of torture; transitional justice, memory, andtrauma; and the politics of memorialization.Peter Read is an Australian Research Council Professorial Research Fellow in the De-partment of History, University of Sydney. His interests center on state violence in Aus-tralia and Latin America and studies in trauma and national reconciliation. He is currentlywriting a history of the Aboriginal people of Sydney since the arrival of the British colo-nizers in 1788.44  THE PUBLIC HISTORIANTPH032-1 1/26/10 10:41 AM Page 44From State Terrorism to State Errorism: Post-Pinochet Chile's Long Search for Truth andJusticeAuthor(s): Marivic Wyndham and Peter ReadSource: The Public Historian, Vol. 32, No. 1, <bold><italic>Where Are the Bodies? ATransnational Examination of State Violence and its Consequences</italic></bold> (Winter2010), pp. 31-44Published by: University of California Press on behalf of the National Council on Public HistoryStable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/tph.2010.32.1.31 .Accessed: 24/02/2011 20:58Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unlessyou have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and youmay use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucal. .Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printedpage of such transmission.JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range ofcontent in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new formsof scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.University of California Press and National Council on Public History are collaborating with JSTOR todigitize, preserve and extend access to The Public Historian.http://www.jstor.org