ABSTRACT: 
Antibiotic resistance is a worldwide health issue spreading quickly among human and animal pathogens, as well as environmental bacteria. Misuse of antibiotics has an impact on the selection of resistant bacteria, thus contributing to an increase in the occurrence of resistant genotypes that emerge via spontaneous mutation or are acquired by horizontal gene transfer. There is a specific and urgent need not only to detect antimicrobial resistance but also to predict antibiotic resistance in silico. We now have the capability to sequence hundreds of bacterial genomes per week, including assembly and annotation. Novel and forthcoming bioinformatics tools can predict the resistome and the mobilome with a level of sophistication not previously possible. Coupled with bacterial strain collections and databases containing strain metadata, prediction of antibiotic resistance and the potential for virulence are moving rapidly toward a novel approach in molecular epidemiology. Here, we present a model system in antibiotic-resistance prediction, along with its promises and limitations. As it is commonly multidrug resistant, Pseudomonas aeruginosa causes infections that are often difficult to eradicate. We review novel approaches for genotype prediction of antibiotic resistance. We discuss the generation of microbial sequence data for real-time patient management and the prediction of antimicrobial resistance. 
 
PREDICTION: 
in recent years the field of dna sequencing has made great progress . in this field ,<n> one of the most important challenges is to devise a practical dna sequencing scheme that is both accurate and scalable .<n> one of the reasons for this interest in dna sequencing is the promise of doing so at a low cost .<n> however , the practical feasibility of such a scheme has not yet been demonstrated . in this paper<n> , we consider a very promising dna sequencing scheme based on a dna base sequence .<n> this base sequence is generated by a small number of dnas , called _ dna fragments _ , which are identical to the ones that are already in use in the clinic .<n> dna fragments are the first step in the sequence of dnas that are intended to be synthesized in a clinic .<n> dna fragments are also called _ nucleotides _ or _ polymers _ , depending on whether they are polymers or nuclei .<n> dna fragments are characterized by a set of eight , rather complicated , chemical entities .<n> the sequence of dna fragments is generated by a set of eight , rather complicated , chemical entities .<n> 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Jeukens, Julie and Freschi, Luca and Kukavica-Ibrulj, Irena and Emond-Rheault, Jean-Guillaume and Tucker, Nicholas P and Levesque, Roger C (2017) Genomics of antibiotic-resistance prediction in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. ISSN 0077-8923 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13358This version is available at https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/60990/Strathprints is designed to allow users to access the research output of the University of Strathclyde. Unless otherwise explicitly stated on the manuscript, Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Please check the manuscript for details of any other licences that may have been applied. You may not engage in further distribution of the material for any profitmaking activities or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute both the url (https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/) and the content of this paper for research or private study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge. Any correspondence concerning this service should be sent to the Strathprints administrator: strathprints@strath.ac.ukThe Strathprints institutional repository (https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk) is a digital archive of University of Strathclyde research outputs. It has been developed to disseminate open access research outputs, expose data about those outputs, and enable the management and persistent access to Strathclyde's intellectual output.Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. ISSN 0077-8923ANNALS OF THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCESIssue:Antimicrobial Therapeutics ReviewsREVIEWGenomics of antibiotic-resistance predictionin Pseudomonas aeruginosaJulie Jeukens,1 Luca Freschi,1 Irena Kukavica-Ibrulj,1 Jean-Guillaume Emond-Rheault,1Nicholas P. Tucker,2 and Roger C. Levesque11Institut de biologie inte´grative et des syste`mes (IBIS), Universite´ Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. 2Strathclyde Instituteof Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, UKAddress for correspondence: Roger C. Levesque, Institut de biologie inte´grative et des syste`mes (IBIS), Universite´ Laval,Quebec City, QC G1A 0A6, Canada. rclevesq@ibis.ulaval.caAntibiotic resistance is a worldwide health issue spreading quickly among human and animal pathogens, as well asenvironmental bacteria. Misuse of antibiotics has an impact on the selection of resistant bacteria, thus contributingto an increase in the occurrence of resistant genotypes that emerge via spontaneous mutation or are acquired byhorizontal gene transfer. There is a specific and urgent need not only to detect antimicrobial resistance but also topredict antibiotic resistance in silico. We now have the capability to sequence hundreds of bacterial genomes perweek, including assembly and annotation. Novel and forthcoming bioinformatics tools can predict the resistome andthe mobilome with a level of sophistication not previously possible. Coupled with bacterial strain collections anddatabases containing strain metadata, prediction of antibiotic resistance and the potential for virulence are movingrapidly toward a novel approach in molecular epidemiology. Here, we present a model system in antibiotic-resistanceprediction, along with its promises and limitations. As it is commonly multidrug resistant, Pseudomonas aeruginosacauses infections that are often difficult to eradicate. We review novel approaches for genotype prediction of antibioticresistance. We discuss the generation of microbial sequence data for real-time patient management and the predictionof antimicrobial resistance.Keywords: antibiotic resistance; in silico prediction; emerging technologies; genomicsIntroductionThe damaging effect of antimicrobial resistance(AMR) in infectious diseases is evident and a majorpreoccupation around the world. Bacterial infec-tions are currently observed with ancient as wellas emerging pathogens resistant to all classes ofantibiotics. Bacterial infections claim at least 70,000lives each year in Europe and 23,000 in the UnitedStates; at least two million infections occur eachyear worldwide.1 It is estimated that hundreds ofthousands of people die each year in other areas ofthe world owing to AMR. Considerable variation isobserved between countries, because data are sim-ply not available or poorly described in the pat-terns of AMR observed. Different countries aroundthe globe experience different problems in healthcare, public health and services, and overall hygiene.AMR may thrive in some environments, but soliddata are virtually nonexistent. The rise of AMRhas not gone unnoticed by governments aroundthe world. For example, the UK government com-missioned the O’Neill review in 2014. This reportpredicts that, without intervention, the number ofdeaths attributable to AMRwill rise to 10 million in2050, corresponding to one death every 3 seconds.2Inmodern societies with excellent healthcare sys-tems, the most recent technologies in diagnosticsof infectious diseases, and an arsenal of therapeu-tics, the costs of treatment is continually increas-ing because of AMR. The mortality rate of patientscaused by AMR is still very high. In aging popula-tions, high-level medical treatment with the mostrecent health care, including long periods in inten-sive care units and transplantation, and long-termdoi: 10.1111/nyas.133581Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use anddistribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas Jeukens et al.age-related chronic diseases have dramatically aug-mented susceptibility to AMR bacterial infections.This has led to the emergence of pan-resistant infec-tions, meaning that no effective treatment is cur-rently available.3In many countries, antibiotics are often usedexcessively, in a very broad and unregulatedfashion.2 They are often readily available over thecounter, sometimes prescribed, and in other casesprescribed but with completely different prescrib-ing habits, leading to excessive use and unnecessaryoveruse, which contributes to AMR. This is a worst-case scenario in infectious diseases, as the globalspread of AMR in bacterial pathogens is rapid, with-out borders, and amplified by the speed and volumeof intercontinental travel.4 Moreover, the com-plexity of polymicrobial communities creates idealconditions for what we propose to call the “AMRsprawl.”Armed with an arsenal of new bacterial genomicand bioinformatic tools, coupled with a certainlevel of understanding of the biology of a bacte-rial pathogen, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, andits tendency to evolve AMR, there is an excellentopportunity to develop creative approaches in deci-phering AMR.5–8 The challenge is to have the capa-bility to use predictive values that lead not only torapid intervention and therapy but also to molecu-lar epidemiological surveillance. Indeed, theO’Neillreport also recommends increased surveillance andimproved diagnostics in order to prevent unneces-sary use of antibiotics.2Here, we highlight recent creative concepts,hypothesis-driven discoveries in predicting AMR,innovative strategies to limit its dissemination,and a way out of AMR. In specific cases, thesenovel approaches and disruptive technologies arepromising and will certainly revolutionize thetraditional view of using standards, such as thedisk diffusion methods and the determination ofminimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs), forpredicting AMR. In other cases, development isstill in its infancy, as was the case for polymerasechain reaction (PCR) in 1984. Overall, these newapproaches are significant but limited advances inAMR prediction—a newly emerging field that willhave a major impact in clinical microbiology andmolecular epidemiology.9 AMR prediction presentsan enormous challenge, and some of its currentlimitations are discussed.Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a modelsystem for the validation of AMRpredictionP. aeruginosa is an environmental Gram-negativebacterium that exhibits extensive metabolic adapt-ability, enabling it to thrive in an extraordinaryrange of niches (for a review, see Ref. 10). It is alsoa highly successful opportunistic pathogen, causinga wide range of acute and chronic infections.11Although transmission routes remain difficult toestablish, it is generally accepted that P. aeruginosais a ubiquitous opportunistic pathogen found inthe environment. For example, most cystic fibrosis(CF) patients become infected with P. aeruginosafrom the environment, and it is difficult to devisestrategies to counter such infections.12 P. aeruginosahas inherent resistance to many antimicrobialclasses. Its ability to acquire AMR via mutations toall relevant treatments and its frequent role in seri-ous infections (i.e., bacteremia) with highmortalityrates, have become true nightmares since the early1990s.13Molecular mechanisms of resistance in P. aerugi-nosa include preventionof access to target, increasedefflux, changes in antibiotic targets by mutation,modification and protection of targets, and directmodification of antibiotics (for details, see Ref. 1).Even antibiotic-susceptible strains of P. aeruginosahave considerable defenses due to intrinsic AMR.Ongoing international surveillance of P. aeruginosaAMR is fundamental to monitor trends in suscepti-bility patterns and to appropriately guide cliniciansin choosing empirical or directed therapy.14Whole-genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing of P.aeruginosa provides a privileged perspective of thedramatic effect of mutator phenotypes on the accu-mulation of random mutations, most of which aretransitions, as expected.15 Moreover, a frameshiftmutagenic signature, consistent with error-proneDNA polymerase activity as a consequence of SOSsystem induction, is also observed. This effect wasobserved for the evolution of resistance to all antibi-otics tested, but it was higher for fluoroquinolonesthan for cephalosporins or carbapenems. Analysisof genotype versus phenotype confirmed expectedresistance evolution trajectories, but also revealednew pathways. Qualitative RNA sequencing wasused to identify the key genetic determinantsof AMR in 135 clinical P. aeruginosa isolates2 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Jeukens et al. Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonasfrom diverse geographic origins and infectionsites.16 By applying transcriptome-wide associationstudies, adaptive variations associated with AMR offluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, and -lactamswere identified. Besides potential novel biomarkerswith a direct correlation to AMR, global patternsof phenotype-associated gene expression andsequence variations were identified by machinelearning approaches.Studies of the genetic structure of microbial pop-ulations are central to understanding the evolu-tion, ecology, and epidemiology associated withthe origin of AMR. Numerous studies describ-ing the genetic structure of P. aeruginosa popu-lations are based on samples drawn mostly, evenoverwhelmingly, from clinical collections.17 Thisapproach has resulted in a limited view of P. aerug-inosa with respect to defining the potential evolu-tionary history of disease-causing lineages, as wellas the rapid development of AMR by the resis-tome and distribution by horizontal gene transfervia the mobilome.18,19 A central question is: Canwe define environmental and clinical P. aeruginosaisolates with distinct gene contents for virulenceand AMR? To answer this question, we are devel-oping a proof-of-concept approach based on bac-terial genomics and a well-defined collection of P.aeruginosa strains.5Driven by the advent of next-generation sequenc-ing (NGS) coupled with bioinformatics, we areon the verge of significant technological advancesat the interface between bacteriology and clinicalpractice.20,21 Although we have made significantprogress in understanding the variations withinthe species P. aeruginosa, including the identifica-tion of AMR transmissible strains associated withgreater patient morbidity, there is still a lack of clar-ity and consensus. There are three key areas whereimprovements in our understanding of P. aerugi-nosa genomics would lead to benefits in infectiousdisease and human health: (1) given the clear linkbetween infection with P. aeruginosa and patientmorbidity/mortality, we need to better understandhow patients become infected, including the role ofcross infection; (2) given the limitations of currentantibiotic therapy, especially in relation to chronicinfections, we need to develop better and new thera-peutic approaches; and (3)weneed to identify betterprognostic markers and detect AMR more rapidlyto enable clinicians to make better evidence-baseddecisions on patient care.Identification of emerging P. aeruginosatransmissible strains and their AMRprofilesThe experiences in the Liverpool, UK clinics andin Canada highlight the need to identify emergingtransmissible strains early. Once the LiverpoolEpidemic Strain (LES) isolates were identified, itwas possible to design a simple PCR test, which isnow used widely in UK CF clinics.22,23 However, inreality, most CF patients at the Liverpool clinic wereinfected with the LES before it was discovered, andalthough segregation measures have led to a wel-come decline in new cases, the adult unit remainsdominated by this strain. Encouragingly, studieselsewhere in the world also show that patient seg-regation efficiently reduces the spread of epidemicclones.24,25Hence, we need strategies tomake earlierinterventions based on rapid identification of newtransmissible strains. However, to achieve this,we require a greater understanding of the generalpopulation structure of P. aeruginosa and predictivecapacity for AMR. Key to this is the identificationof strain types that are not present in the CFpopulation because they are of higher prevalence inthe environment. There have also been examples ofmultiple CF patients in Germany carrying the samestrain, known as P. aeruginosa Clone C.26 However,we know that Clone C is one of the most abundantclones of P. aeruginosa strains.27 Hence, it is likelythat in any CF patient cohort, there will be multipleCF patients infected with this strain, becausethey acquired their infections from environmentalsources. In contrast, the LES has not been identi-fied from other environmental or clinical sources,clearly implicating its transmission route as patient-to-patient cross-infection. These two examples areclear-cut. However, to make informed decisionsabout the sources of other strains of P. aeruginosaidentified in multiple CF patients (cross-infectionor environmental), we need to have a much betterunderstanding of P. aeruginosa population struc-tures and determine whether links exist with othertypes of P. aeruginosa opportunistic infections. Toachieve this, we need to exploit bacterial WGS usingNGS, predict AMR, and couple the data to tran-scriptomics via RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) in a3Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas Jeukens et al.well-defined pipeline in as short a time frame aspossible that would be amenable to the clinic. Wemust devise robust, unequivocal, and portablestrategies for strain genotyping that will not only(1) enable the identification of P. aeruginosa strainspresent among isolates at higher than expectedprevalence, but also (2) allow us to search forlinks between strain genotype, clinical outcome,and AMR and (3) design epidemiologically andclinically relevant strain panels for anti-infectivetesting using clear, evidence-based criteria.P. aeruginosa strain diversity and AMROver the years, there have been many approachesto the typing of P. aeruginosa strains, driven bythe availability of the technology, costs, and ease ofuse. Some of these approaches are poorly portablebetween laboratories (RAPDs and ERIC-PCR) andtherefore difficult to use for anything other thanlocal outbreaks. Others (e.g., PFGE) have been con-sidered as gold standards, but are again of limiteduse for interlaboratory comparisons and are sus-ceptible to genetic instability, such as that exhib-ited during CF infections.22 There have also beena number of different methodological approachesto define the population structure of P. aerugi-nosa, each comparing collections of isolates fromdiverse geographical, environmental, and humansources, using methods that readily allow compar-isons between laboratories.28,29 The ArrayTube,30MLST,31 and VNTR32 genotyping schemes haveall indicated extensive diversity among P. aerugi-nosa isolates, but with dominant clones, clusters, orclonal complexes that are more widespread amongthe general P. aeruginosa population. However,each of these approaches has limitations. They canbe technically demanding, time-consuming, andexpensive to carry out. There is clear evidence thatNGS-based approaches, such as single-cell genomesequencing and portable real-time sequencing (e.g.,NanoPore MinIon), will eventually offer far betterresolution and become cost-effective solutions toclinical diagnostic laboratory practice.33 In addi-tion to genotyping for strain surveillance, NGSapproaches also generate a wealth of additionaldata that can be exploited for clinical impact, suchas the identification of (1) markers for use inprognostic approaches, (2) novel therapeutic tar-gets, and (3) genotypic markers for the predictionof AMR.Exploiting P. aeruginosa genomicsas proof of concept for AMR predictionThe basic principles on which clinical bacteriologypractices are based have altered little over the past 50years. In the context of chronic lung infections, suchas those typical in CF and in opportunistic infec-tions in intensive care units, there are severe limita-tions to these approaches, particularly with P. aerug-inosa. Because P. aeruginosa populations are mostlyfound in biofilms34 and because strains diversifyphenotypically and adapt rapidly to their hosts,35antimicrobial susceptibility profiles based on MICsand disk diffusionmethods applied to single isolatesare poorly predictive of therapeutic efficacy.36 Addi-tionally, highly resistant P. aeruginosa small-colonyvariants (SCVs) are frequently isolated from patientsamples, yet they are rarely reported or further ana-lyzed by clinical microbiology services.37Studies on the genetic structure of P. aeruginosapopulations are central to understand the evolu-tion, ecology, and epidemiology of opportunisticinfections. NGS technology gives us the means totake such studies to new levels of sophistication,by incorporating data from worldwide, representa-tive strain collections to generate new genomics-based microbiology workflows for direct clinicalbenefit to patients and for epidemiological survey-ing. The challenge of this approach will be to takethe genomic data through the translational pipelineusing cutting-edge bioinformatics and expertisefrom leading researchers worldwide and developclinically oriented methodologies that are user-friendly, evidence-based, and lead to direct clini-cal impact. Namely, this should enhance prognosticmarker development for AMRprediction.However,minimal metadata as well as international reportingstandards will be required.Bacterial strain and genome databases:first step in predicting P. aeruginosa AMRThe first Pseudomonas Genome Database (http://www.pseudomonas.com/) was built upon theSanger sequenced genome of strain PAO138 witha community-built annotation strategy and is nowattempting to incorporatemetadata.39 AsofDecem-ber 2016, the Pseudomonas Genome Database con-tained 2199 draft and 135 complete P. aeruginosagenomes, and the numbers are likely to continue toincrease exponentially. This genome database is of4 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Jeukens et al. Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonasimmense value to the P. aeruginosa research com-munity. In order to develop a strategy capable ofpredicting AMR in P. aeruginosa, a detailed collec-tion of strains and metadata is also essential. In2013, the International Pseudomonas Consortiumfunded by Cystic Fibrosis Canada was initiated tolink genomics and metadata and create a repositoryof P. aeruginosa strains from around the world.5 Theconsortiumhas had remarkable success in acquiringstrains and SCVs and is expanding its activities inAMR prediction.The International Pseudomonas ConsortiumDatabase (IPCD) is a web application designed notonly to store data for the P. aeruginosa collection,but also to provide access to each isolate’s pheno-typic and genomic data (http://ipcd.ibis.ulaval.ca/).Different levels of access may be granted, and datamodification or updates are strictly reserved forthe curators. The IPCD includes isolate identifi-cation; environmental origin; host; provider; dateof isolation; geographical origin; phenotypic datawith a strong emphasis on AMR when available;anonymized patient information; and technicalNGS information, such as library preparation, typeofNGSstrategy, anddetails on thequality of genomeassembly and software used. The IPCD currentlycontains NGS data and unpublished draft genomesfrom CF patients and from most of the other typesof known human infections caused by P. aeruginosa.For comparative genomics purposes, the IPCD alsocontains animal infection isolates. Because of thelimited information in the literatureonP. aeruginosaenvironmental isolates encoding AMR, the IPCDhas a large collection of strains from plants, soil,and water. Draft genomes of the IPCD are progres-sivelymadepublicly available by theNationalCenterfor Biotechnology Information (NCBI), mainly inBioProject PRJNA325248 (see “Publicly available”in the IPCD’s search engine).The IPCD contains 1588 entries for P. aeruginosaisolates, with a time span of 135 years going backto 1880 and covering 85 locations in 35 countrieson five continents. It includes previously describedcollections28,31,40 and was assembled with the aimof representing maximal genomic diversity. To thisend, various criteria were taken into consideration,including geographic origin, previous genotyping,phenotype, and in vivo behavior. We envision thatthe collection could accommodate over 10,000P. aeruginosa isolates.To be a tool for predicting AMR, the quality ofdraft genomes must be exceptional. In the IPCD,for the 979 P. aeruginosa genomes sequenced andassembled to date, themediannumber of scaffolds is43 (median number of contigs is 46), for amedian coverage of 43×. The NCBI indicates, asof December 2016, a repertoire of 2104 P. aerugi-nosa sequenced genomes, with a median of 111 andup to 2797 scaffolds. Because this publicly avail-able P. aeruginosa data set has been available sincethe early stages of NGS using different technolo-gies, and because of the high variability in sequencequality and limited metadata information that isdifficult to retrieve, it cannot be used for AMR pre-diction. In P. aeruginosa, predicting AMR can onlybe achieved using a strain and genome databasesuch as the IPCD, where not only metadata but alsoan integrated approach for genome sequencing andannotation will first define the proof of concept inpredicting AMR, its limitations, and how it may beused in other species.Phylogeny of P. aeruginosa linkedto the prediction of AMRAlthough several P. aeruginosa genomes have beencompletely sequenced and annotated as a single cir-cular chromosome,38,41–44 the species phylogeny hasbeen clearly determined only recently.5,45 Knowl-edge on this species’ diversity and evolution is essen-tial in the development of tools for predicting AMR,because knowledge about diversity could be closelylinked to the source of AMR, crucial informationfor surveillance and epidemiology.P. aeruginosa is well known to have an adaptablegenome between 5.5 and more than 7 Mbp. Thislarge genome contains more than 550 transcrip-tional regulators, which presumably play exquisiteroles in coordinating the colonization of a widerange of ecological niches.38 Comparative genomicsapproaches have identified changes in surface anti-gens, loss of virulence-associated traits, increasedAMR, overproduction of alginate, and the modu-lation of metabolic pathways. Its genome also hasmany regions that exhibit plasticity linked withAMR.46The core genome phylogeny for the 390 genomes(Fig. 1) that constitute a key data set for predict-ing AMR in P. aeruginosa strains can be dividedinto threemajor groups,5 a result in agreement withwhat was previously observed45 but with enhanced5Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas Jeukens et al....Group 1 (n = 312)Group 3 (n = 12)Group 2 (n = 68)PA7LESB58PAKPAO1PA14Stewart et al.45IPCDReference strainFigure 1. Unrooted tree of 390 P. aeruginosa genomes based on SNPs within the core genome as defined by Harvest (100bootstraps). The total coverage of the core genome among all sequences was 17.5%. Strains are divided into three groups (blue,orange, and green). The number of strains for each group is shown. White circles represent one or more strains that were sequencedby the IPC, while black circles represent publicly available genomes. Adapted with permission from Ref. 5.resolution. Furthermore, the third major group,which includes strain PA7, has a genome sequencerevealing considerable divergence from other P.aeruginosa strains.43 The PA7 genome was particu-larly useful for unraveling the genetic basis of AMRin this strain: pointmutations in gyrA and parC con-ferred fluoroquinolone resistance, and efflux sys-tems with conserved and unique oprA componentswere the primarymodes of resistance. Amore exten-sive survey of P. aeruginosa is required to furtherpopulate the tree. Still, these 390 strains are highlyvaluable for predicting AMR because they originatefrom a wide array of environmental, clinical, andanimal sources.AMR databases: the second stepin predicting AMR in P. aeruginosaPromising application of NGS technology includeshospital infection-control surveillance programsand community outbreak investigations.9 In addi-tion to bacterial WGS sequencing and identifica-tion at the subspecies and strain levels based onsingle-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and aver-age nucleotide identity for species confirmation,47we entertain the possibility that a critical approachshould include a clear focus on predicting AMR.Conducting AMR testing to guide therapy is one ofthemajor critical tests in a clinical laboratory. Bacte-rialWGShas an excellent potential to predict knowngene content encoding AMR (i.e., the resistome).WGS of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniaeclinical isolates and BLASTn used to identify thepresence of relevant AMR genes demonstrated 96%and 97% sensitivity and specificity for predictingAMR, respectively.48Predicting AMR will require two complimen-tary approaches to have some degree of success:comprehensive databases and software capable ofgiving statistical prediction with a high level ofconfidence. In addition, there is no a priori evi-dence that all AMR can be successfully predictedin all bacterial species. It has not been estab-lished whether WGS coupled with AMR predic-tion can be broadly applied to the full spectrumof pathogenic bacteria, particularly those with adiverse armamentarium of resistance mechanisms.P. aeruginosa is certainly a case in point describedhere.6 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Jeukens et al. Predicting antibiotic resistance in PseudomonasnfxBnalDnalCmexTmexSmexRgolSevgSmacBmacAput. qac MFS pumpmexImexHmexGput. RND pump subunitput. abeMoprNoprMoprJoprAopmDmexFmexEmexDmexCmexBmexAmdtCmdtBmdsBmdsAemrEamrBamrAtet efflux pumpput. sulsul2sul1mutant rpoB*rosBPmrFPmrCarnAput. mphput. EreAFosAmutant gyrB*mutant parC*mutant gyrB*mutant gyrA*mutant rpoC*cmxput. cmlcmlBput. catcatB7VIM beta−lactamaseSHV beta−lactamasePDC beta−lactamaseOXA beta−lactamasermtDAPH(6)−IdAPH(6)−IcAPH(3'')−IbAPH(3')−IIbAPH(3')−Ibput. ANT(3'')−IaaadAANT(2'')−Iaputative AAC(6')AAC(6')−Ib'put. AAC(3)put. AAC(1)Regulation Efflux, macrolideEfflux, fluoroquinoloneEffluxTetracyclineSulfonamideRifampicinAminoglycosideBeta-lactamChloramphenicolDaptomycinFluoroquinoloneFosfomycinMacrolidePolymyxin0246FrequencyFigure 2. Heat map showing unique resistomes for 390 P. aeruginosa strains. The heat map was obtained by performing tblastnsearches using the sequences present on the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD)7 as queries and the genomesas subjects. Green, perfect match to a sequence in the CARD; red, similar to a sequence in the CARD, within a curated e-value cutoff(gene specific); and black, absent. The bar plot represents absolute frequency of each resistome. On the left of the heat map, genes,proteins, and specific variants (*) are grouped according to their biological function or the resistance they confer. Adapted withpermission from Ref. 5.The three major extensive AMR databasesare the Comprehensive Antibiotic ResistanceDatabase (CARD),7 Antibiotic Resistance Gene-ANNOTation (ARG-ANNOT),49 and ResFinder.50The CARD is one of the more sophisticated,highly detailed, and comprehensive databases(http://arpcard.mcmaster.ca), because it is a man-ually curated resource containing high-quality ref-erence data on the molecular basis of AMR, withan emphasis on the genes, proteins, and muta-tions involved. The CARD is ontologically struc-tured, model centric, and spans the breadth of AMRdrug classes and resistance mechanisms, includ-ing intrinsic, mutation-driven, and acquired resis-tance. Its design allows the development of novelgenome analysis tools, such as the Resistance GeneIdentifier (RGI) for resistome prediction from rawgenome sequences. Recent improvements includeextensive curation of additional reference sequencesand mutations, development of a unique ontol-ogy and accompanying AMR detection models topower sequence analysis, new visualization tools,and expansion of the RGI for detection of emergentthreats.6As a proof of concept in predicting AMR inP. aeruginosa, the RGIwas used to detect AMRgenesand specific gene variants from WGS of 390 Pseu-domonas strains (Fig. 2).5 Approximately one-thirdof the 46 detected resistance genes were found inmost strains. On the other hand, the other twothirds were found only in a restricted group ofstrains, highlighting the great variability of P. aerug-inosa strains with respect to AMR genes. This vari-ation can only be unraveled by extensive sampling.This information can be exploited to study the poolof resistance genes present in clinical strains andunderstand the links between clinical and environ-mental strains in the context of AMR. Remarkably,as depicted in Figure 2, AMR genes or mutantswere found for the major families of antibiotics7Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas Jeukens et al.used, including aminoglycosides, -lactams, fluo-roquinolones, fosfomycin, macrolides, polymyxin,rifampin, sulfonamide, and tetracycline. On thebasis of our own work, as well as machine learn-ing attempts from another team,51,52 the only singlegene that can be directly associated with a resistancephenotype is gyrA, for which specific variants areassociated with quinolone resistance.53 This high-lights the complex nature of the molecular basis ofAMR in P. aeruginosa and the challenge that is AMRprediction for this organism.As depicted in Figure 2, an impressive reper-toire of efflux genes encoding multidrug resistance(MDR) efflux pumps were also identified in these390 P. aeruginosa genomes. This opens major ques-tions: What is the significance of efflux in AMR andwhat is a resistance gene?MDR efflux pumps will bea major challenge in predicting AMR, particularlyin P. aeruginosa. MDR efflux pumps are chromoso-mally encoded and capable of mediating resistanceto toxic compounds in several life forms. Hence,they exhibit multiple functions relevant to bacte-rial physiology in addition to mediating AMR.54MDR efflux pumps contribute to both intrinsic andacquired resistance to toxic compounds, includ-ing in humans, where they have a role in resis-tance to anticancer drugs,55 and in bacteria, wherethey are involved in resistance to antibiotics.56,57MDR efflux pumps are highly conserved in a givenbacterial species and are presumably implicated inbacterial virulence,58 trafficking of quorum-sensingmolecules,59,60 and detoxification processes frommetabolic intermediates and toxic compounds, suchas heavy metals, solvents, or antimicrobials pro-duced by other microorganisms.54 It is relativelywell documented, however, that efflux gene expres-sion is a better predictor of efflux-mediated AMRthan the presence of efflux pump–encoding genesalone.61,62 Regulatory genes that are known to havean impact on AMR are part of the CARD; eight ofthem are represented at the bottom of Figure 2. InP. aeruginosa, an experimental study of 108 clinicalisolates revealed complex associations, where onlycertain combinations of multiple regulatory muta-tions and overexpressed efflux genes were associatedwith MDR phenotypes.63 Although multiple effluxsystems have been characterized, namely MexAB-OprM and MexXY complexes, their expression iscontrolled by an intricate network of regulators andmodulators, not to mention the impact of environ-mental conditions. 64Hence, knowledge of each reg-ulatory gene and its role(s) does not necessarily easethe task of predicting phenotype from genotype.Additionally, it has come to our attention that theCARDnomenclature sometimesdiffers fromwhat isexpected in terms of gene names. For instance, withthe current version, strain PAO1’s mexB is calledmexF. Moreover, some efflux genes tend to be iden-tified in multiple copies per genome by the RGI.Therefore, it is difficult to ascertain whether we arereally comparing the same locus when comparinggenetically diverse isolates of Pseudomonas.The third step: software for predictingAMR––a route out of resistance?The Mykrobe Predictor software was able to detectresistance to the five first-line antibiotics in over99% of Staphylococcus aureus cases, matchingthe performance of traditional drug-sensitivitytesting.65 For Mycobacterium tuberculosis, wherethe genetic basis for drug resistance is less wellunderstood, the Mykrobe Predictor still detected82.6% of resistant infections around 5–16 weeksfaster than traditional drug susceptibility testing.Mykrobe Predictor can be rapidly updated with asimple software upgrade that allows researchers todetect new resistance mutations as they evolve. Afurther advantage of Mykrobe is that it can identifyinfections where a patient’s body contains a mix-ture of both drug-resistant and drug-susceptiblebacteria.65 The ability to distinguish betweenthese bacterial subpopulations is an advantageover conventional testing in detecting resistanceto second-line tuberculosis (TB) drugs. This isimportant for diagnosing infections like extensivelydrug-resistant TB, which is resistant to at least fourof the coreTBdrugs and is considered a global threatto public health by the World Health Organization.ARG-ANNOT is a bioinformatics tool that wascreated to detect existing and putative AMR genesin bacterial genomes.49 ARG-ANNOT uses a localBLAST program in the Bio-Edit software thatallows the user to analyze sequences without a Webinterface. All AMR genetic determinants were col-lected from published works and online resources;nucleotide and protein sequences were retrievedfrom the NCBI GenBank database. After buildinga database that includes 1689 AMR genes, the soft-ware was tested in a blind manner using 100 ran-dom sequences selected from the database to verify8 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Jeukens et al. Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonasthat the sensitivity and specificity were at 100%,even when partial sequences were queried. It will beinteresting to observe the potential ofARG-ANNOTand its limitationswhenusing awell-defined set ofP.aeruginosa genomes encoding multiple AMR genes.The Integrated Rapid Infectious Disease Analysis(IRIDA) platform combines PHYLoVIZ (enhancedphylogenomics visualization), IslandViewer andIslandCompare (genomic island, virulence factor,and antibiotic-resistance gene identification andcomparison), GenGIS (phylogeography analysisand visualization), CARD, and SNVPhyl phyloge-nomics analysis (http://www.irida.ca/tools/). TheIRIDA platform is a promising integrated approachbut needs to enhance some of its capabilities inIsland and in virulence factor prediction with NGSdata.OSPREYwas able to predict themost likelymuta-tions to come out of certain bacteria, and clinicianswere then able to test treatment with antimicrobialsthat are still in the experimental phase.66 Identifyingthe most likely mutations while antimicrobials arestill under development indicates a better positionfor success when these compounds become avail-able for general use.OSPREYwasused to specificallypinpoint methicillin-resistant S. aureus, a commoncause of hospital infection. Developing preemptivestrategies while antimicrobials are still in the designphase will provide a head start on the next line ofcompounds that will be effective despite the AMRmutations. If we can somehow predict how bacte-ria might respond to a particular antibiotic aheadof time, we can change the regimen for treatment,plan for the next one, or rule out therapies that areunlikely to remain effective for long.Machine learning to predict AMRAmajor drawback of database approaches is that, bydefinition, they will never detect what is unknown.This is why machine learning is such a promisingapproach for predicting AMR. To date, however,machine learning applied to P. aeruginosa AMRhas had mitigated success51,52 and will need to bebetter adapted to the genomic complexity of thespecies. Currently, there are two major approachesthat could be amenable to AMR prediction: rules-basedmethods andmachine learningmethods. Therules-based algorithm makes predictions based oncurrent, curated knowledge of AMR genes. Themachine learning algorithm predicts AMR and sus-ceptibility based on a model built from a trainingset of resistant and susceptible isolates. In general,machine learning algorithms work by finding therelevant features in a complex data set that enablesthe ability to make a strong prediction.In one of the largest phenotypic studies everperformed on biocides and on AMR, a total of1632 worldwide clinical strains of S. aureus wereanalyzed.67 S. aureus is a major human pathogen, amajor cause of nosocomial infections, and a signif-icant cause of foodborne infection. By combiningdifferent machine learning methodologies, namelydecision trees and clustering, to explore the data inorder to find biologically and statistically significantresults, it was demonstrated that reduced suscepti-bility to two common biocides, chlorhexidine andbenzalkonium chloride, which belong to differentstructural families, is associated with multi-AMR.An MIC greater than 2 mg/L for both biocides isrelated to AMR in S. aureus.Amachine learning approach was used to predictbacterial susceptibility using the presence or absenceof over 500 SNPs found in a data set of 652M. tuber-culosis isolates and used as features for a number ofclassification algorithms.68 Susceptibility and AMRwere defined on the basis of phenotypic growth pat-terns, and the results from the machine learningmethod were compared to predictions based on thepresence of a set of knownAMRmutations.Misclas-sified isolates were also examined for commonali-ties, revealing 11 potentially new AMR mutations.The prediction of antibiotic susceptibility gave aclassification accuracy of 93% for predicting AMRto isoniazid. Machine learning was capable of par-ticularly high sensitivity, ranging between 95% and100% across the four antibiotics examined.WGS data were used from 78 clinical Enterobac-teriaceae isolates identified to represent a variety ofphenotypes, from fully susceptible to pan-resistantstrains for the antibiotics tested. The predictions ofthe rules-based and machine learning algorithmsfor these isolates were compared to results ofphenotype-based diagnostics.8 The rules-based andmachine learning predictions achieved agreementwith standard-of-care phenotypic diagnostics of89.0% and 90.3%, respectively, across 12 antibioticagents from six major antibiotic classes. Severalsources of disagreement between the algorithmswere identified. Novel variants of known resis-tance factors and incomplete genome assembly9Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas Jeukens et al.confounded the rules-based algorithm, resulting inpredictions based on gene family rather than onknowledge of the specific variant found. Low-frequency resistance caused errors in the machinelearning algorithm because those genes were notseen or seen infrequently in the test set. Theyalso identified an example of variability in thephenotype-based results that led to disagreementwith both genotype-based methods.PATRIC (Pathosystems Resource IntegrationCenter (patricbrc.org)) is a National Institutes ofHealth–supported bioinformatics resource centerthat was built to enable comparative genomic anal-ysis of bacterial pathogens.69 The PATRIC file-transfer protocol server enables access to genomesthat are binned by their AMR phenotypes, aswell as metadata including MICs. The custom-built AdaBoost (adaptive boosting) machine learn-ing classifiers can identify carbapenem resistancein Acinetobacter baumannii, methicillin resistancein S. aureus, and -lactam and cotrimoxazole resis-tance in Streptococcus pneumoniae with accuraciesranging from 88% to 99%. AdaBoost can predictisoniazid, kanamycin, ofloxacin, rifampicin, andstreptomycin resistance in M. tuberculosis, achiev-ing accuracies ranging from 71% to 88%. This set ofclassifiers has been used to provide an initial frame-work for species-specific AMR and genomic fea-ture prediction in theRASTandPATRICannotationservices.70The functional study of AMRUnderstanding the mechanisms responsible forAMR will continue to remain a central aspect ofAMR research. Like AMR prediction, this field alsobenefits greatly from the most recent NGS tech-nologies. For instance, a transposon-sequencing(Tn-seq) methodology was used to screen largenumbers of transposon mutants in P. aeruginosa.71This method was benchmarked with the iden-tification of mutations reducing intrinsic resis-tance to tobramycin, a phenotype that had beenpreviously analyzed at the genome scale usingmutant-by-mutant screening. The results show theeffectiveness of the Tn-seq method in defining thegenetic basis of a complex resistance trait in P.aeruginosa. Harnessing evolutionary biology is alsoa promising route out of AMR. Experimental evolu-tion of P. aeruginosa in the presence of an antibioticmonitored using WGS sequencing allows not onlythe direct identification of themutations that occur,but also an investigation of the fitness cost associ-ated with these mutations, which is likely to affecttheir success in a host environment.72,73ConclusionsThe clinical and basic science literature suggest thatbacterial WGS can be successfully applied to rapiddiagnostics in infectious diseases and the predictionof AMR. Predicting AMR may be useful for clinicalcases that fail or challenge the limits of traditionallaboratory testing.WGS analysis coupledwith AMRprediction could be particularly beneficial for slow-growing SCVs of P. aeruginosa or for other difficult-to-culture organisms and organisms that elude phe-notypic testing altogether. As for species or strainsthat grow normally and for which current labora-tory methods are relatively efficient, we argue thatsequencing-based approaches offer the potential toprovide much more clinically relevant informationin a similar time-frame.However, there are clear limitations in predictingAMR without phenotypic confirmation; cautionneeds to be taken in attributing relevance to anygenes hitherto not shown to confer drug resistance.Four AMR postulates have been proposed, and anAMR trait should be only described as such if thecriteria of these four postulates are met.74 Theseinclude the following: (1) show that the genetic traitis present in drug-resistant microbes; (2) demon-strate that the genetic trait is not present or notexpressed in drug-susceptible strains; (3) replacethe genetic trait with wild-type DNA sequence andshow that it confers drug susceptibility; and (4)introduce the genetic trait into a drug-susceptiblestrain and show that it confers AMR. These postu-lates are supported by the biology of AMR, wherewe know the microbiological effects of sublethaldoses of antibiotics, including in P. aeruginosa;75 therelative contribution of recombination and pointmutation to the diversification of P. aeruginosaclones;76 the impact of AMR caused by geneamplification and its implication on the evolutionof AMR;77 the ramifications of SNPs associatedwithAMR;78 and the challenge of pinpointing whichMDR efflux pumps are involved in AMR. However,one additional genomics approach to support AMRprediction and its implementation could includedata on the transcriptome of AMR for the bacterialspecies to be tested. In P. aeruginosa, RNA-Seq10 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Jeukens et al. Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonashas defined a transcriptional landscape known tobe shaped by environmental heterogeneity andgenetic variation.79 In specific cases, such as inP. aeruginosa CF lung infections, single–bacterialcell genome sequencing could assist in predictingAMR.80 Single-cell genomics and transcriptomicsare advancing rapidly and could interrogate AMRthrough a novel, complimentary approach.Althoughmany potential impediments to the uti-lization of NGS-based diagnostics and prediction ofAMRexist, it would be a loss to themedical commu-nity if this technology couldnotbe applied topredictAMRand assist in patient care in some capacity. Therapid evolution of NGS challenges both the regula-tory framework and the development of laboratorystandards and will certainly contribute to furtherresearch using P. aeruginosa and the IPCD towardtangible improvement and progress.AcknowledgmentsWe express our gratitude to members of the Plate-forme d’analyses ge´nomiques and the Plateformede bioinformatique at IBIS. A special thanks toAndrew McArthur for his support and encour-agement in using the Comprehensive AntibioticResistance Database. J. Jeukens was supported bya Cystic Fibrosis Canada postdoctoral fellowship. R.C. Levesque is funded by Cystic Fibrosis Canada(Grant ID: 2610), a CIHR-Joint ProgrammingInitiative on Antimicrobial Resistance (JPIAMR)team grant, and by Genome Que´bec and GenomeCanada.Competing interestsThe authors declare no competing interests.References1. Blair, J.M. et al. 2015. Molecular mechanisms of antibioticresistance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13: 42–51.2. O’Neill, J. 2016. Tackling drug-resistant infections glob-ally: final report and recommendations. Accessed March22, 2017. https://amr-review.org/sites/default/files/160518_Final%20paper_with%20cover.pdf.3. O’Neil, J. 2014. Antimicrobial resistance: tackling a cri-sis for the health and wealth of nations. In Review onAntimicrobial Resistance: Tackling Drug-Resistant InfectionsGlobally. HM Government, Welcome Trust. Accessed April28, 2017. https://amr-review.org/sites/default/files/160518_Final%20paper_with%20cover.pdf.4. Little, T.J. et al. 2012. Harnessing evolutionary biology tocombat infectious disease. Nat. Med. 18: 217–220.5. Freschi, L. et al. 2015. Clinical utilization of genomics dataproduced by the international Pseudomonas aeruginosa con-sortium. Front. Microbiol. 6: 1036.6. Jia, B. et al. 2016. CARD 2017: expansion andmodel-centriccurationof the comprehensive antibiotic resistancedatabase.Nucleic Acids Res. 45: D566–D573.7. McArthur, A.G. et al. 2013. The comprehensive antibioticresistancedatabase.Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57:3348–3357.8. Pesesky, M.W. et al. 2016. Evaluation of machine learn-ing and rules-based approaches for predicting antimicro-bial resistance profiles in Gram-negative bacilli from wholegenome sequence data. Front. Microbiol. 7: 1887.9. Goldberg, B. et al. 2015. Making the leap from researchlaboratory to clinic: challenges and opportunities for next-generation sequencing in infectious disease diagnostics.mBio 6: e01888-15.10. Silby, M.W. et al. 2011. Pseudomonas genomes: diverse andadaptable. FEMS Microb. Rev. 35: 652–680.11. Winstanley, C., S. O’Brien & M.A. Brockhurst. 2016.Pseudomonas aeruginosa evolutionary adaptation and diver-sification in cystic fibrosis chronic lung infections. TrendsMicrob. 24: 327–337.12. Kidd, T.J. et al. 2013. Shared Pseudomonas aeruginosa geno-types are common in Australian cystic fibrosis centres. Eur.Respir. J. 41: 1091–1100.13. Livermore, D.M. 2002. Multiple mechanisms of antimicro-bial resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: our worst night-mare? Clin. Infect. Dis. 34: 634–640.14. Sharma, S. & P. Srivastava. 2016. Resistance of antimicrobialin Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci.5: 121–128.15. Cabot, G. et al. 2016. Evolution of Pseudomonas aerugi-nosa antimicrobial resistance and fitness under low and highmutation rates. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 60: 1767–1778.16. Khaledi, A. et al. 2016. Transcriptome profiling ofantimicrobial resistance inPseudomonas aeruginosa.Antimi-crob. Agents Chemother. 60: 4722–4733.17. Selezska, K. et al. 2012. Pseudomonas aeruginosa populationstructure revisited under environmental focus: impact ofwater quality and phage pressure. Environ. Microbiol. 14:1952–1967.18. D’Costa, V.M. et al. 2006. Sampling the antibiotic resistome.Science 311: 374–377.19. Perry, J.A. & G.D. Wright. 2013. The antibiotic resistance“mobilome”: searching for the link between environmentand clinic. Front. Microbiol. 4: 138.20. Goodwin, S., J.D. McPherson & W.R. McCombie. 2016.Comingof age: ten years ofnext-generation sequencing tech-nologies. Nat. Rev. Genet. 17: 333–351.21. Loman, N.J. & M.J. Pallen. 2015. Twenty years of bac-terial genome sequencing. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13: 787–794.22. Fothergill, J.L. et al. 2010. Impact ofPseudomonas aeruginosagenomic instability on the application of typingmethods forchronic cystic fibrosis infections. J. Clin. Microbiol. 48: 2053–2059.11Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas Jeukens et al.23. Parsons, Y.N. et al. 2002. Use of subtractive hybridization toidentify a diagnostic probe for a cystic fibrosis epidemicstrain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Clin. Microbiol. 40:4607–4611.24. Aaron, S.D. et al. 2010. Infection with transmissible strainsof Pseudomonas aeruginosa and clinical outcomes in adultswith cystic fibrosis. JAMA 304: 2145–2153.25. van Mansfeld, R. et al. 2016. The effect of strict segregationon Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis patients. PLoSOne 11: e0157189.26. Romling, U. & B. Tummler. 1994. Bacterial genome map-ping. J. Biotechnol. 35: 155–164.27. Romling, U. et al. 2005. Worldwide distribution ofPseudomonas aeruginosa clone C strains in the aquatic envi-ronment and cystic fibrosis patients. Environ. Microbiol. 7:1029–1038.28. Pirnay, J.P. et al. 2009. Pseudomonas aeruginosa populationstructure revisited. PLoS One 4: e7740.29. Pirnay, J.P. et al. 2002. Pseudomonas aeruginosa displays anepidemic population structure. Environ. Microbiol. 4: 898–911.30. Wiehlmann, L. et al. 2007. Population structure ofPseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104:8101–8106.31. Kidd, T.J. et al. 2012. Pseudomonas aeruginosa exhibits fre-quent recombination, but only a limited association betweengenotype and ecological setting. PLoS One 7: e44199.32. Turton, J.F. et al. 2010. Evaluation of a nine-locus variable-number tandem-repeat scheme for typing of Pseudomonasaeruginosa. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 16: 1111–1116.33. Didelot, X. et al. 2012. Transforming clinical microbiologywith bacterial genome sequencing. Nat. Rev. Genet. 13: 601–612.34. Singh, P.K. et al. 2000. Quorum-sensing signals indicatethat cystic fibrosis lungs are infected with bacterial biofilms.Nature 407: 762–764.35. Mowat, E. et al. 2011. Pseudomonas aeruginosa populationdiversity and turnover in cystic fibrosis chronic infections.Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 183: 1674–1679.36. Keays, T. et al. 2009. A retrospective analysis of biofilmantibiotic susceptibility testing: a better predictor of clin-ical response in cystic fibrosis exacerbations. J. Cyst. Fibros.8: 122–127.37. Johns, B.E. et al. 2015. Phenotypic and genotypic charac-teristics of small colony variants and their role in chronicinfection. Microbiol. Insights 8: 15–23.38. Stover, C.K. et al. 2000. Complete genome sequence ofPseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, an opportunistic pathogen.Nature 406: 959–964.39. Winsor, G.L. et al. 2016. Enhanced annotations and featuresfor comparing thousands of Pseudomonas genomes in thePseudomonas genome database.Nucleic Acids Res. 44:D646–D653.40. Stewart, R.M. et al. 2011. Genetic characterization indicatesthat a specific subpopulation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isassociated with keratitis infections. J. Clin. Microbiol. 49:993–1003.41. He, J. et al. 2004. The broad host range pathogen Pseu-domonas aeruginosa strain PA14 carries two pathogenicityislands harboring plant and animal virulence genes. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101: 2530–2535.42. Mathee, K. et al. 2008. Dynamics of Pseudomonas aeruginosagenome evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105: 3100–3105.43. Roy, P.H. et al. 2010. Complete genome sequence of themultiresistant taxonomic outlier Pseudomonas aeruginosaPA7. PLoS One 5: e8842.44. Winstanley, C. et al. 2009. Newly introduced genomicprophage islands are critical determinants of in vivo compet-itiveness in the Liverpool Epidemic Strain of Pseudomonasaeruginosa. Genome Res. 19: 12–23.45. Stewart, L. et al. 2014. Draft genomes of 12 host-adaptedand environmental isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa andtheir positions in the core genome phylogeny. Pathog. Dis.71: 20–25.46. Klockgether, J. et al. 2011. Pseudomonas aeruginosa genomicstructure and diversity. Front. Microbiol. 2: 150.47. Konstantinidis, K.T. & J.M. Tiedje. 2005. Genomic insightsthat advance the species definition for prokaryotes. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102: 2567–2572.48. Stoesser, N. et al. 2013. Predicting antimicrobial suscepti-bilities for Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae iso-lates using whole genomic sequence data. J. Antimicrob.Chemother. 68: 2234–2244.49. Gupta, S.K. et al. 2014. ARG-ANNOT, a new bioinfor-matic tool to discover antibiotic resistance genes in bacterialgenomes. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58: 212–220.50. Zankari, E. et al. 2012. Identification of acquired antimicro-bial resistance genes. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 67: 2640–2644.51. Drouin, A. et al. 2016. Predictive computational phenotyp-ing and biomarker discovery using reference-free genomecomparisons. BMC Genomics 17: 754.52. Drouin, A. et al. 2016. Large scale modeling of antimicrobialresistance with interpretable classifiers. arXiv: 1612.01030.53. Yonezawa, M. et al. 1995. DNA gyrase gyrA mutations inquinolone-resistant clinical isolates of Pseudomonas aerugi-nosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39: 1970–1972.54. Alvarez-Ortega, C., J. Olivares & J.L. Martinez. 2013. RNDmultidrug efflux pumps: what are they good for? Front.Microbiol. 4: 7.55. Wu, C.P., C.H. Hsieh & Y.S. Wu. 2011. The emergence ofdrug transporter-mediated multidrug resistance to cancerchemotherapy. Mol. Pharm. 8: 1996–2011.56. Poole, K. 2007. Efflux pumps as antimicrobial resistancemechanisms. Ann. Med. 39: 162–176.57. Webber, M.A. & L.J. Piddock. 2003. The importance ofefflux pumps in bacterial antibiotic resistance. J. Antimicrob.Chemother. 51: 9–11.58. Alcalde-Rico, M. et al. 2016. Multidrug efflux pumps at thecrossroad between antibiotic resistance and bacterial viru-lence. Front. Microbiol. 7: 1483.59. Evans, K. et al. 1998. Influence of the MexAB-OprMmultidrug efflux system on quorum sensing in Pseudomonasaeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 180: 5443–5447.60. Kohler, T. et al. 2001. Overexpression of the MexEF-OprNmultidrug efflux system affects cell-to-cell signaling inPseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 183: 5213–5222.12 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.Jeukens et al. Predicting antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas61. Li, X.-Z. & H. Nikaido. 2009. Efflux-mediated drug resis-tance in bacteria. Drugs 69: 1555–1623.62. Piddock, L.J.V. 2006. Clinically relevant chromosomallyencodedmultidrug resistance efflux pumps in bacteria.Clin.Microbiol. Rev. 19: 382–402.63. Kiser, T.H. et al. 2010. Efflux pump contribution tomultidrug resistance in clinical isolates of Pseudomonasaeruginosa. Pharmacotherapy 30: 632–638.64. Li, X.-Z. & P. Ple´siat. 2016. Antimicrobial drug efflux pumpsin Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In Efflux-Mediated Antimicro-bial Resistance in Bacteria: Mechanisms, Regulation andClinical Implications. X.-Z. Li, C.A. Elkins & H.I. Zgurskaya,Eds.: 359–400. Cham: Springer International Publishing.65. Bradley,P. et al. 2015.Rapidantibiotic-resistancepredictionsfrom genome sequence data for Staphylococcus aureus andMycobacterium tuberculosis. Nat. Commun. 6: 10063.66. Reeve, S.M. et al. 2015. Protein design algorithms predictviable resistance to an experimental antifolate. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112: 749–754.67. Coelho, J.R. et al. 2013.Theuse ofmachine learningmethod-ologies to analyse antibiotic and biocide susceptibility inStaphylococcus aureus. PLoS One 8: e55582.68. Niehaus, K.E. et al. 2014. Machine learning for theprediction of antibacterial susceptibility in Mycobac-terium tuberculosis. In IEEE-EMBS International Confer-ence on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI). 618–621.https://doi.org/10.1109/BHI.2014.686444069. Wattam, A.R. et al. 2014. PATRIC, the bacterial bioinfor-matics database and analysis resource. Nucleic Acids Res. 42:D581–D591.70. Davis, J.J. et al. 2016. Antimicrobial resistance prediction inPATRIC and RAST. Sci. Rep. 6: 27930.71. Gallagher, L.A., J. Shendure & C. Manoil. 2011. Genome-scale identification of resistance functions in Pseudomonasaeruginosa using Tn-seq. mBio 2: e00315-10.72. Melnyk, A.H., A. Wong & R. Kassen. 2015. The fitness costsof antibiotic resistance mutations. Evol. Appl. 8: 273–283.73. Wong, A., N. Rodrigue & R. Kassen. 2012. Genomics ofadaptation during experimental evolution of the oppor-tunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. PLoS Genet. 8:e1002928.74. Piddock, L.J. 2016. Assess drug-resistance phenotypes, notjust genotypes. Nat. Microbiol. 1: 16120.75. Andersson, D.I. & D. Hughes. 2014. Microbiological effectsof sublethal levels of antibiotics. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12:465–478.76. Spratt, B.G., W.P. Hanage & E.J. Feil. 2001. The relativecontributions of recombination and point mutation to thediversification of bacterial clones. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 4:602–606.77. Sandegren, L. & D.I. Andersson. 2009. Bacterial gene ampli-fication: implications for the evolution of antibiotic resis-tance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7: 578–588.78. Chewapreecha, C. et al. 2014. Comprehensive identificationof single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with beta-lactam resistance within pneumococcal mosaic genes. PLoSGenet. 10: e1004547.79. Dotsch, A. et al. 2015. The Pseudomonas aeruginosatranscriptional landscape is shaped by environmental het-erogeneity and genetic variation. mBio 6: e00749.80. Gawad, C., W. Koh & S.R. Quake. 2016. Single-cell genomesequencing: current state of the science. Nat. Rev. Genet. 17:175–188.13Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. xxxx (2017) 1–13 C© 2017 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciencespublished by Wiley Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.