ABSTRACT: 
Linguistic innovations that arise contemporaneously in highly distant locations, such as quotative be like, have been termed ‘global linguistic variants’. This is not necessarily to suggest fully global usage, but to invoke more general themes of globalisation vis-à-vis space and time. This research area has grown steadily in the last twenty years, and by asserting a role for mass media, researchers have departed intrepidly from sociolinguistic convention. Yet they have largely relied on quite conventional sociolinguistic methodologies, only inferring media influence post hoc. This methodological conservatism has been overcome recently, but uncertainty remains about the overall shape of the new epistemological landscape. In this paper, I review existing research on global variants, and propose an epistemological model for researching media influence in language change: the mediated innovation model. I also analyse the way arguments are constructed in existing research, including the use of rhetorical devices to plug empirical gaps – a worthy sociolinguistic topic in its own right. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 the mediated innovation model is an epistemological model for research on the media and language change . along the way 
 , I arrange existing studies of global linguistic variants into five identifiableapproaches , each one engaging more substantively with media texts andmedia engagement . 
 all this is intended to clarify the achievements andlimitations of current research , and to map out where future research couldfocus its efforts .  
 
FULL TEXT: 
 The mediated innovation model: a framework for researching media influence in language changeSAYERS, DaveAvailable from Sheffield Hallam University Research Archive (SHURA) at:http://shura.shu.ac.uk/8080/This document is the author deposited version. You are advised to consult the publisher's version if you wish to cite from it.Published versionSAYERS, Dave (2014). The mediated innovation model: a framework for researching media influence in language change. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 18 (2), 185-212. Repository use policyCopyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in SHURA to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or any commercial gain.Sheffield Hallam University Research Archivehttp://shura.shu.ac.ukFOCUS ARTICLEThe mediated innovation model:A framework for researching mediainfluence in language change1Dave SayersSheffield Hallam University and Swansea University,United KingdomLinguistic innovations that arise contemporaneously in highly distantlocations, such as quotative be like, have been termed ‘global linguisticvariants’. This is not necessarily to suggest fully global usage, but to invokemore general themes of globalisation vis-a-vis space and time. This researcharea has grown steadily in the last twenty years, and by asserting a role formass media, researchers have departed intrepidly from sociolinguisticconvention. Yet they have largely relied on quite conventional socio-linguistic methodologies, only inferring media influence post hoc. Thismethodological conservatism has been overcome recently, but uncertaintyremains about the overall shape of the new epistemological landscape. In thispaper, I review existing research on global variants, and propose anepistemological model for researching media influence in language change:the mediated innovation model. I also analyse the way arguments areconstructed in existing research, including the use of rhetorical devices toplug empirical gaps – a worthy sociolinguistic topic in its own right.Les innovations linguistiques qui emergent simultanement dans differentesregions du monde, telles que les verbes introducteurs be like par exemple,ont ete recemment appelees des ‘variantes linguistiques universelles’. Cecine suggere pas necessairement l’existence d’un usage mondial a partentiere, mais pluto^t l’invocation de themes plus larges sur la mondialisationen matiere d’espace et de temps. Ce domaine de recherche a connu undeveloppement regulier au cours de ces vingt dernieres annees, et enrevendiquant le ro^le que peuvent jouer les medias de masse, lessociolinguistes se sont eloignes avec une certaine intrepidite desconventions caracteristiques de leur domaine. Pourtant, ces derniers ontbien employe des methodes d’analyse sociolinguistique conventionnelles,mais inferant l’influence des medias uniquement apres coup. Force est deconstater que ce conservatisme methodologique a recemment ete depasse,mais de nombreuses incertitudes subsistent quant a la structure globale dece nouveau paysage epistemologique. L’objectif de cet article est d’examinerJournal of Sociolinguistics 18/2, 2014: 185–212© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permitsuse, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.les travaux de recherche qui traitent de ces variantes universelles et deproposer un modele epistemologique destine a la recherche sur l’influencedes medias dans les processus linguistiques du changement appele enanglais ‘the mediated innovation model’, c’est-a-dire un modeled’innovations vehiculees par les medias. Dans le me^me temps, le presentarticle vise a etudier la maniere dont les arguments sont construits dans cestravaux de recherche, par exemple par le biais de procedes rhetoriques, afinde corriger les insuffisances empiriques – en somme un sujet desociolinguistique qui merite certainement toute notre attention. [French]KEYWORDS: Global linguistic variants, globalisation, mass media,quotatives, rhetorical devices, televisionINTRODUCTIONThe term ‘global linguistic variants’ (e.g. Buchstaller 2008) has been coined forlinguistic innovations arising contemporaneously in highly disparate places.The use of ‘global’ here is not intended to imply usage absolutely everywhere –or even necessarily in different languages – but just to highlight the sheerdistances involved, and partly to intimate a possible role for globalised massmedia. However, there remains deep division in sociolinguistics about thatpossible role. Debate has concerned, firstly, whether these reported globalchanges are any more than linguistically superficial, with negligible impact ondeeper linguistic structure; and secondly, whether and how far the mediamight be involved. As Eckert judiciously puts it:We have all been told by non-linguist acquaintances that language changecomes from the television. The idea that language change could beaccomplished in such a trivial fashion is part of the popular ‘bag o’ words’view of language . . . that we’re all tired of dealing with. However, weshouldn’t ignore the possibility that not all changes are equal. We need toask ourselves what kinds of changes require the kind of repeated exposurethat regular social interaction gives, and what kinds can be taken right offthe shelf. (Eckert 2003: 395)On the question of linguistic superficiality, Meyerhoff (1991) and Trudgill(2003) discuss the use of putatively U.S.-originating words in New Zealand,like flashlight for torch, or truck for lorry. Trudgill (2003) contrasts this lexicalconvergence with the steadfast divergence of New Zealand and U.S. vowelsystems, to evince the impervious localness of these more complex systemicchanges. Similarly, Milroy (2007, after Eckert as above) contrasts ‘off the shelf’changes in the U.K. – such as nationwide increases in ‘vocalization of /l/ andglottalization of /t/’ (2007: 164) – with what she terms ‘under the counter’changes, which require prolonged contact in social networks – such assystemic vowel shifts. Relatedly, Dion and Poplack argue: ‘although . . .186 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.“off-the-shelf” changes . . . can diffuse easily . . . the transmission of complexlinguistic variables . . . requires face-to-face contact’ (2007: 1; cf. Barbieri2009: 71). The matter of media influence has been less contentious withsuperficial changes – the ‘diffusion of catch-phrases’, as Chambers puts it(1993: 138–140; see also Charkova 2007; Risager 2006: 96–97). The debatewarms up when apparently complex innovations are reportedcontemporaneously across great distances.One global variant has attracted the most research: quotative be like (e.g.‘I was like, no way!’), displacing quotatives such as say across the English-speaking world. Meanwhile other changes, though not global, have arisenwith similar speed across whole countries, such as TH-fronting to [f]/[v] in theU.K. Milroy (2007) includes both be like and TH-fronting in the ‘off the shelf’category, suggesting a certain superficiality; but quotatives in particular havebeen argued to be complex, core grammatical, ‘high-context’ features(Buchstaller 2006a), part of a ‘quotative system’ (Tagliamonte and D’Arcy2004) indicative of systemic change. As such, one might expect these to act asunder-the-counter changes reliant on face-to-face contact, yet they arereported in ‘discontinuous geographic settings’ worldwide (Buchstaller andD’Arcy 2009: 291; cf. ‘spatially non-contiguous communities’, Buchstaller2006a: 363). Could all these changes really be driven by contact amongitinerant globetrotters? Their speed and reach makes it unclear; the scale seemsout of proportion. The quandary deepens in the way such changes tend to bepioneered by adolescents, who lead very local lives yet have strong access tomass media (Altendorf 2003: 148–149). Milroy (2007) does end by tentativelyquestioning the explanatory adequacy of face-to-face contact, but she seemscautiously silent on the media specifically – only highlighting a dearth ofresearch into the social mechanisms underlying off-the-shelf changes. Hercaution speaks to the level of contention at play on this issue. Where to go fromhere, and whether to invoke the media, has become one of the hottest potatoesin early twenty-first century sociolinguistics.As we will see, research focusing on global innovations has made some claimsabout a role for the media, though these claims have tended to outpace theevidence. Language corpora have remained the datasets of choice, and thatelides two important factors: firstly, the way global variants are actually used inmass media; and secondly, the way individual people engage with mass media –and precisely how that might figure in their appropriation of variants. All thishas led to ambiguity as to whether sociolinguistics can really account for globalvariants, and if so, what the new epistemological landscape might look like.In this article I review recent research on global linguistic variants, togetherwith two concepts that help to fill the above two gaps. First is mediation, a termdeveloped in a different area of sociolinguistics to describe the way non-standard vernaculars are (re)produced in media texts (Coupland 2009).Second is parasocial interaction (Rubin, Perse and Powell 1985), developed inmedia audience research to describe how media engagement works as aTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 187© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.creative, emotionally involved process, actively reworking media content. AsLivingstone notes of soap operas, they ‘thrive on interplay between . . .viewpoints’, thereby ‘providing a considerable role for the viewer’ (1998: 42–52). As we will see, such emotional investment is central to any substantiverole for the media in language change.I use these foundations to develop an epistemological model for research onthe media and language change: the mediated innovation model. Along the way,I arrange existing studies of global linguistic variants into five identifiableapproaches, each one engaging more substantively with media texts andmedia engagement. All this is intended to clarify the achievements andlimitations of current research, and to map out where future research couldfocus its efforts.There will be some limitations in what follows. The field of research I amreviewing is at quite an early stage, with some critical blind spots. In the last ofthe five approaches proposed below, I describe a study by a team in Glasgow(Scotland), which goes beyond conventional methods and collects new kinds ofdata on media influence. Yet, this study focuses on innovations originating inEngland, meaning a far smaller spatial scope than the transatlantic casesreported elsewhere, let alone the global ones. The new data in the Glasgowstudy do indicate a significant role for the media, but face-to-face contact alsoweighs in quite heavily – more than one might expect had the same techniquesbeen applied across global distances. So the overall case for media influencecould be sharper than it is presently. But then, my purpose is not to propoundmedia influence, only to build an epistemological model for its interrogation.In any event, the studies reviewed below suggest that local social conditionsultimately decide the linguistic and demographic profile of innovations, and thatany role for the media is much diluted by the ‘repeated exposure’ of ‘regularsocial interaction’ (Eckert 2003: 395). This in turn reflects audience research onthe partial, negotiated role of the media in influencing behaviours:[L]ocal realities can . . . present an unpredictable interpretive screen throughwhich the intruding electronic screen images are filtered. . . . Media realityhas not completely erased social reality, . . . counterposed as it is by thecentrifugal forces of the local micro-circumstances in which people live outtheir everyday lives . . .. (Ang 1996: 151–152; cf. Stuart-Smith 2011)A second limitation is a lack of clarity to date on whether global variantsrepresent lasting changes, or merely fads (Barbieri 2007: 29; Tagliamonte andD’Arcy 2007: 213). As Mair puts it dryly, ‘generations of teenage linguisticrebellion will not lead to a lasting change in community norms’ (2006: 29).Longevity is not altogether critical in this article, but it could be interesting infuture to analyse longevity using the mediated innovation model as a backdrop.Thirdly, my discussion involves only TV and film, not the internet. I amlimited here by the scope of existing research. Despite interest in globalisation188 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.from the wider discipline of sociolinguistics (e.g. Blommaert 2010: 49), andemerging work on computer-mediated communication (e.g. issue 10:4 of thisjournal), geographically-minded variationists so far have not gone ‘online’.There have been some variationist studies of email (Kuzmack 2010) andnewsgroups (Buchstaller et al. 2010; Coppen and Foolen 2012: 271), but thesehave not tracked the geographical spread of innovations. Still, TV is not amoribund topic; global audiences continue to grow (BBCWorldwide 2011: 26).There is just scope for expansion in future research. I return to that at the end.A final caution: the studies I review here mostly concern nativeAnglophone societies. Relevance to other contexts remains to be explored –see e.g. Baird (2001: 7), Cukor-Avila (2002: 3), and Kohn and Franz (2009:262). Perhaps that is for the best though, given the intended applicability tofuture research.A further contribution of this article is to examine the way researchersconstruct their arguments in relation to media influence, including the use ofrhetorical devices to bolster claims when empirical data may be lacking. This isitself an important sociolinguistic topic; it tells us a lot about the evolution ofthis field. I do not introduce rhetorical terms separately here, but as they arise.KEY TERMSSome terminological foundations need to be clarified before beginning the maindiscussion. I review five key terms here, to be used in what follows.Sociolinguistic conventionFor my purposes, this relates to a prevailing focus in variationist studies onface-to-face contact as a principal factor in language change. Neither theorynor methodology has delved far into media influence. Moreover, in the widersocial science of globalisation, sociolinguistics has been ‘late getting to theparty’ (Coupland 2003: 465). This point of departure is elaborated on below.Diffusion of innovationsThe spread of linguistic innovations across social and geographical space hasbeen labelled ‘diffusion’ – leading on, somewhat circuitously, from earlierbehavioural studies (see seminal work by e.g. Rogers 1962). Labov (2007)reflects on his own and others’ sociolinguistic research in this area. Linguistic‘transmission’ is the ‘unbroken sequence of native-language acquisition bychildren’ (2007: 346), enabling continuity of dialect norms. Such normschange by ‘incrementation’, starting with ‘faithful transmission of the adultsystem, including variable elements’ to children, followed by advancement ofthat variation (2007: 346). ‘This is the normal type of internal languagechange, termed CHANGE FROM BELOW or change from within the system’ (2007:346; cf. Macaulay 2006: 280). This is contrasted with ‘CHANGE FROM ABOVE or theTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 189© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.importation of elements from other systems’ (Labov 2007: 346), involving‘learning, primarily by adults, who acquire the new variants of the originatingcommunity’ and then transmit them to the next generation back in theircommunity (2007: 380) – designated as ‘linguistic DIFFUSION’ (2007: 347).Britain (2005: 996–997) compares types of diffusion:• wave or contagion, where an innovation spreads out in a ‘ripple’;• urban hierarchical, from large cities to towns, villages, and so on;• contra-hierarchical, from rural to urban areas; and• cultural hearth diffusion, the innovation taking hold simultaneously inboth urban and rural areas before spreading elsewhere – see Britain(2013) for developments and critiques of these models.A crucial point of departure below is that all these types of diffusion arepremised on face-to-face contact.The speech communityThis term was developed by Bloomfield (1926: 153–154) to refer to the totalityof alike utterances (acts of speech) in a given community; he gives Frenchmenand Zulus as examples. Subsequent reworkings of the term from the 1960sonwards, by the likes of J. J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes, zoomed in further thandiscrete languages, emphasising local variation. Reviewing a broad range oftwentieth century sociolinguistic studies, Patrick (2002: 577) arrives at a viewof the speech community as a ‘socially-based unit of linguistic analysis’,realised by shared productive and evaluative language norms, and usuallysome chain of interaction linking its members (cf. Owens 1999: 663).It is not necessary for all these members to actually meet, so some speechcommunities have grown very large. Most members of the ‘African Americanspeech community’ (Rickford 1999) never meet, but racial divides in the U.S.have helped reinforce the distinctions of African American Vernacular English(AAVE) (Fridland 2003). A relatable speech community comes in the form of aMexican enclave of a U.S. city, with an ‘emerging Hispanic English’ under littleinfluence from ambient southern U.S. speech communities (Wolfram, Carterand Moriello 2004). Despite this local isolation, there is a flow of migration intothe enclave from faraway Mexico. This speech community is locally discrete,yet it has one arm stretched out hundreds of miles south-west, with productiveand evaluative norms following a discernible chain of interlocution.Diffusion serves to connect otherwise discrete speech communities, usuallyvia adults traveling between them. Milroy notes that ‘off the shelf’ changes‘[do] not require the support of . . . regular primary interaction and [are]therefore more generally accessible to mobile or marginal individuals’, likecommuters (2007: 163), but less accessible to people with low mobility anddenser social network ties: ‘Because of the . . . time and commitment neededto maintain these strong ties, they . . . lack opportunities to form . . . weak[external] ties’ (Milroy and Milroy 1985: 367–368). Crucially though,190 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.although diffusion involves interaction beyond the speech community, it stillrelies on contact between interlocutors. A possible role for the media goesbeyond that. To return to AAVE, consider a related music genre, hip-hop –also widely appropriated globally (e.g. Cutler 1999; Lee 2011). AAVE hip-hopartists in the U.S. are, at one level, all interacting members of the AAVEspeech community. However, when they become superstars, theirinterlocution becomes heavily imbalanced. Their words are heard by farmore people than could ever speak back to them, and who will never meetthem. This is more than diffusion of off-the-shelf changes via mobileindividuals: it is not limited to face-to-face contact; it follows no identifiablegeographical pattern; and access to these artists’ linguistic output has no linkto the strength or weakness (or even existence) of social network ties. If massmedia have a distinct role in spreading innovations between distant speechcommunities, then it would be a codicil to a model based principally onface-to-face contact and network ties.GlobalisationIt is often contested that globalisation is particularly recent. Taking theU.K. as anexample, consider a warning from A. J. Ellis writing in the nineteenth century:‘the present facilities of communication are rapidly destroying all traces of ourolder dialectic English’ (1999[1871]: vi). So, what’s new? For one thing, thechanges bothering Ellis were limited to ‘dedialectalisation’ (Trudgill 2002: 40) –encroachment of Standard English on to local dialect forms. I have arguedelsewhere (Sayers 2009: 51–58) that those changes, dominant in the U.K. fromthe late-nineteenth tomid-twentieth century, were due to increased literacy, andthe commensurate influence of written Standard English (cf. Chambers 1993:141–142). This period saw little transfer of non-standard dialect forms betweeneven contiguous speech communities, let alone distant ones.Geographical space can be defined ‘in terms of relations’ between people(Allen, Massey and Cochrane 1998), which greatly increased in scope in mid-late-twentieth century Britain, alongside rising geographical mobility. In thisperiod, dedialectalisation was gradually eclipsed by dialect contact and mixture(Sayers 2009: 59–155), allowing off-the-shelf changes to accelerate apace.This was a change from Ellis’ day, but did it relate to globalisation? Scholte(2005: 59–84) argues that globalisation only began in earnest in the 1980s.He stresses the quantitative scale of ‘transworld associations, communications. . ., finance, investment, travel and trade’, alongside the qualitativedistinctness of ‘social connections that substantially transcend territorialgeography’ (2005: 61). ‘The newer spread of transplanetary simultaneity andinstantaneity takes social relations substantially beyond territorial space’(2005: 62, emphasis original). Scholte includes ‘global mass media spread[ing]messages simultaneously to transworld audiences’ (2005: 62) in his examples.So, increased mobility and dialect mixture was a change from Ellis’ day, but itTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 191© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.bore no hallmarks of globalisation per se (cf. Buchstaller 2008: 19). Peculiar toglobalisation would be the co-occurrence of innovations in discontinuousgeographic settings, inexplicable solely on grounds of mobility and personalcontact. This is precisely what has motivated discussion of media influence inthe rise of global linguistic variants. Moreover, the aforementionedsociolinguistic concept of mediation is centrally associated with the‘uncoupling of space and time’ in the conditions of globalisation (Fairclough2006: 85, after Thompson 1995: 32).The influence of mass mediaAltendorf offers a frank reflexivity about media influence on language, in adiscussion of innovations co-occurring across the U.K., worth citing at length:We have already identified these variants as ‘youth norms’ . . . and not assouth-eastern [U.K.] accent features . . .. We have not been able to explainhow they could have spread without extensive face-to-face interaction,which is generally regarded as a necessary pre-requisite for diffusion . . ..It is possible but not yet proven that the combined effect of linguisticpreference + social attractiveness + constant exposure through the mediamight have an effect . . ..In any case, the development has reached a point where we might have tore-evaluate the role of television in bringing about new linguistic trends. . . .[F]or example, . . . if TV watching trends continue, ‘many children will cometo spend more time exposed to non-local varieties than to their localvernacular’ (Foulkes and Docherty 1999: 15). (Altendorf 2003: 148–149)Foulkes and Docherty are similarly circumspect: ‘The possible effects of [media]exposure on acquired speech patterns remain to be formally tested, but arecertainly worth considering in the context of continuing changes’ (1999: 15).Kerswill and Williams (2000: 105) describe T-glottaling (on the rise across theU.K.) as ‘particularly evident in the spoken media, to which children areincreasingly oriented’. Trudgill (1988: 43) notes of U.K.-wide TH-fronting:What is surprising . . . is the extreme rapidity of this change. . . . The patternof geographical diffusion suggests very strongly that face-to-face contact, asa result of mobility and immigration . . . must be involved (see Trudgill1986). The sheer speed of the change, however, may be due to a softening-up process . . . through television programmes . . . .The media are given a rather minimised role here; the ‘softening-up process’seems to mean only greasing the wheels for changes occurring anyway viaconventional diffusion. This minimisation is not about fingers jammed in ears,just reasoned scepticism that diffusion cannot ultimately explain everything.The studies of global innovations reviewed below have departed from this line.192 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.FIVE APPROACHES TO GLOBAL INNOVATIONSI identify five approaches in existing research on global innovations. Eachembodies a further departure from sociolinguistic convention. These five areoutlined briefly below, and then each is expanded in its own subsection.Approach 1 comprises studies on innovations conducted in just one speechcommunity, with only tentative mentions of globalisation and media. This isthe most local approach, with the highest constraints on any ‘global’argument. In Approach 2, innovation usage is compared in discontinuousgeographic settings worldwide. This is a clearer nod to the global, but only byvirtue of distance and conspicuous linguistic similarity; there is still littlemention of the media, or other unconventional factors. In Approach 3, the roleof the media is asserted more explicitly, yet still not explored empirically. InApproach 4, innovation usage is recorded in media texts as well as speechcorpora. This achieves a methodological advance by analysing mediation, but itdoes not explore how people actually engage with mass media. Approach 5progresses beyond the methodological conservatism of Approaches 1–4 with atripartite exploration of conventional speech data, mediation in media texts,and – most importantly – media engagement practices. Crossing this Rubiconenables a significantly fuller interrogation of media influence.Note that although Approach 1 cites the oldest studies, and Approach 5 thenewest, overall they are not chronologically ordered. They do not represent ashift in empirical claims over time, just different kinds of argument.Approach 1: One speech community at a timeBlyth, Recktenwald and Wang (1990) examine be like among respondents atCornell University, according to age and gender. Ferrara and Bell, at auniversity in Texas, analyse a corpus recorded by three student cohorts, andthe ‘gender-marking, age-grading, ethnic distribution, and rural-versus-urbanusage’ of be like (1995: 270). Neither study concerns the way be like arose inTable 1: Five approaches to the study of global linguistic variants, eachrepresenting a further departure from sociolinguistic convention*Not in all studies cited under this approach.THE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 193© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.these places. Ferrara and Bell note that be like is ‘readily observable’ among TVentertainers (1995: 288), but this is just a brief aside in a footnote.Baird (2001) takes a similar approach to quotative usage in New Zealand,analysing age, sex, and other factors. D’Arcy (2010), also in New Zealand, andCukor-Avila (2002) in a rural Texan location, compare usage by ethnicity.Baird briefly mentions the media near the end, then states: ‘How much a trendcatches on might depend on our (subconscious) attitude toward, and . . .exposure to, the nation responsible for starting it, in this case, the UnitedStates’ (2001: 18). This is the penultimate sentence of the article though,almost an afterthought. Tagliamonte and D’Arcy (2004, 2007) analyserealisation of quotatives in Toronto. They give a brief introductory review oflocalisation patterns in the U.S. and U.K. (2004: 509–511), but focus mainlyon the Toronto data. They discuss why be like arose in Toronto after its earlierrise in California: ‘As part of the “preppie” movement of the 1980s, be likegained prestige as a trendy and socially desirable way to voice a speaker’s innerexperience’ (2007: 212). Again though, this is quite a casual assertion, rightbefore their conclusion. Detail of how be like might travel is not pursued.Macaulay (2001) reports the pioneering of be like by adolescent girls inGlasgow. He asserts its origin in California (2001: 3), and queries the primacyof conventional diffusion: ‘the question remains of how be like reachedteenagers in Glasgow. It is unlikely to have been through direct contact withyoung Americans’ (2001: 17). He cites a study showing increased use of be likein American films over the previous two decades, adding: ‘it is possible that theinnovation . . . owes something to the media’ (2001: 17). This is a swift remarkthough, just before the conclusion which simply recommends ‘[m]ore attentionto archival media materials’ (2001: 18) to explore such a link. Be like is notedas originating peculiarly far away, and some initial interest in the media isclear, but Macaulay’s attention mostly remains on usage patterns of be like inthis one location, not the role of the media in its arrival there.Kohn and Franz (2009) analyse ethnicity and usage of global variantsacross North Carolina. Early on they lament the lack of research on ‘the impactvarious social and local identities may have on the distribution of a globalform’. But they go on to focus tightly on linguistic data, only returning in theconclusion to a brief and fairly abstract discussion of ‘structural differences’,such as ‘access to telecommunications . . . or transportation’ (2009: 285).Meyerhoff and Niedzielski (2003), in New Zealand, analyse the use ofinnovations considered to have U.K. and U.S. origins, and whether ‘instead ofbeing seen as borrowings, [they] are perceived to be home-grown variants’(2003: 549). They consider ‘some general principles . . . in the social sciences. . . associated with globalisation and . . . the theoretical and methodologicalimplications . . . for the study of language variation’ (2003: 534). They providea novel discussion of ‘tensions between globalisation and localisation’ (2003:550). Overall though, they remain cautious about reasons for this co-occurrence, and focus mainly on local attitudes to the innovations. Just before194 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.their conclusion, they cite some studies on mass media, and set a future goalfor sociolinguists to explore how ‘patterns of language use reify or challengethe interests of globalisation’ (2003: 549). In all, they offer quite a lengthydiscussion of globalisation, but they do not directly claim media influence, nordo they compare corpora from discontinuous geographic settings.Stuart-Smith, Timmins and Tweedie (2007), in Glasgow, examine TH- andDH-fronting, L-vocalisation, R-labialisation, and T-glottalling. Some of these werealready familiar in the local dialect, but they were arising in unfamiliarphonetic environments, leading to ‘a consonantal system which in manyrespects is more similar to that of London English’ (2007: 222). As notedearlier, although this is only between Scotland and England, the authors raisesimilar queries to those researching global co-occurrences. Stuart-Smith,Timmins and Tweedie (2007: 250) report that middle-class adolescents‘largely maintain Scottish regional standard norms’ and show no TH- or DH-fronting, low L-vocalisation, and only moderate T-glottalling; middle-classadults maintain standard norms even more so; and while working-class adultsare losing some local dialect forms, it is working-class adolescents who are the‘leaders of change’ (2007: 251). The authors see this as a very normal attemptto sound ‘as anti-middle-class, and anti-establishment as possible’ (2007: 251);the only question is how these ‘less-mobile, strongly-tied, working-classadolescents’ (2007: 224) came to pioneer these non-local variants. Theauthors discuss the relative placelessness of these innovations – on the riseamong young people across the U.K. and apparently existing ‘in “cultural” orideological space, towards which speakers may orientate’ (2007: 224).Diffusion in social networks ultimately does explain much of their data, butthey end with three ‘troublesome “non-local” variants, [f], [v] and vocalised /l/’(2007: 254), which evade such explanation. ‘Our information for working-class adolescents reduces the likelihood of dialect contact as a direct factor’(2007: 255). The authors do not probe media influence, and are careful not tospeculate, although they mention (2007: 224) preliminary results of a follow-SPEECH COMMUNITYInnovators:middle-classgirls, 55% Adopters:working-classgirls, 11%Adopters:middle-classboys, 20%Non-adopters:working classboys, 0%Figure 1: Approach 1, illustrated with data from Macaulay (2001)THE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 195© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.up study that did examine TV influence (to which I return in Approach 5below). Their article ends on what can only be called a cliffhanger (2007: 255,emphasis original):Descriptively they are using a mixed consonantal system, with local andnon-local features. Whether they intend this repertoire to sound mixed, oranything other than ‘pure Glaswegian’, seems unlikely, though that in itselfdoes not rule out interaction with television or the media as additionalcontributory factors in these changes. But that is another story altogether.Broadly, Approach 1 involves analysis of interesting innovative forms, butnot cross-corpus comparisons of discontinuous geographic settings, nor muchdiscussion of how the innovations got from place to place. Some studiesbriefly mention the media, but only cautiously in passing. Approach 1 isrepresented in Figure 1, illustrated with data from Macaulay (2001). InFigure 1 the outer oval represents the Glasgow speech community; the innerovals represent the groups of speakers categorised by Macaulay and theirinnovation usage rates. Epistemologically, Approach 1 looks a lot like anyother variationist study; the only difference is how the authors puzzle over theway the variants arrived.Approach 2: Compare discontinuous geographic settingsWinter (2002), building on Tagliamonte and Hudson (1999) and Ferrara andBell (1995), compares quotative usage in corpora from Australia, the U.K., andCanada. Comparing corpora from distant speech communities helps tosubstantiate the spatial scope of the co-occurrence. It also elucidates thelocalisation of global variants, the unique sociolinguistic profiles they developin each place. Still, the analysis remains focused on linguistic detail. There islittle interest in how this global co-occurrence came about. At one point,Winter recalls an Australian TV character’s ‘stereotypical’, ‘exaggerated usage’of the kinds of innovative quotatives found in the Australian English corpus(2002: 12). This is an isolated aside though, developed no further.Barbieri analyses quotative use by age and sex in a corpus recorded ‘acrossnumerous US states’ (2007: 31). Barbieri (2009) elaborates by comparing twopan-U.S. corpora recorded a decade apart, noting sustained growth of be like.As for underlying mechanisms, she offers macro-level interpretations based onother attitude studies (2007: 41), but specific mechanisms are not pinpointed;nor are data collected from individual speakers about influences on their usage.Durham et al. (2012) compare usage of be like in two cohorts ofundergraduates in York (England) a decade apart. They also provide attitudedata on say and be like in different linguistic contexts from a cohort of AmericanEnglish speakers. They very briefly assert that ‘be likehas diffused geographically’(2012: 328) and ‘continues to diffuse globally’ (2012: 327), but they otherwisedo not explore mechanisms behind this distant co-occurrence.196 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Tagliamonte and Hudson (1999) are somewhat bolder. Comparing corporafrom York (England) and Ottowa (Canada) to Ferrara and Bell’s (1995) Texasdata, they assert the ‘remarkably parallel’ usage rates as ‘evidence for asystematic global diffusion of be like across geographically separated speechcommunities’ (1999: 147), ‘a very good linguistic indicator of . . .developments and changes we might expect from the putative ongoingglobalization of English’ (1999: 168). But this venturesome claim is in theirfinal paragraph, a pensive postscript where they also stress: ‘the socialmechanism(s) underlying these processes are beyond the scope of the presentinvestigation’ (1999: 168).Approach 2 maintains a largely conventional methodology of comparingspeech corpora, just ones recorded in highly distant speech communities. Apartfrom some tentative, isolated asides in the sunset of their arguments, thesestudies give a sense of either trepidation or indifference towards the media.Approach 3: Pinpointing the mediaIn Approach 3, globalisation and mass media begin to be discussed moreexplicitly, yet still within familiar empirical territory. A rift begins to openhere between evidence and assertions, bridged in some cases by rhetoricaldevices.Buchstaller compares U.S. and U.K. corpora to show linguistic, social andattitudinal adaptation of innovations, amounting to changes in ‘perceptualload’ (Buchstaller 2006a: 363, 2006b: 12). Buchstaller (2008) discussesglobalisation at length, even distinguishing the role of geographical mobilityand media. She argues that innovations spread globally ‘in all probabilitymainly via the media’ (2008: 37). Ultimately though, out of the ‘global spreadof innovations and their localized adaptation’ (2008: 21), only the latter issupported by evidence.Buchstaller and D’Arcy compare linguistic localisation of be like in U.S., U.K.,and New Zealand corpora: the unique way be like is used in each discontinuousgeographic setting. They conclude that be like has undergone ‘weak transfer’(2009: 316), with most of its functions decided by local sociolinguisticprocesses after its global journey. They generally focus on linguistic detail, butmake repeated gestures to globalisation, and claim the ‘global transfer’, ‘globalspread’ (2009: 316) and ‘global diffusion’ (2009: 317) of be like, describing itas one example of ‘linguistic innovations that float globally through real (orcyber) space’ (2009: 293–294; cf. Buchstaller 2008: 19). They assert that belike has ‘spread to numerous varieties worldwide in a very short time spanthrough presumably limited interpersonal contact’ (2009: 322). They alsoraise the quandary that be like is pioneered by low-mobility adolescents withstrong access to ‘meditated forms of communication (e.g. email, IM, blogs,wikis, TV, etc.)’ (2009: 322). They foreground globalisation and media fairlyboldly, but the discussions of ‘global spread’ drift free of the empirical supportTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 197© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.that underlay their main linguistic analysis. This amounts to the use of arhetorical device, proof surrogate, where media influence is inferred but notevidenced.Buchstaller (2004) states: ‘The very social group which introduces like intothe linguistic system is also the one we can assume to be most likely to pick upa new lexical variant through soaps, talkshows, etc.’ (2004: 289). Therefollows a countervailing emphasis on the role of face-to-face contact, to stress‘that mass media are an insufficient transmission channel for the wholevariant (surface item, functional value and social value)’ (2004: 290). At firstblush, this appears to echo media audience research on the partial, locallycontested influence of media stimuli (e.g. Liebes and Katz 1990), but that echofades at a critical juncture. Unlike audience research, there are no data fromparticipants about their media engagement practices, only the speech corpora.Given that empirical disjuncture, Buchstaller is here deploying a differentrhetorical device, namely paralipsis: the media cannot do everything, but this isasserted precisely to suggest they are doing something – yet without evidencefor that something.In Approach 3, the methodologies remain largely unchanged, but the claimsof media influence grow. As a result, gaps open up in the empirical defence.Overall, Approaches 1–3 do not explore how ‘globally travelling features’(Buchstaller 2006a: 375) actually travel.Approach 4: Comparing speech data and media dataTagliamonte and Roberts (2005) analyse intensifiers (e.g. very, so) in the U.S.sitcom Friends, and compare speech data from the U.K. and North America.Linguistic detail dominates their article, in which correlations arise: ‘TheFriends data exhibit almost the same overall rate . . . as . . . contemporaryEnglish’; ‘media language actually does reflect what is going on’ (2005: 296).They infer media influence – ‘these media data appear to pave the way;language is more innovative in the media than in the general population’(2005: 296) – but end inconclusively on that point: ‘At the very least, theinextricable link between language and society – often self-evident forsociolinguists and dialectologists – stands out in this icon of pop culture’(2005: 297). They seem to inch up to, then step away from, an explicitassertion of media influence. Dion and Poplack (2007) make a similarcomparison of speech data and media texts, although ‘quotative use in thescripted media . . . diverged wildly from the community norm’ in their data, sothey remain doubtful of influence.Approach 4 answers Macaulay’s appeal for ‘[m]ore attention to archivalmedia materials’ (2001: 18). Still, Approaches 1–4 do not probe howindividual speakers’ media engagement practices might contour their use ofinnovations. This is touched on, but only as an addendum to the mainlinguistic analysis. Amid discussion of the ‘globalisation’ and ‘localisation’ of198 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.variants, it is the latter to which such corpus analyses are limited. Precedencedoes not entail ancestry, and assertions of global ‘spread’, ‘diffusion’, ‘transfer’,etc. are strictly post hoc, assuming cause and effect from temporal succession –cf. Britain’s (2013: 475) distinction between portrayal and explanation ofsociolinguistic patterns. As Buchstaller notes: ‘There is still a dearth of detailedmicro-linguistic analyses that demonstrate the links between local linguisticmechanisms and global forces’ (2008: 20). That dearth is addressed inApproach 5.Approach 5: Gauging the effect of the mediaMedia engagement as a factor in language change is empirically substantiatedin only one study, by a team led by Jane Stuart-Smith in Glasgow. This was afollow-up to their earlier study in Glasgow, included in Approach 1 above.That earlier study failed to explain its data with social networks alone, butlacked the means to explore media influence. The consonantal changes of TH-fronting, DH-fronting, and L-vocalisation are seen by Milroy as ‘off the shelf’changes, ‘accessible to mobile or marginal individuals’ (2007: 163). But, asAltendorf notes, these are ‘youth norms’ (2003: 148–149). As the Glasgowteam found, the quandary for contact-based explanations was the way thesechanges were being led by adolescents, typically with the lowest mobility.[O]ur results seem odd: middle-class speakers with more . . . contact withEnglish English speakers [i.e. in England] and weaker social networks aremaintaining Scottish features, while less mobile, strongly-tied working-classspeakers are losing some Scottish features and using innovative [London-originating] features the most. (Stuart-Smith, Timmins and Tweedie 2007:222)Trudgill includes TH-fronting in Glasgow in a list of ‘extremely similarphonological changes . . . taking place in varieties of English around theworld more or less simultaneously’, which evade ‘explanation in terms ofdiffusion’ (2003: 56). Ever sceptical of the media, he argues that thesechanges are in fact independently driven by predetermined structurallinguistic trajectories. Meyerhoff and Niedzielski (2003: 546) set a similarlyhigh bar, stating that ‘the possibility of independent, parallel development’must first be ruled out. A further possible explanation for the Glasgow datacould have been adolescents adopting variants from geographically mobileadults, then simply using those variants more. With the new data in theirfollow-up study, Stuart-Smith and her team found that such conventionalinfluences did play a part, but only alongside, and indivisibly from, anempirically substantiated role for the media.To collect their new data, an interdisciplinary methodology was developedwith academic collaborators specialising in audience research and statistics –see Stuart-Smith et al. (2013). First, London-based TV shows were identifiedTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 199© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.by the participants. That decisive role for the participants was an advance frome.g. Tagliamonte and Roberts (2005), giving a firmer basis for subsequentclaims of influence on those participants. The researchers then recorded ratesof the above consonantal variables in these media texts, to operationalise‘media-Cockney’ as a source variety. As discussed at the outset, this stepillustrates the process of mediation.To explore media engagement (as well as other conventional sociolinguisticfactors), speech data were combined with participant observation, interviewsand questionnaires over a four-month period in 2003–2004. This was gearedtowards fine-grained mapping of social networks, and specific examination ofhow media engagement correlated with and contoured innovation usage.Following the measurement of innovation usage in the Glasgow data, thefirst attempt to account for these patterns was a large-scale regressionanalysis of [f] and [v] . . . and numerous extra-linguistic factors . . .: potentialfor dialect contact within and beyond Glasgow, attitudes to urban accents,social practices and identity, entertainment preferences, engagement withcomputers and the internet, involvement in sport, and exposure to andengagement with television, both generally and with specific programmes.(Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2009: 42)The analysis showed multiple influences: ‘limited contact between weaklytied individuals, . . . positive attitudes towards London accents (Milroy 1987:203; Trudgill 1988), and/or orientation towards ‘youth norms’ experiencedpartially via . . . broadcast media (Williams and Kerswill 1999)’ (Stuart-Smithand Timmins 2009: 41). ‘Adopter categories’ were used to distinguishparticipants by their level of innovation use; these included ‘innovators’ and‘early adopters’ (Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2007; cf. Milroy and Milroy 1985:367). Regressions of the linguistic and extra-linguistic data showed thatinnovation use correlated with local contact among adopter categories, mediaengagement, and contact with people from the London-southeast region(Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2009). However, each extra-linguistic factor alonegave a poor overall explanation of innovation use; ‘the final models with the fullrange of social factors’ explained innovation use ‘at least three times better thanany single category model alone’ (2009: 42). Recalling the explanatoryponderings in Approaches 1–4 between media and face-to-face contact, here isthe first empirical illumination of that balance. Different factors coincide,overlap, and interrelate; their effects cannot be analysed or asserted discretely.At the level of individual participants, influences varied. For some, contactwith people outside Glasgow emerged as the strongest factor (Stuart-Smith andTimmins 2009: 52). For others, media influence had a firmer correlation. Therespondent with by far the most DH-fronting had no interpersonal contactoutside Glasgow – not even much inside – yet very high engagement with theLondon soap opera EastEnders (Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2007: 20). Media200 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.engagement functioned as a form of parasocial interaction; indeed it is thosewith limited social contact for whom Rubin, Perse and Powell (1985) arguethat parasocial interaction is the most potent. More generally, there was arobustly significant relationship between innovation use and prolonged,emotionally-invested media engagement (Stuart-Smith 2012). Suchparticipants were innovators and early adopters (Stuart-Smith and Timmins2009: 46). Importantly though, prolonged exposure without emotionalinvestment had no such significance. This reaffirms the importance ofparasocial interaction for media influence.All of this being said, engagement with London-based TV did not meanpositive evaluation of Cockney accents. Similarly to the attitude studies citedearlier (e.g. Meyerhoff and Niedzielski 2003), London accents received mixedevaluations, while the innovations themselves were considered by participantsas ‘pure Glaswegian’ (Stuart-Smith 2007: 12). Indeed, subsequent reanalysisof the data (Stuart-Smith et al. 2013) has further lessened the significance ofattitudinal factors. These innovations in Glasgow gained a new ‘perceptualload’ (Buchstaller 2006a: 363, 2006b: 12). They did not keep their ‘functionaland social boots on’ (Buchstaller and D’Arcy 2009: 282). The authors providean illustrative vignette from their data collection process, when they wererecording the young people reading word lists:the teenagers treated the task as an opportunity to display . . . ‘their’ speech,and one can hear them laughing and playing up to the microphone . . .. Theadolescents are . . . representing their own group, or at least a possibleversion of their . . . repertoire . . .. What is interesting is that the non-localnon-standard variants are selected for this particular stylistic repertoire.(Stuart-Smith, Timmins and Tweedie 2007: 247; cf. Stuart-Smith andTimmins 2014)Keen to emphasise the complexity of overlapping influences, the authorspoint to historical evidence that these innovations were present at some levelin Glasgow before their contemporary surge – perhaps due to historical contactwith Londoners – and that media engagement served only as an acceleratingfactor (Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2014). This supports, and augmentssomewhat, Trudgill’s (1988: 43) ‘softening-up process’ from TV. Approach 5may be the furthest departure from sociolinguistic convention, but Stuart-Smith and her team are no iconoclasts. Stuart-Smith considers their argumentamenable to Trudgill’s (pers. comm. 23 May 2012), indeed building upon theinsights from his work in Norwich. As she notes, Trudgill had reported TH-fronting there among low-mobility, working-class speakers, driven partly bycontact with Londoners,but he also speculates about the potential role of television programmesbased in London in promoting positive attitudes towards London dialectfeatures: ‘television may be part of a “softening-up” process leading to theTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 201© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.adoption of the merger [of /f/ with /th/], but it does not cause it’ (Trudgill1986: 55). (Stuart-Smith 2006: 141)Stuart-Smith and Timmins reject the idea of ‘blanket transmission frommediasource to passive speaker/viewers, a notion long abandoned within mediaeffects research’ (2009: 54). Overall, the picture that emerges is one of ‘differentcausal pathways, and combinations of pathways, for different speakers’ (Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2007: 28). The innovations in Glasgow arrive via cross-cutting and interrelating routes, in which the media play a demonstrable part,but indivisibly from concurrent social processes.Approach 5 progresses beyond inferences derived from macro-level theories(characteristic of Approaches 1–4), and answers Buchstaller’s appeal for‘detailed micro-linguistic analyses that demonstrate the links between locallinguistic mechanisms and global forces’ (2008: 20). As for the constructionof their arguments, Stuart-Smith and her team are of course advancingclaims based on inevitably limited data, but they strike a shrewder, morepainstaking balance between evidence and assertions. Collecting actual dataabout media engagement practices has led, perhaps counter-intuitively, to amore subdued assertion of media influence – emphasising uncertainty anddeferring to complexity. Truth is stranger than fiction, as it were.The Glasgow study serves to query the idea that only weakly tiedindividuals introduce non-local variants. If there is a discernible role for themedia, then it is not limited in this way, since there were innovators andearly adopters in Glasgow with high, positive media engagement, strong localnetworks, and weak external ties (or none). This reprises an overarchingpoint: if there is a role for mass media, it is qualitatively distinct fromconventional diffusion.Approach 5 involves a combination of different methodological tools foranalysing media engagement alongside other factors. It is the epistemologicalmapping of these different methodologies to which I now turn.THE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODELFollowing Coupland (2009), as cited at the outset, vernacular forms used inmedia texts can be said to have been mediated. If these mediated forms areadopted as innovations in discontinuous geographic settings, then I suggestthe term mediated innovations. Figure 2 depicts the mediated innovation model, anepistemological model for visualising methodologies used to research mediainfluence in language change.The conventional processes of transmission and diffusion rely on contactamong interlocutors. Diffusion occurs between speech communities via weaklytied mobile individuals. If there is a role for media engagement, which does notrely on personal contact and occurs regardless of tie strength, then I would referto it as innovation broadcast. Mediation can be seen as a prior step to this. As the202 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Glasgow study in Approach 5 shows, mediation and broadcast occur alongside,and intertwined with, conventional diffusion. It is precisely this rich mix ofinfluences for which the mediated innovation model is designed.Figure 2 is a diagrammatic representation of a mediated innovation model.It depicts the datasets resulting from the various methodologies used to probe‘different causal pathways’ (Stuart-Smith and Timmins 2007: 28). The ovalsin the diagram represent language corpora, from distant speech communitiesand from media texts. The dotted backgrounds represent social networksthrough which diffusion occurs – denser within speech communities, weakerbetween. The dots do not permeate either the media texts or the processes ofmediation and broadcast. As argued so far, although these interrelate withconventional diffusion, they are qualitatively distinct, and require differentempirical data.Figure 2 sacrifices detail for simplicity, which exposes certain risks. At aglance, it might even seem to suggest a highly deterministic role for ‘mediatexts’, downplaying the complexities of media engagement and localisation.Figure 2 could be redrawn in various ways, perhaps better in threedimensions, but the aim is only to set out clearly the different sites foranalysis. It is not a theoretical model but an epistemological model, depictingthe columns of Table 1 as a kind of checking exercise to see what has beenempirically substantiated.The model also inevitably falls back inelegantly on some sociolinguisticconvention which it would have been ideal to progress beyond. The distinctionof ‘source’ and ‘adopting’ speech communities may seem curiously linear in adiscussion of global flows. That distinction emanates from the studies reviewedabove, all of which compare innovation usage in a putative antecedent speechcommunity and one or more adopting speech communities. Such distinctionssocial networkssocial networksMEDIA TEXTSbroadcastmediationSOURCE SPEECH COMMUNITYADOPTING SPEECH COMMUNITYADOPTING SPEECH COMMUNITYFigure 2: A hypothetical mediated innovation modelTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 203© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.may well be deconstructed in future research, in which case the model willhopefully adapt. ‘Adopting’ may also seem a little simplistic; it is intended hereas shorthand for the multifarious adaptations, appropriations and localisationsthat incoming innovations go through. As Mair puts it:Particularly when it is nonstandard forms of American English which arespreading . . . we are rarely dealing with simple . . . linguisticAmericanization but with a more complex . . . negotiation of vernacularnorms in a globalized communicative habitat. (Mair 2006: 195)Let me walk through how the model helps to elucidate the limits of thestudies reviewed above, with a view to how it can help structure future work.Macaulay’s (2001) study, cited in Approach 1 and represented in Figure 1,would fit inside just one ‘adopting speech community’ oval in Figure 2. Noneof the rest of Figure 2 applies. The studies in Approach 2 compare innovationusage in discontinuous geographic settings, like the U.K. and Canada(Tagliamonte and Hudson 1999). In such studies, the two ‘adopting speechcommunity’ ovals in Figure 2 are present. If usage in the putative sourcevariety is also analysed (as in Buchstaller and D’Arcy 2009), then the ‘sourcespeech community’ oval is present. Still, throughout Approach 2 the ‘mediatexts’ oval is absent, as are all the arrows; those methodologies are not in use.Much the same is true of Approach 3: despite explicit mention of globalisationand mass media, neither mediation nor broadcast is interrogated orevidenced.Approach 4 makes a substantial methodological advance, comparing speechcorpora to media texts – for example Tagliamonte and Roberts’ (2005)comparison of Friends scripts to speech corpora from North America and theU.K. Here, both ‘adopting speech community’ ovals in Figure 2 are present, asare the ‘media texts’ oval and the ‘mediation’ arrow. The ‘broadcast’ arrowsare absent though; no data are collected about media engagement practices.Although the Glasgow study in Approach 5 does not fill Figure 2 entirely, itdoes have the means to do so. The ‘source speech community’ oval is present,given the identification of London English features. The ‘media texts’ oval and‘mediation’ arrows are present, given the operationalisation of ‘media-Cockney’ in TV shows identified by the participants. The ‘broadcast’ arrowsare realised by the exploration of media engagement practices. As it stands,only one ‘adopting speech community’ is present (Glasgow), but if the studyhad incorporated another in a discontinuous geographic setting, then Figure 2could have been illustrated fully.With all these applications of the mediated innovation model to the studiesreviewed so far, my purpose is not to claim things are missing from thosestudies, but to clarify what can be reliably asserted with their data. In turn, themediated innovation model can help to apply some foundational sociolinguisticconcepts to mediated innovations. First of all, actuation:204 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.What factors can account for the actuation of changes? Why do changes ina structural feature take place in a particular language at a given time, butnot in other languages with the same feature, or in the same language atother times? (Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 1968: 102)Milroy and Milroy (1985: 342–344, 364–366) regard Labovian diffusion asan aspect of actuation, insofar as it connects distinct speech communities viaweakly tied mobile individuals. Mediation and broadcast similarly connectdistinct speech communities, though in a qualitatively distinct way. Actuationcan therefore be expanded to accommodate mediation and broadcast as wellas diffusion. Like diffusion, broadcast will vary in its intensity in differentplaces, and may not happen at all in some – as reflected in the variedlocalisations of mediated innovations, noted in the studies reviewed above. Themediated innovation model helps arrange the analysis of these localisations.All this gives a new slant to Kerswill and Williams’ (2000: 92) comment:‘Essentially, a close-knit network will resist . . . changes, unless these changescome via an “insider” who also has “weak ties” elsewhere (Milroy and Milroy1992)’. In its original sense, this comment relates to Labov’s ‘CHANGE FROM ABOVEor the importation of elements from other systems’ (2007: 346) as cited earlier– actuated by weakly tied mobile individuals. But if there is a definable role forthe media, then actuation may happen regardless of tie strength, and mediainput may constitute a quite different kind of link to ‘outside’.Next, embedding: ‘How are the observed changes embedded in the matrix oflinguistic and extralinguistic concomitants of the form in question?’(Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 1968: 101, emphasis original). For mediatedinnovations, embedding relates to the distinct local realisations in eachadopting speech community. The mediated innovation model helps map outthese local idiosyncrasies and the methodologies that interrogate them.Mediation and broadcast, like diffusion, can connect distant speechcommunities. Unlike diffusion though, they are not limited by the extent ofcontact between weakly tied mobile individuals. The mediated innovationmodel helps to discern these qualitatively distinct and diverse links.For clarity, a contrast can be made to the ‘linguistic community’. Silverstein(1996) defines this as a group of disparate speech communities sharing anexternal target variety – either a standard language, or a less formalorientation to another target variety. Mediated innovations do not depend onrecognition of a target variety, as evinced by the recurrent perception that theyare in fact local (Meyerhoff and Niedzielski 2003; Stuart-Smith 2007: 12). It isalso worth drawing a brief contrast to ‘imagined communities’ (Anderson1983); this idea describes the importance of print media to nationalistsentiment, not the influence of media (printed or otherwise) on sociolinguisticvariation.To sum up then, what use is the mediated innovation model? As anepistemological model, its main purpose is to arrange the methodologies usedTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 205© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.to research mediated innovations. Those methodologies account for previouslyunaccounted-for findings, namely the pioneering of non-local innovations bystrongly-tied, low-mobility adolescents. The mediated innovation model bringsin mediation from a different area of sociolinguistics, and specifies a furthersociolinguistic process for investigation: broadcast. The model also distinguishesmediation and broadcast from conventional transmission and diffusion. All thishelps to draw apart the different kinds of data and methodologies relevant toexploring these qualitatively distinct and concurrent processes. The model alsothrows into sharper relief the limitations in existing research, and clarifies theremit of future work. The model itself, and the emerging body of research itdescribes, will help sociolinguistics contribute to the social-scientific study ofglobalisation.CONCLUSIONThis fact of different places becoming swept up in similar economic, politicaland cultural flows . . . does not necessarily mean that places worldwide arebecoming more alike. . . . ‘[N]on-local’ processes combine with existing localdifferences to yield unique outcomes. Places ‘internalize’ these processes indistinctive ways, which is why place interconnection does not implyincreased homogeneity among places. (Castree et al. 2004: 68, emphasesoriginal)Milroy (2007: 163) argues that ‘socially embedded sound changes should bedistinguished with respect to their different underlying sociologies and socialtrajectories’. For mediated innovations, I have argued that Approach 5 iscurrently themost advanced distinction of these sociologies and trajectories. Themediated innovation model offers perspective for whatever partial, negotiatedrole the media might play in the complex pathways that innovations takebetween discontinuous geographic settings, in conditions of globalisation.[T]hough even our terminology for . . . ‘media influence on language’ . . .implies . . . the media somehow doing things to the viewer, it seems muchmore likely that it is the viewers, in ways thoroughly constrained by theirexisting linguistic, social and ideological knowledge, and usually withoutany overt awareness that anything might be happening, who are doingthings with the media. (Stuart-Smith 2011: 223)As cautioned earlier, Stuart-Smith and her team did not conduct theirresearch on a global scale. If they had, then there could have been a smoothertransition through Approaches 1–5; that may also have lessened thesignificance of conventional diffusion in their findings, perhapsstrengthening the empirical basis for media influence. As Macaulay notedback in 2001 (cited in Approach 1): ‘how be like reached teenagers in Glasgow. . . is unlikely to have been through direct contact with young Americans’206 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.(2001: 17–18). Stuart-Smith and her team stress that the London innovationswere likely already present in Glasgow, and that the media only expedited theirrecent surge. This prevents any extrapolation of a decisive media role forinnovations that had no such prior presence, such as be like. That questionremains open, and it is precisely such questions which the mediated innovationis designed to help coordinate.Similarly, in terms of linguistic features: ‘a fruitful line for further researchwould be to develop a more comprehensive account of the social and linguisticconditions which permit some [linguistic] elements to be more widely availablethan others’ (Milroy 2007: 165). The mediated innovation model could be auseful backdrop for such a comparative analysis.Lastly, to return to a caveat at the outset, the mediated innovation modeldoes not cover the influence of the internet. Buchstaller et al. (2010) andCoppen and Foolen (2012: 271) analyse innovation use in online discussionforums, but do not specify the whereabouts of specific participants, theirduration of involvement, or really much at all about them individually. Thatcurtails any account of innovation movement across spatial or social distance.Stuart-Smith and Timmins (2009: 42) did include ‘engagement withcomputers and the internet’ as an extra-linguistic factor, but its significancewas low: the only detectable result was a negative effect on TH-fronting inwordlists (Stuart-Smith et al. 2013). However, their data were collected in2003–2004, a very long time ago in internet terms (predating the rise of socialmedia like Facebook, Twitter and MySpace). Engagement with the internet haschanged almost beyond recognition in the intervening decade, and a great dealof research remains to be done there.My own sense is that using social media is much closer to interpersonalinteraction and conventional diffusion than the communicative imbalance andparasocial interaction characterised by TV viewing. For now though, as Stuart-Smith, Timmins and Tweedie (2007: 255) put it, that is another storyaltogether.NOTE1. The idea behind this article has been under development (on and off) for sevenyears. It formed a chapter of my PhD thesis (Sayers 2009) at the University ofEssex (ESRC award PTA-030-2005-00968), where Dave Britain’s painstakingsupervision honed my ideas. I also had many useful discussions there with PeterPatrick and Gareth Price. Swansea University’s generous award of an HonoraryResearch Fellowship gave me access to useful resources during a period of non-academic employment, and I am pleased to remain affiliated there. To completethe write-up I used part of the research allocation of lecturing posts at AboAkademi University, the University of Turku, and Sheffield Hallam University.Jane Stuart-Smith has been very patient providing and discussing herunpublished work. She also gave useful comments on a draft – as did RobertTHE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 207© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Lawson. A version of the paper was submitted for the Richard M. Hogg Prize;those reviews provided constructive criticisms. I have had further usefulcomments over the years from Dave Elder-Vass, Isa Buchstaller, Peter Trudgilland David Hornsby. Many helpful pointers came from conference and seminaraudiences at the University of Essex (U.K.), the University of Groningen(Netherlands), the University of Cambridge (U.K.), City University (U.K.), theUniversity of Regensburg (Germany), and the University of Kent (U.K.). Twoanonymous reviewers motivated a major overhaul, including a rethink of themain neologism – ‘mediated innovation model’ had previously been ‘linguisticvirtual collective’, which appeared in the above conference abstracts (most ofwhich remain online). Veronique Lacoste kindly translated the abstract. AllanBell and Devyani Sharma have provided painstaking editorial oversight, andTrish Brothers has conducted excellent copy-editing. Remaining mistakes are ofcourse my own.REFERENCESAllen, John, Doreen Massey and Allan Cochrane. 1998. Rethinking the Region. London:Routledge.Altendorf, Ulrike. 2003. Estuary English: Levelling at the Interface of RP and South-Eastern BritishEnglish. T€ubingen, Germany: Narr.Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread ofNationalism. London: Verso.Ang, Ien. 1996. Living Room Wars: Rethinking Media Audiences for a Postmodern World. London:Routledge.Baird, Sarah. 2001. How ‘to be like’ a Kiwi: Verbs of quotation in New Zealand English. NewZealand English Journal 15: 6–19.Barbieri, Federica. 2007. Older men and younger women: A corpus-based study of quotativeuse in American English. English World-Wide 28: 23–45.Barbieri, Federica. 2009. Quotative be like in American English: Ephemeral or here to stay?English World-Wide 30: 68–90.BBC Worldwide. 2011. Annual Review 2010/11. Last accessed 19 December 2012 at www.bbcworldwide.com/ media/41967/bbc worldwide annual review 2010-11.pdfBlommaert, Jan. 2010. The Sociolinguistics of Globalization. Cambridge, U.K.: CambridgeUniversity Press.Bloomfield, Leonard. 1926. A set of postulates for the science of language. Language 2: 153–164.Blyth, Carl, Sigrid Recktenwald and Jenny Wang. 1990. I’m like, ‘Say what?!’: A Newquotative in American oral narrative. American Speech 65: 215–227.Britain, David. 2005. Innovation diffusion, ‘Estuary English’ and local dialect differentiation:The survival of Fenland Englishes. Linguistics 43: 995–1022.Britain, David. (2013). Space, diffusion and mobility. In J. K. Chambers and Natalie Schilling-Estes (eds.) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change (2nd edition). Malden,Massachusetts/Oxford, U.K.: Wiley-Blackwell. 471–500.Buchstaller, Isabelle. 2004. The sociolinguistic constraints on the quotative system: US Englishand British English compared. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Edinburgh, U.K.: University ofEdinburgh.208 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Buchstaller, Isabelle. 2006a. Social stereotypes, personality traits and regional perceptiondisplaced: Attitudes towards the ‘new’ quotatives in the U.K. Journal of Sociolinguistics 10:362–381.Buchstaller, Isabelle. 2006b. Diagnostics of age-graded linguistic behaviour: The case of thequotative system. Journal of Sociolinguistics 10: 3–30.Buchstaller, Isabelle. 2008. The localization of global linguistic variants. English World-Wide29: 15–44.Buchstaller, Isabelle and Alexandra D’Arcy. 2009. Localized globalization: A multi-local,multivariate investigation of quotative be like. Journal of Sociolinguistics 13: 291–331.Buchstaller, Isabelle, John R. Rickford, Elizabeth Closs Traugott, Thomas Wasow and ArnoldZwicky. 2010. The sociolinguistics of a short-lived innovation: Tracing the development ofquotative all across spoken and internet newsgroup data. Language Variation and Change 22:191–219.Castree, Noel, Neil Coe, Kevin Ward and Mike Samers. 2004. Spaces of Work: Global Capitalismand Geographies of Labour. London: Sage.Chambers, Jack. 1993. Sociolinguistic dialectology. In Dennis R. Preston (ed.) American DialectResearch. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: John Benjamins. 133–164.Charkova, Krassimira D. 2007. A language without borders: English slang and Bulgarianlearners of English. Language Learning 57: 369–416.Coppen, Peter-Arno and Ad Foolen. 2012. Dutch quotative van: Past and present. In IsabelleBuchstaller and Ingrid Van Alphen (eds.) Quotatives: Cross-linguistic and cross-disciplinaryperspectives. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 259–280.Coupland, Nikolas. 2003. Introduction: Sociolinguistics and globalisation. Journal ofSociolinguistics 7: 465–472.Coupland, Nikolas. 2009. The mediated performance of vernaculars. Journal of EnglishLinguistics 37: 284–300.Cukor-Avila, Patricia. 2002. She say, she go, she be like: Verbs of quotation over time in AfricanAmerican Vernacular English. American Speech 77: 3–31.Cutler, Cecilia A. 1999. Yorkville crossing: White teens, hip hop and African AmericanEnglish. Journal of Sociolinguistics 3: 428–442.D’Arcy, Alexandra. 2010. Quoting ethnicity: Constructing dialogue in Aotearoa. Journal ofSociolinguistics 14: 60–88.Dion, Nathalie and Shana Poplack. 2007. Linguistic mythbusting: The role of the media indiffusing change. Paper presented to New Ways of Analysing Variation 36, 11–14 October,University of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.Durham, Mercedes, Bill Haddican, Eytan Zweig, Daniel Ezra Johnson, Zipporah Baker, DavidCockeram, Esther Danks and Louise Tyler. 2012. Constant linguistic effects in thediffusion of be like. Journal of English Linguistics 40: 316–337.Eckert, Penelope. 2003. Dialogue – sociolinguistics and authenticity: An elephant in the room.Journal of Sociolinguistics 7: 392–431.Ellis, Alexander J. (ed.). 1999 [1871]. On Early English Pronunciation, Part III. Woodbridge,U.K.: Early English Text Society.Fairclough, Norman. 2006. Language and Globalization. London: Routledge.Ferrara, Kathleen and Barbara Bell. 1995. Sociolinguistic variation and discourse function ofconstructed dialogue introducers: The case of BE + LIKE. American Speech 70: 265–290.Foulkes, Paul and Gerard Docherty. 1999. Urban voices: Overview. In Paul Foulkes andGerard Docherty (eds.) Urban Voices: Accent Studies in the British Isles. London: Arnold.1–24.THE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 209© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Fridland, Valerie. 2003. ‘Tie, tied and tight’: The expansion of /ai/ monophthongization inAfrican-American and European-American speech in Memphis, Tennessee. Journal ofSociolinguistics 7: 279–298.Kerswill, Paul and Ann Williams. 2000. Creating a new town koine: Chil-dren and language change in Milton Keynes. Language in Society 29: 65–115.Kohn, Mary Elizabeth and Hannah Askin Franz. 2009. Localized patterns for global variants:The case of quotative systems of African American and Latino speakers. American Speech 84:259–297.Kuzmack, Stefanie. 2010. How medium shapes language development: The emergence ofquotative re online. In Robert Cloutier, Anne Marie Hamilton-Brehm and WilliamKretzschmar, Jr. (eds.) Variation and Change in English Grammar and Lexicon: ContemporaryApproaches. Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter Mouton. 293–310.Labov, William. 2007. Transmission and diffusion. Language 83: 344–387.Lee, Jamie. 2011. Globalization of African American Vernacular English in popular culture:Blinglish in Korean Hip Hop. English World-Wide 32: 1–23.Liebes, Tamar and Elihu Katz. 1990. The Export of Meaning: Cross-Cultural Readings of Dallas.Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.Livingstone, Sonia. 1998. Making Sense of Television: The Psychology of Audience Interpretation(2nd edition). London: Routledge.Macaulay, Ronald. 2001. You’re like ‘why not?’ The quotative expressions of Glasgowadolescents. Journal of Sociolinguistics 5: 3–21.Macaulay, Ronald. 2006. Pure grammaticalization: The development of a teenage intensifier.Language Variation and Change 18: 267–283.Mair, Christian. 2006. Twentieth-Century English: History, Variation, and Standardization.Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.Meyerhoff, Miriam. 1991. Not just Ninja Turtles: Lexical shift in working-class New ZealandEnglish. Paper presented to The Ninth New Zealand Linguistics Conference, University ofCanterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.Meyerhoff, Miriam and Nancy Niedzielski. 2003. The globalisation of vernacular variation.Journal of Sociolinguistics 7: 534–555.Milroy, James and Lesley Milroy. 1985. Linguistic change, social network and speakerinnovation. Journal of Linguistics 21: 339–384.Milroy, Lesley. 1987. Language and Social Networks (2nd edition). Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.Milroy, Lesley. 2007. Off the shelf or under the counter? On the social dynamics of soundchanges. In Christopher M. Cain and Geoffrey Russom (eds.) Managing Chaos: Strategies forIdentifying Change in English. New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 149–172.Milroy, Lesley and James Milroy. 1992. Social network and social class: Toward an integratedsociolinguistic model. Language in Society 21: 1–26.Owens, Jonathan. 1999. Uniformity and discontinuity: Toward a characterization of speechcommunities. Linguistics 37: 663–698.Patrick, Peter L. 2002. The speech community. In J. K. Chambers, Peter Trudgill and NatalieSchilling-Estes (eds.) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.573–597.Rickford, John R. 1999. African American Vernacular English: Features, Evolution, EducationalImplications. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.Risager, Karen. 2006. Language and Culture: Global Flows and Local Complexities. Clevedon,U.K.: Multilingual Matters.210 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Rogers, Everett M. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.Rubin, Alan M., Elizabeth M. Perse and Robert A. Powell. 1985. Loneliness, parasocialinteraction, and local television news viewing. Human Communication Research 12: 155–180.Sayers, Dave. 2009. Reversing Babel: Declining linguistic diversity and the flawed attempts toprotect it. Last accessed 5 April 2013 at http://bit.ly/reversingbabelScholte, Jan Aart. 2005. Globalization: A Critical Introduction (2nd edition). New York: PalgraveMacmillan.Silverstein, Michael. 1996. Monoglot ‘standard’ in America: Standardization and metaphors oflinguistic hegemony. In Donald Lawrence Brenneis and Ronald K. S. Macaulay (eds.) TheMatrix of Language: Contemporary Linguistic Anthropology. Boulder, Colorado: WestviewPress. 284–306.Stuart-Smith, Jane. 2006. The influence of the media. In Carmen Llamas, Louise Mullany andPeter Stockwell (eds.) The Routledge Companion to Sociolinguistics. London: Routledge. 140–148.Stuart-Smith, Jane. 2007. Data on TV and accent change. Last accessed 22 August 2008 atwww.gla.ac.uk/media/media_70055_en.pdfStuart-Smith, Jane. 2011. The view from the couch: Changing perspectives on the role of thetelevision in changing language ideologies and use. In Tore Kristiansen and NikolasCoupland (eds.) Standard Languages and Language Standards in a Changing Europe. Oslo,Norway: Novus. 223–239.Stuart-Smith, Jane. 2012. English and the Media: Television. In Alexander Bergs and Laurel J.Brinton (eds.) English Historical Linguistics: An International Handbook. Berlin, Germany:Mouton de Gruyter. 1075–1088.Stuart-Smith, Jane and Claire Timmins. 2007. ‘Aye, I watch it but’: Individuals, television andlanguage change. Paper presented to U.K. Language Variation and Change, 11–13September, University of Lancaster, U.K.Stuart-Smith, Jane and Claire Timmins. 2009. The role of the individual in language variationand change. In Carmen Llamas and Dominic James Landon Watt (eds.) Language andIdentities. Edinburgh, U.K.: Edinburgh University Press. 39–54.Stuart-Smith, Jane and Claire Timmins. 2014. Language and the influence of the media: AScottish perspective. In Robert Lawson (ed.) Sociolinguistics in Scotland. Basingstoke, U.K.:Palgrave Macmillan. 177–196.Stuart-Smith, Jane, Gwilym Pryce, Claire Timmins and Barrie Gunter. 2013. Television canalso be a factor in language change: Evidence from an urban dialect. Language 89: 501–536.Stuart-Smith, Jane, Claire Timmins and Fiona Tweedie. 2007. ‘Talkin’ jockney’? Variation andchange in Glaswegian accent. Journal of Sociolinguistics 11: 221–260.Tagliamonte, Sali and Alexandra D’Arcy. 2004. He’s like, she’s like: The quotative system inCanadian youth. Journal of Sociolinguistics 8: 493–514.Tagliamonte, Sali and Alexandra D’Arcy. 2007. Frequency and variation in the communitygrammar: Tracking a new change through the generation. Language Variation and Change19: 199–217.Tagliamonte, Sali and Rachel Hudson. 1999. Be like et al. beyond America: The quotativesystem in British and Canadian youth. Journal of Sociolinguistics 3: 147–172.Tagliamonte, Sali and Chris Roberts. 2005. So weird; so cool; so innovative: The use ofintensifiers in the television series Friends. American Speech 80: 280–300.Thompson, John. 1995. The Media and Modernity. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.THE MEDIATED INNOVATION MODEL 211© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Trudgill, Peter. 1986. Dialects in Contact. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.Trudgill, Peter. 1988. Norwich revisited: Recent linguistic changes in an English urbandialect. English World-Wide 9: 33–49.Trudgill, Peter. 2002. Sociolinguistic Variation and Change. Edinburgh, U.K.: EdinburghUniversity Press.Trudgill, Peter. 2003. Linguistic changes in pan-world English. In Cornelia Tschichold (ed.)English Core Linguistics: Essays in Honour of David Allerton. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.55–68.Weinreich, Uriel, William Labov and Marvin Herzog. 1968. Empirical foundations for a theoryof language change. In Winfred P. Lehmann and Yakov Malkiel (eds.) Directions forHistorical Linguistics. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press. 97–195.Williams, Ann and Paul Kerswill. 1999. Dialect levelling: Change and continuity in MiltonKeynes, Reading and Hull. In Gerard Docherty and Paul Foulkes (eds.) Urban Voices: AccentStudies in the British Isles. London: Arnold. 141–162.Winter, Joanne. 2002. Discourse quotatives in Australian English: Adolescents’ performingvoices. Australian Journal of Linguistics 22: 5–21.Wolfram, Walt, Phillip Carter and Beckie Moriello. 2004. Emerging Hispanic English: Newdialect formation in the American south. Journal of Sociolinguistics 8: 339–358.Address correspondence to:Dave SayersDepartment of HumanitiesSheffield Hallam UniversitySheffield S1 1WBUnited Kingdomdave.sayers@cantab.net212 SAYERS© 2014 The Authors Journal of Sociolinguistics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.