ABSTRACT: 
Recent debates on informal economic activities have partially switched away from a pure monetary logic towards a more complex one, embedded in long term relations and reckoning with non materialistic paradigms. The role of informality in certain aspects of people's lives has however, remained largely unexplored. This article uncovers what happens when the state retires from (providing benefits and social services to) a geographic area and what kind of mechanisms, practices and institutions are created to make up for this. We suggest that, in the face of de facto abandonment by state welfare, and the absence of a private sector alternative, a myriad of transactions and actors can make up for this by replacing these forms of welfare informally. Our case study focuses on the nuclear landscapes around the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone in north–central Ukraine as we reveal the ways the excluded and abandoned, which we frame as post-nuclear “bare life” (Agamben, 1998), have created a mechanism of social security that is independent from the state and yet complements it. Informal, local and unofficial understandings of nuclear spaces are central to survival in this marginalised and risky environment. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 in many respects informal activities may be seen as com- plementary to formal processes or , in market logic , as occupying the niche that remained vacant because of limited action of the formal sphere . 
 this is often contrasted with the Western world where , it is assumed , visibility of the economy is secured by the fact that market forces have penetrated almost every sphere of modern society . in this article 
 we suggest that , in the absence of an entrepreneurial actor , be it the state or a private one , a service that is needed by a given segment of a population might end up being provided informally . to do this 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Copyright © 2014, Asia-Paciﬁc Research Center, Hanyang University. Production and hosting by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. Introduction In post-socialist spaces, beneath the shadows of the neon-lit signs of marketization, the informal economy re- mains acknowledged and vital, yet largely ‘invisible’. Beyond the more obvious street-level traders and the like, most informal activity e for a variety of reasons e occurs beyond the ‘panoptic gaze’ of the state (Foucault, 1977). The seem- ingly invisible nature of this economy is suggested in the, Earth and Environ- K. Tel.: þ44 121 414 arch Center, Hanyang nter, Hanyang University. Prodvarious names it is given; from ‘shadow’, to ‘underground’, to ‘hidden’ or ‘black’. This underlying assumption that informal activity is unseen, that it takes place in ‘other worlds’ (Gibson-Graham, 2008: 1), is often contrasted with the Western world where, it is assumed, visibility of the economy is secured by the fact that market forces have penetrated almost every sphere of modern society (Hann & Hart, 2009;Williams, Nadin, Rodgers, Round,&Windebank, 2011;Williams&Martinez, 2014). This has been reﬂected in the wide literature on social transformation starting from either Polanyi (1944) or from developmentalist approaches suggesting the next alignment of new emerging powers with standards set in industrialised countries (Haller & Shore, 2005; Pieterse, 2010). On the uphill struggle through post-socialism, however, there is an emerging school of thought suggesting that theuction and hosting by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e45 35route is no longer planned by neo-liberal ideas of ‘transi- tion’ from a to b, nor mapped out teleologically by ‘one size ﬁts all’ Washington-consensus cartography; in fact there is no ‘route’ at all (Burawoy, 2002; Ledeneva, 2004; Stenning, 2005). Coping mechanisms such as informal work (Stenning, 2005; Williams & Round, 2007), economies of favours (Kuehnast & Dudwick, 2004; Pavlovskaya, 2004; Polese, 2008), ‘social acknowledgement’ (Morris, 2012, 2011: 629), gift exchange (Mauss, 2002; Polese, 2014a), memory (Buyandelgeriyn, 2008), and social/kinship net- works (Grabher & Stark, 1997; Lonkila, 1997, 1999; Walker, 2010) have not only helped navigate the post-Soviet ‘every- day’ (Bruns & Migglebrink, 2012; Morris, 2012; Polese, 2006a; Round & Williams, 2012; Sasunkievich, 2014). They have also, and possibly more importantly, pointed to the existence of a persistent and complete system in which ‘informality is here to stay’ (Morris & Polese, in press, 2014b: 1). Whilst initially relegated to particularistic and empirically-grounded case studies, unlikely to provide normative or universalistic value to further studies, the growing amount of research and its progressive theoret- ical engagement has pointed to the social signiﬁcance, persistence and size of informal activities (Morris & Polese, in press, 2014b; Round, Williams, & Rodgers, 2010). Indeed, such is the prevalence of these behaviours that one could argue that ‘formality’ could safely be concluded as an exception and ‘informality’ the rule (Routh, 2011: 212). Studies on informality have rapidly grown out of their initial framework that saw an informal economy (Hart, 1973) or resistance (Scott, 1984) originating among the poor, the marginalised and the excluded (Gupta, 1995). New directions in the study of informality have suggested that it is also a signiﬁcant phenomenon in richer countries, including industrialised ones (Williams, 2011) and that both winners and losers of transitions make extensive use of it (Morris & Polese, 2015; Polese, 2014b), including in political spheres (Isaacs, 2011, 2013; Kevlihan, 2012). In many respects, informal activities may be seen as com- plementary to formal processes or, in market logic, as occupying the niche that remained vacant because of limited action of the formal sphere (Polese, Morris, Kovacs, & Harboe, 2014).Fig. 1. Informal welfare may be forced to plug the gap between what the state and t competencies and forming a “grey zone of informal welfare” (Polese et al., 2014).2. Informality and (lack of) welfare There is a growing literature discussing social solidarity, social justice and other micro-social phenomena that do not necessarily come from the state (Kuznetsova & Round, 2014; Polese et al. 2014, 2015). Post-Weberian conceptions of a state advocate several degrees of state intervention (Darden, 2008): from little e a liberal logic, where the state does not interfere in market activities but creates the in- struments for control of fair behaviour e to more proactive intervention, where the state is the warrant of most eco- nomic rights and obligations. In Western Europe, as in other geographical regions, the “ethics of austerity”, enhanced by the recent economic crisis (Windebank &Whitworth, 2014), along with a wider desire to decrease public deﬁcit, has encouraged a number of states to reduce the amount of money available for public services and enabled the private sector to penetrate pre- viously state-monopolised aspects such as healthcare or education (Kovacs, 2014; O Beachain, Sheridan, & Stan, 2012; Rogers & Sheaff, 2000; Tatar, Ozgen, Bayram, Belli, & Berman, 2007). This process has been somehow less rapid in Central and Eastern Europe but only because it is building on a de facto process of privatisation (Harboe, 2014; Polese, 2006b) as opposed to a de jure one in more advanced economies. Traditionally, privatisation issues have been a major concern for economists or public policy specialists. Scholarship, however, has often neglected various grey situations that are, nonetheless, frequently encountered. If we see the economic and social life of a state shared between two, or in some cases three, main forces, as in Fig. 2, we can think of three situations that have been underrepresented in scholarship. The ﬁrst one is the transition between public and private services. If a state decides to privatise a service e fully or partially e then it is possible that at the end of the priva- tisation process, the new system will work better than the preceding public one. However, there is generally an adaptation period during which time gaps in provisionmay appear, sometimes lasting long enough to be more than just ‘transition’. For instance some competencies might remain “uncovered” because both state and private sectors claim it is the other side's responsibility. In a second case, one can ﬁnd a gap between a service that has beenhe market provide, occupying a space beyond the de facto protection of state Fig. 2. Complementarity of competencies of the private, public and non-proﬁt sectors. T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e4536promised and the way it is actually delivered. This could simply be due to bureaucratic issues, where a need is identiﬁed, money to address the need is allocated, but it takes a number of signatures and years, to unblock proper implementation. It could, however, also be due to the third situation, in which the state fails to address a given issue and simply leaves (or never enters) the game. This is the case when providing a service is too costly, or there is little interest or awareness of a given need to be addressed. The case study in this article is most closely related to the last two scenarios (Table 1). In all three situations, citizens might become, or consider themselves ‘abandoned’ because they have access to little or no welfare services. Privatisation is, in some cases, a solution but it also raises questions. What would happen if the private sector provided a service at a price that was too high for a signiﬁcant number of people? What happens if private sector actors do not see the advantage of occupying that niche, and leave a service tackling a particular social need unprovided? In the recent past, situations where citizens expected or were promised A, but delivered B have resulted in a conﬂict that has been solved in different ways. Contestation and contentious politics is one of them, when citizens openly criticise and challenge the state, asking for a change from the status quo (Della Porta, 2009; Tarrow, 2005). Organised criminality and illegal ﬂows are another well-studied ﬁeld, with some groups taking advantage of the void of power to create a system within the system with its own rules of engagement and different distributions of welfare and beneﬁts (Bruns & Migglebrink, 2012; O'Brien & Penna, 2007; Pinotti, 2012; Van Schendel & Abrahams, 2005). There are also cases where an initiative starts from citizens who organise in a less hierarchical structure than a maﬁa to provide a service, competing with the state in welfare distribution (such as Time Banks or other alternative cur- rencies). Those actions can either be formally coordinated, such as when civil society organisations or informal groupsTable 1 Table showing the causes of welfare ineffectiveness and potential consequences Causes of ineffectiveness Reasons Transition period Adaptation period Holes in the system Gap between service Failure to identify a need Bureaucratic hurdles in allocating money State “exits” Service is too costly No awareness or pressure to address a social needstart providing services, or uncoordinated, but still widely popular within a certain segment of a society (Koven & Michel, 1990; Mollica, 2014). We are clearly indebted to Scott's (1984) works on everyday forms of resistance when framing the approach of this article. Our question, however, starts from the possibility to apply this framework more broadly and see it not only as resistance or a survival strategy, but in a more structural way. We start from the question of what happens when a state retires, or refrains, from (providing services to) a particular geographic area and what kind of mechanisms, practices and institutions are created to make up for this. We suggest that, in the absence of an entrepreneurial actor, be it the state or a private one, a service that is needed by a given segment of a population might end up being provided informally. To do this, this article takes the region around Chernobyl in northecentral Ukraine as a case study to document the way the absence of de facto welfare protection leads to the creation of local informal markets and economic activity. In the Chernobyl region the excluded and abandoned have created a set of informal mechanisms independent from the state. While Harboe (2013) has documented the life of Invisible Citi- zens, who avoid formal institutional relations with the state due to a general scepticism towards such estab- lishments, we here deal with those that the state has decided to avoid a relationship with. Although the pro- vision of a small state pension paid out each month, tiny food subsidies, or the permission to live in a given place might indicate that the state has ‘not forgotten’ about these people, the amount of beneﬁts received and the way this compares to the rest of the country seem to point to the fact that state support is only nominal, showing little or no difference to those who receive nothing from the state. The post-Chernobyl Ukrainian state offers only a ‘Potemkin village’ of welfare support e a complex web of de jure entitlements but a lived reality of de facto state abandonment.of welfare failure. Possible consequences Informal economic and social practices Informal practices, there might be room for organised crime to take over some aspects Organised crime, maﬁa structures replace the state; some informal economy develops T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e45 37The choice of this case study is connected to the possi- bility to position Chernobyl as an example of a ‘state of exception’ (Agamben, 2005), where its affected population uses informal economic activity and non-formal un- derstandings of radiation risk as a way to enact agency and subvert their post-disaster status of ‘bare life’ (Agamben, 1998). The state's failure to ‘see’ into the hidden spaces and processes of informal activity around the Exclusion Zone reveals the non-expert experience of having to cope in a landscape where radioactive danger is invisible. This radioactive landscape reverses the old adage ‘what you can't see won't hurt you’, and blurs the boundary between ‘contaminated and safe’; ‘seen and unseen’; ‘formal and informal’. While acknowledging that formal and informal activity can be viewed as a “multicoloured” (Smith & Stenning, 2006) spectrum, we also conclude that informal activity can be a lens through which to view wider issues, such as how people use informality to renegotiate their vulnerable status of post-nuclear bare life. Informal activ- ities around Chernobyl, which are often enacted through local knowledge and unofﬁcial understandings of the nu- clear landscape, cultivate mechanisms of informal welfare that replace or sit alongside the failed and retreating state welfare system. This research is grounded in long-term ethnographic ﬁeldwork between 2010 and 2013 around the Chernobyl border region, which is a few hours by minibus (marsh- rutka) north of Kyiv. Food and goods such as scrap metal from within the Exclusion Zone and the wider region are often informally traded within local urban areas, including the capital, linking the Chernobyl landscape to the rest of Ukraine, involving formal business structures, through informal supply chains. Ethnographic methods were employed with over one hundred semi-structured and informal interviews with local residents, border guards, former liquidators, scrap collectors, gatekeepers, returnees, and local elites. Other key research tools included the extensive use of participant observation and a visual methodology involving participant photography, explored in a previous article (Davies, 2013). Given the sensitivity of the material, the identities of all participants are concealed and any information that may be harmful to the research participants has been omitted. 3. Structure and agency in debates on informality Since Hart's ﬁrst mention of ‘informal economies’ in 1973, the debate on informality has been enriched by a wide number of empirical and theoretical studies exploring the nature and diversity of alternative, informal, or diverse economies (Escobar, 1995; Gibson-Graham, 1996; Law & Urry, 2004; Spinosa, Flores, & Dreyfus, 1997). It is possible to see the debate on informal economies, and the different positions resulting from it, as an extension of the structure- agency debate. Modernists and transitionalists, in partic- ular, tend to consider the existence of informal economies and related phenomena (informal employment, work and undeclared activities) as mostly depending on structure. According to their position, informality results from tem- porary, or transitional, adjustments in the path to moder- nity that are bound to disappear after a country, or a sector,has been modernised (Boeke, 1942; Geertz, 1963; Lewis, 1959). Structural perspectives share, to a different extent, the belief that participation in informal activities is an imposition rather than a choice. They start from the idea that informal economic practices are more spread and important in economic systemswhere the state is unable to protect its citizens against social risks, a number of which are pushed into informal employment, and unregistered economic activities (Davis, 2006; Gallin, 2001). In both cases the central idea is that it is mostly the marginalised who engage in informal transactions because of lack of alternative options (Castells & Portes, 1989; Hudson, 2005; Sassen, 1997). Those two positions put emphasis on structure, be these economic and institutional frameworks or structures created by the ensemble of economic and administrative actors that either decide on work conditions or their regulation. Exclusion is sometimes prompted, according to some critics of capitalism, by the lack of need to maintain a reserve army of labour or lack of desire to act as a welfare state for those who have been formally excluded by the economic life of the country (Hudson, 2005). This leads scholars to consider that informal activity is largely invol- untarywith people just falling into it for the sake of survival (Castells & Portes, 1989; Sassen, 1997) meeting a desire by large actors to reduce costs and maximise proﬁts (Bender, 2004; Hapke, 2004; Ross, 2004) and thereby leaving ‘everyday’ people with no alternatives. In contrast to the above approach, neoliberal, ultralib- eral and some behaviouralists (Gaal &McKee, 2004) argue that non-participation in and non-contribution to an eco- nomic system is a matter of choice. Rather than being initiated by an overarching system, lack of participation to the formal economic life of a system largely depends on the fact that people themselves choose not to be part of a system they do not trust, or that they believe is bringing them more damage than beneﬁts. Reasons vary, from high taxation, corruption to lack of formal beneﬁts of acknowl- edgement for micro economic actors (De Soto, 1989; Harboe, 2014, 2015; London & Hart, 2004), but the general approach is that informality complements the formal economywhen economic or administrative hurdles make it more convenient (Cross, 2000; Gerxhani, 2004; Perry & Maloney, 2007) as a result of a micro cost-beneﬁt analysis (e.g. De Soto, 1989; Minc, 1982; Sauvy, 1984). Recently, however, the above monetary-centred vision has been challenged by a number of works coming from various disciplines. In particular, inﬂuences from feminism, new institutionalist economics, and critical empirically grounded studies on the meaning of money in socio- economic systems have informed a relatively new perspec- tive considering monetary and ﬁnancial transitions as socially embedded (Bourdieu, 2001; Chakrabarty, 2000; Davis, 1992; Escobar, 1995; Gibson-Graham, 1996, 2006; Leyshon, Lee, & Williams, 2003; Zelizer, 2005). Some scholars have insisted on the fact that these transactions are based on work or relations for a circle of friends, kin and acquaintances (Nelson & Smith, 1999; Smith & Stenning, 2006; Williams & Round, 2007). Other studies have focused on social relations and social/redistributivemotives (Williams, 2005). This post-structural perspective has T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e4538proven to be a good interdisciplinary synthesis (e.g. Gurtoo & Williams, 2009; Maloney, 2004) between scholars look- ing at the market, or economic logic as prevailing over everythingelse (Egbert, 2006) and those seeing themeaning of every transaction in a social and societal framework with no apparent economic logic (Gudman, 2001). Our article starts from this perspective and explore the meaning of transactions assuming a logic that transcends the self-interested utility-maximising economic one. We do not deny here the economic gain informal transactions bring or that they are essential to the survival of most of the involved actors. We consider, however, that economic reasoning is embedded in a larger framework that priori- tises a long-term logic, and subsequently long-term re- lationships, interactions and the embeddedness of economic and social life. We draw here from a growing body of literature in anthropology about favour exchanges in different regions of the world (Ledeneva, 1998, 2006; Tlaiss & Kauser, 2011; Yang, 1994) but also the social and cultural signiﬁcance of economic and social exchanges that Parry and Block (1989) pointed out both for unreciprocated gifts and even for the symbolic function of money that can be social or economic depending on culture (Parry & Block, 1989; Polese, 2014a). We also build on works looking at informal transactions as building respectability, hierarchies and status (Pardo, 1996) that conﬁrm or subvert the social symbolic order of a community or even a society. As White has described, there exists the possibility that social and economic relations become so embedded to be indiscern- ible so that ‘money makes us relatives’ (1994). These premises allow us to approach post-structuralist perspectives going beyond the survival logic that some- times features in scholarly works. We look at the way social and economic functions of informal transactions engender a redistributive system that generates, allocates and allows the sharing of welfare and how this system is based on a balance between economic beneﬁts and the construction of social relations and social facts.4. Chernobyl Whilst mostly explored by scholars from the hard or life sciences, Chernobyl has recently gained popularity in the social sciences across ﬁelds such as human geography (Davies, 2013, 2015; Rush-Cooper, 2013), anthropology (Petryna, 2002, 2011; Phillips, 2005, 2012), sociology (Kuchinskaya, 2011, 2012, 2014), history (Kalmbach, 2013), studies of tourism (Goatcher & Brunsden, 2011; Stone, 2013; Yankovska & Hannam, 2013), culture (Falkof, 2013), and visual studies (Bürkner, 2014). What these scholars share is the realisation that the Chernobyl disaster has multiple interpretations and realities, with contested im- pacts that stretch both within and beyond post-socialist space. For some, the 1986 nuclear disaster has come to embody the demise of the Soviet era e both in the way the accident itself contributed to the sudden implosion of the internally vulnerable Soviet system (Van der Veen, 2013), but also in the way that the Exclusion Zone today hasbecome a frozen microcosm of late-Soviet everyday life (Davies, 2013). For countless people Chernobyl remains an ongoing disaster. Its consequences extend beyond its un- knowable death toll, andwell past the conﬁnes of its ofﬁcial nuclear spaces, penetrating many social, psychological and economic facets of everyday life. Adriana Petryna (2004: 263) describes how after Cher- nobyl, a new ‘informal economy of diagnoses and entitle- ment’ emerged. In a world where radiation risk is invisible to the lay perspective, informal means of overcoming this technological blindness began to surface. Doctors were bribed not simply for preferential medical treatment, but to diagnose a more ﬁnancially rewarding Chernobyl disability status. Hospitals and sites of healthcare are well- documented arenas of informal exchange (Mæstad & Mwisongo, 2011; Morris & Polese, in press, 2014b, 2006, 2008; Stepurko, Pavlovab, Grygaa, & Grootb, 2013), but Chernobyl presented a situation where an individual's entire bio-political status could be won and lost at the turn of a brown envelope. The new forms of ‘biocitizenship’ (Petryna, 2002) that emerged after Chernobyl, where a higher disability status equalled more social beneﬁts, meant that an individual's biology became bio-capital to be informally traded within the State's healthcare system; ‘bare life’ (Agamben, 1998) could be informally renegotiated. Here e like in other modern spaces of exception sug- gested by Giorgio Agamben (2005), such as Nazi concen- tration camps or Guantanamo Bay e certain people are excluded from the normal protections of the law, and allowed a ‘death without consequences’ (Doty, 2011: 610). We follow calls from human geographers to ‘bring Agamben out from the battleﬁeld’ (Laurie, 2014) and can apply his framework to the nuclear landscape of Cher- nobyl. We ﬁnd that in Chernobyl, a permanent state of emergency is enforced geographically through the con- struction (and performance) of nuclear ‘Exclusion Zones’, and through its governance from Ukraine's ‘Ministry of Emergencies’, thus ensuring that the state of exception persists. As such, those living in Chernobyl-affected ter- ritories can be viewed as ‘bare life’ (Agamben, 1998); their lives stripped of the protection of the law, and abandoned through insufﬁcient welfare and compensation protection to an uncertain fate; their potentially damaged biologies are placed outside the responsibility of the state to face the hidden violence of abandonment. To live inside contaminated territory is therefore to live outside the de facto protection of the law.5. Chernobyl welfare After Ukrainian independence in 1991, the baton of responsibility for Chernobyl passed from the USSR to Ukraine, making it one of the least welcome and most toxic inheritances of Soviet collapse. At ﬁrst, a newly independent Ukraine increased welfare payments and provisions as a method of publically and politically distancing itself from its former Soviet masters, but T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e45 39recent developments have seen a new approach to Chernobyl management. In 2010 the ‘Ministry of Emer- gencies and Affairs of Population Protection from the Con- sequences of Chernobyl Catastrophe of Ukraine’ was supplanted by the much pithier ‘State Emergency Service’.1 The dropping of reference to ‘Chernobyl’ was more than semantic efﬁciency, but part of a wider move within Ukraine and beyond to rebrand the catastrophe from an ongoing process to a bounded and ﬁxed event in late- Socialism. This move preceded the construction of the EU funded ‘New Safe Conﬁnement’; a huge structure that will envelop the infamous Sarcophagus of Lenin Reactor 4, and thereby attempt to physically and symbolically ‘put a lid’ on Chernobyl as an event. Chernobyl welfare, too, has been constantly threatened with overhaul by successive Kyiv regimes, often met with protests from Liquidators and other Chernobyl victims (Chernobiltsi). With estimates of 5e8% of Ukraine's annual state budget being dedicated to post-Chernobyl manage- ment (Danzer & Danzer, 2014; Oughton, Bay-Larsen, & Voigt, 2009; Stan, 2012), it is no wonder that Kyiv has made moves towards reframing the disaster from an open-ended question to a geographic and temporally closed-off ‘cer- tainty’ in late-Soviet history. This shift in Chernobyl man- agement follows calls from the World Bank that describe Chernobyl welfare as a ‘dead weight’ on Ukraine's ﬂoun- dering economy (Petryna, 2011) e a political view that will doubtless increase following Ukraine's dire post- Euromaidan position and stringent IMF loan conditions (Davies, 2014). Unlike other spheres of state protection in post-Soviet space, the sprawling and underfunded Chernobyl welfare system is not something that the private sector is willing to enter. Referring back to Fig. 1, welfare has remained in a de jure sense entirely within the remit of the state, yet in a real sense informal activity has had to plug the gap that state- welfare has left bare. As the state reduces the size of Chernobyl's welfare and beneﬁt system, which already falls well short of protecting its exposed citizens, it will become even more necessary for informal mechanisms to step in wherewelfare fails, and circumvent the consequences of de facto state abandonment. As Chernobyl citizens face a ‘double exposure’ from the combination of nuclear pollu- tion and failed governance (Davies, 2013: 116), they increasingly rely upon informal mechanisms to subvert their position as post-nuclear bare life. Chernobyl is, in fact, no case study proper. It is a highly anomalous relationship between the population of an area and the welfare state. Nonetheless, despite its multiple forms of uniqueness, Chernobyl is still a representative element of more gener- alised state withdrawal.6. Food and welfare There are over 2.15millionpeople inUkrainewho live on territoryofﬁcially designated as contaminatedbyChernobyl1 This ministry was renamed again in 2012 to the similarly succinct ‘Ministry of Emergencies of Ukraine’, with reference to ‘Chernobyl’ being equally absent.(Ministry of Emergencies of Ukraine, 2011, 42) e around 4% of Ukraine's population (State Statistics Committee of Ukraine, 2004).2 Those who live on this Chernobyl- affected land are entitled to monthly compensation pay- ments designed to help people buy clean food, and thus mitigate the risk of consuming produce grown in polluted soil. However, the lived experience of this welfare system is quite different from its aim, as demonstrated in the following ethnographic vignette. For Bogdan e a former Liquidator e and his wife Klara, informal economic activity is vital because it supplements their small formal income and tiny welfare payments they receive as compensation for living with Chernobyl. In 2008 Bogdan was sacked from his job as a driver in Chernobyl after an argument with his boss about not being paid for half a month's work. His wife Klara, now the main bread- winner, works two jobs as a school dinner lady and a carer for the elderly, getting paid around $230 per month. Their combined formal income gives them just enough to get by. On top of this, explains Klara, ‘the government give us 2 Hryvnia and 10 Kopeks a month to buy clean food.’ Many research participants complained about the extremely low level of Chernobyl food compensation, which varies from 1.6 Hryvnia in places with lower levels of radiation, to Klara and Bogdan's case of 2.1 Hryvnia, for those who live with higher recorded radiation levels. At the time of writing, this is just 13 to 16 cents per month e a virtually useless amount in the Ukrainian context, where food prices are comparable to the UK (Round et al., 2010). As Klara rhetorically continued e ‘What the hell can we get with that?’ Although some welfare payments in Ukraine such as pensions or disability subsidies ‘are adjusted periodically according to changes in the national average wage and inﬂation’ (SSPTW, 2012: 307), this has not been the case with Chernobyl food beneﬁts, which are e as a Ukrainian diplomat explained during an interview e ‘ﬁxed at the same rate since the early 1990s.’ As such, this dismally low rate of compensation only serves to designate a territory as contaminated by nuclear pollution, yet does nothing to alleviate the problem. It reinforces the reality of contamination, reminding people each month when they collect their compensation, yet does nothing in the way of actually helping. This example of welfare failure in Ukraine can be seen as a form of ‘stealthy violence’ (Gilbert & Ponder, 2013), where individuals are exposed as bare life through inadequate compensation and de facto state-abandonment. Chernobyl governance pro- duces lives that can end without consequence e not killed, but not protected from radiation either, effectively ‘kept alive through a state of injury’ (Mbembe & Meintjes, 2003). ‘We couldn't even buy bread with that,’ complained Bogdan, who echoes a sentiment held by many who live within this stigmatised ‘landscape of threat’ (Parkhill, Butler, & Pidgeon, 2013: 1). As in other post-socialist rural spaces, self-provisioning is an important survival strategy in the post-nuclear2 These statistics were produced before the 2014 annexation of Crimea and continuing crisis in East Ukraine. T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e4540context of economic and environmental precarity. The irony of this broken Chernobyl welfare system is highlighted by the fact that most of the food that people eat in contami- nated regions around Chernobyl is grown by themselves, in the very soil that the compensation is supposed to protect them from. In the face of a retreating state, many people in this nuclear landscape have developed other mechanisms of social protection that are independent from statewelfare, involving informal activity, unofﬁcial understandings of radiation risk, and social networks. Standing in a small barn by his house, just a few kilo- metres from the Exclusion Zone fence, Bogdan explained how he intended to exchange surplus sacks of potatoes with members of his social network who lived nearby: ‘I have no money to pay them, only potatoes. If I have the money to pay them then I do.’ The potatoes were stored below the wooden outbuilding where he and Klara keep a few live- stock: three pigs and a cow e their chickens roaming around the yard. The smallholding was typical of the par- cels of land found in the Chernobyl border region, more ‘household plot’ (Czegledy, 2002: 203) than farm. Between formal employment and looking after their elderly relatives who lived nearby, there was little time for growing surplus cash crops. In the small cool cellar, above the mounds of potatoes grown earlier in the summer, an array of other self-cultivated or foraged foods stood high on shelves, pickled in large jars. Onions, tomatoes, mushrooms, beet- roots, berries, gherkins and a variety of other fruit and vegetables sealed in glass. Though a banal and ordinary scene to anyone familiar with post-Soviet rural and urban life, it is one made unusual and distinct by the assertion that radiation's ‘consumption in food products e especially for those living near Chernobyle is practically unavoidable’ (Phillips, 2005: 288). Yet this array of hard-earned produce in Bogdan's cellar was, for him at least, untarnished by the threat of radiation. If the jars represented anything, it was not the invisible threat from contamination, but the months of toil it had taken to put the food there in the ﬁrst place; domestic food production in Ukraine should not be over-romanticised (Round et al., 2010). Like other forms of informality, the self-cultivated and gathered food was an expression of agency e minor victories against the uncertainty of poverty, each jar an ‘economic cushion’ (Czegledy, 2002: 209) that exists beyond the formal economy and failed welfare system. Wide-scale post-socialist marginalisation has meant many Ukrainians ‘are compelled to worry more about putting food on the table than about the “ecological state” (ekolohichnyi stan) of that food’ (Phillips, 2005: 288). As one elderly woman who lived near the edge of the Exclusion Zone explained, in the confusion and chaos after Chernobyl, she was told to avoid eating various foodstuffs such as berries and mushrooms, or to drink locally produced milk, but: ‘If you are not going to drink or eat everything that they say, then you won't even have the energy to move even your legs… you'll have no power to even move your legs…’ In the wake of a de facto absence of formal welfare protection, many people continue to participate in riskyand informal food practices, normalised and reinforced by local social networks. Bogdan took the potatoes to his friend whowas sitting in a boat moored at the water's edge very near the border of the Exclusion Zone. Concealed from the road, between a smallholding and the tall reeds that are synonymous with the Pripyat Marches, around thirty men were busily folding ﬁshing nets, repairing their boats, ﬁxing out-board motors, and hauling-in the morning's catch. The number and size of the ﬁsh suggested this was not just evidence of ‘the growing commercialisation of rural household production’ (Pallot & Nefedova, 2003: 47), but part of a wider industry of informal (and formal) activity that takes place in this nuclear border region. Dilapidated concrete signs nearby read ‘Fishing is Strictly Forbidden’ as the river here runs past the ‘most contaminated water body in the zone of the Chernobyl accident’ (Kryshev, 1995: 217). The unﬁxed and ephemeral character of this watercourse that ﬂows through the Exclusion Zone itself adds one more layer of liminality to an already fuzzy nuclear border. While it was not possible to trace the end destination of these prohibited ﬁsh via a ‘follow the thing’ (Cook, 2004) approach, respondents suggested the ﬁsh were destined to be sold for money in cities such as Kyiv, as opposed to being solely exchanged within localised kin networks e the sheer amount of ﬁsh collected in large nets made this monetary outcome inevitable. Environmentally risky foodstuffs from restricted areas such asmushrooms, game, barriers and ﬁsh regularly enter the food chain in Ukraine through various informal actions involving trespassing the ofﬁcial borders of the Exclusion Zone (Davies, 2011).7. Informal understandings of Risk Uncertainty about radiological health, as well as eco- nomic insecurity and a lack of adequate welfare support has produced informal understandings of radiation risk in communities that surround Chernobyl. These unofﬁcial nuclear risk perceptions have become a shared welfare resource, allowing abandoned communities to act beyond the ofﬁcial nuclear limits and rules of the Exclusion Zone. The act of exchanging potatoes grown in soil around Chernobyl with illegally caught ﬁsh from within the Exclusion Zone, relies on collective risk consciousness that reinforces and reciprocates informal understandings of radiation, and ways of alleviating the lack of welfare pro- vision. In this way, the excluded and abandoned population of Chernobyl have created new mechanisms for social se- curity that are independent from the state's failure to provide ‘clean food’ e by communally and informally redeﬁning what is considered ‘clean’. New ‘social facts’ about radiation risk are demonstrated and reinforced through risky food practices and informal activity. This does not deny that dangerous food activities around Cher- nobyl are based partly on necessity (of having little prac- tical alternative), but these behaviours are also normalised, reinforced and renegotiated by a local and embedded un- derstandings of radiation risk that is fostered and repro- duced informally through social networks. For example, during a conversation about food, one mother who lives adjacent to the contaminated space of T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e45 41the Zone, compared her home-grown (and gathered) food to shop-bought produce: ‘Everything you buy is full of chemicals and genetically modiﬁed stuff. I know this is my food, so I know it is absolutely natural.’ Like many in this region, this opinion that home-grown and gathered food is safe was held inharmoniously with a wider belief that Chernobyl radiation is deadly. To ‘know’ the food, is to grow it yourself, and to toil your own soil ensures its safety. ‘Why should we be afraid of growing our own?’ she continued, ‘The soil is ours’. Others relied upon local informal knowledge, describing how they knew which ﬁelds they should avoid cultivating because the potatoes grew black e in their opinion e because of radiation. These informal risk understandings occur in tandem with ‘normal’ informal economic activity that has beenwell documented elsewhere (Cassidy, 2011; Morris & Polese, 2015; Round et al. 2010; Williams et al., 2013), and add a new layer of resistance to state abandonment and the lived realities of bare life. The collective risk consciousness that is embedded in these practices and normalised in everyday informal activity around Chernobyl allows people to dwell in a landscape where the state has retreated from its wel- fare responsibilities.8. Rejecting welfare and embracing place One key welfare provision available for Chernobyl affected citizens is the option to be resettled in non- contaminated space. Beyond the 350,000 forcibly displaced people who were made to leave the ‘Zone of Mandatory resettlement’ (Ministry of Emergencies of Ukraine, 2012), those who still live in areas of high contamination outside the Exclusion Zone in Ukraine havee at least in theorye the option of state-assisted voluntarily relocation. In reality, however,many people reject thiswelfare provision. This can be only partly explained by the longwaiting lists involved in securing alternative housing, which are synonymous with welfare systems inherited from theUSSR (Gentile& Sj€oberg, 2013). People also reject this relocationwelfare because of a reliance on informality that connects people to place.We see the ability to perform informal activity, and the social net- works that informality relies upon and reproduces, as key factors that dissuade people from leaving the spaces they inhabit, including Chernobyl's nuclear landscape. This is explored in the following ethnographic vignette, which continues from Bogdan's exchange at the river. ‘All of the men you saw are criminals, you see e it is illegal to ﬁsh there. And they are dangerous … ’, said Bogdan that evening over a bowl of soup made from the traded ﬁsh ‘ … but I am not afraid of them’. Nor was he afraid of higher levels of radiation that could be found in the food. Bogdan is a well-connected man, his large social network vital to his household survival strategies; allowing him to weave in between the informal and formal. When asked if he was ever tempted to move away from this region to somewhereless contaminated he explained how it would be worse for his health to emigrate from the landscape he knows best: ‘most of the people who left here died very quickly, because they had not been accepted into their surroundings … when they left separately, away from people they knew, they died from stress.’ This is a widely held opinion expressed by those living in this region: that it is better to live with the invisible threat of radiation than to risk the tangible reality of severing social networks, and thus harming the ability to use informal methods of survival and reciprocity. This was not based on an opinion that Chernobyl radiation is risk free, indeed every respondent had personal experiences of bereavement and tragedy associated with the accident, but rather on an understanding that the alternative was much worse. The signiﬁcance placed on the agency of informal ac- tivity e even in this extreme environment e speaks to the importance of informality throughout Ukraine in general, and across many other spheres of post-Socialist space. Even on the edge of the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone, where radiological risk makes some informal activity dangerous, this ability to act informally is given a very high importance by local inhabitants. The capacity to use social networks, informal activity and local knowledge to survive outside the formal economy and beyond (or alongside) the welfare system is seen as more important than avoiding the risk of contamination. This has parallels with previous research in highly marginalised areas of the former Soviet Union such as Magadan in Russia's Far East. Here, Gulag survivors who faced extreme climatic and economic conditions refused to be relocated to more afﬂuent areas due the risk of severing their social networks and informal survival tactics onwhich they so completely depended (Round, 2006). To an outsider, the nuclear borderland around Cher- nobyl is an anti-‘therapeutic landscape’ (Gesler & Kearns, 2002: 132). However, to marginalised individuals who are able to negotiate everyday life through subverting the Zone's ‘border processes’ (Newman, 2006), as well as through social networks and informal economic activity, the risk from radiation is less of a threat than the reality of migrating elsewhere. This reliance on a local knowledge of the landscape and on social networks creates an informal pull of place that goes beyond formal techno-scientiﬁc understandings of place and radiation risk. The informality of place attach- ment is a resource that creates spaces where the state can be supplanted by local knowledge. In this case, forms of state welfare (e.g. relocation) are actually rejected in order to ensure the continuation of informal activity and the fostering of social support. Here we can view informality as a logic that not only transcends the formal economic one, but also moves beyond formal understandings of health. When analysing why individuals keep on living with environmentally dangerous environments such as Cher- nobyl, the ability to perform informal activities that subvert the ofﬁcial understandings of space and place should not be T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e4542underestimated. A key example of such informal activity is the prosaic yet illegal, and potentially harmful act of gathering goods from inside the Exclusion Zone (Davies, 2011). For instance the normalised and highly risky activ- ity of collecting, consuming, and exchanging mushrooms and berries from inside the forbidden forests of the Zone. This is an extremely pervasive behaviour, despite these foodstuffs being some of the most harmful produce in a nuclear landscape, with recorded levels of human contamination increasing during foraging season (Botsch, Romantschuk, Beltz, Handl, & Michel, 2001). Scrapmetal collection fromwithin the Exclusion Zone is also key among a spectrum of informal activities that takes place in this marginalised nuclear landscape (see Davies, 2015). This prohibited activity of crossing the nuclear border to salvage (and sell) the abandoned detritus from the Zone, contributes to the informal renegotiation of Chernobyl citizens' status as post-nuclear bare life. It draws upon local place-knowledge and agency by subverting the ofﬁcial rules of this nuclear ‘space of exception’ (Agamben, 2005). The fence around the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone is the physical embodiment of a failed state-attempt to contain harmful radiation. Low-level radiation is not stopped by it, nor too are the informal ebbs and ﬂows of people and goods from within the Zone e as indicated by themany person-sized holes that can be found all along the border between ‘clean’ and ‘unclean’ space. This informal behaviour is infused with dangers and risks beyond those associated with radiation however: ‘… the militia sometimes wait in the forest and then wait for you to cross the border, then they catch you. It depends on who caught you, you may be able to bribe.’ Several participants described how they remove scrap metal from the Zone, taking it from the many deserted buildings on the other side of the fence. One participant described selling themetal: ‘to different dealers. We take it to the factory where it is crushed, melted down, and mixed with other metals…’ From here it is in the formal economic sphere and ‘ … it is impossible to ﬁnd or trace it.’ It becomes invisible. The ubiquitous yet unseen presence of informality also dwells within the ‘ﬂoating mists’ (Lefebvre, 2000: 98; Round, Williams, & Rodgers, 2008: 172) of Chernobyl's spaces of exception, not threatening the marginalised but helping them negotiate everyday life in the context of de facto state-abandonment. 9. Conclusion Despite Chernobyl being a relatively limited geograph- ical area in Ukraine, we would suggest that it is possible to take the micro data used above to extrapolate some lessons that can be applied more widely within post-Soviet space and beyond. Starting from apparently pure monetary transactions that could be considered from a solely eco- nomic logic, this article has attempted to provide a more systemic explanation to the series of exchanges happening in the region. The transactions analysed, we suggest, can be considered as a whole, a system that is occupying a vacant welfare niche in an area where the state has unofﬁcially decided not to assert its role.For many marginalised individuals, despite a belief that Chernobyl has caused widespread sickness, the risk from invisible radiation is considered less of a health threat than the tangible reality of leaving behind social support net- works after moving, and the ability to employ local informal economic tactics. From a state perspective, the marginal role the area plays in the economy and politics makes it unattractive or at least not worth the same efforts compared to other regions. By framing the Chernobyl landscape as a space of exception, this article shows that informal activity provides a key means of subverting the ofﬁcial rules of this space, and the lived realities of ‘bare life’ (Agamben, 1998). These informal behaviours take place against a backdrop of de facto state abandonment that exposes Chernobyl's vulner- able citizens to the stealthy violence of harmful radiation and a retreating state. This sense of abandonment is matched, however, by an intensiﬁcation of social networks, unofﬁcial risk un- derstandings, and informal activities, making possible life with this nuclear landscape, that cannot possibly be considered ‘illegal’. Illegal is a term one uses for an activity going against the state, or better the operating of a state. If the state retires from an area, or from providing a service, how can the coping mechanisms possibly be ‘illegal’?Acknowledgement This research was funded by a CEELBAS scholarship and would not have been possible without the help of Alexey Furman, Yulia Bodnar and the many research participants in Ukraine. The collaboration was supported by a Marie Curie International Research Staff Exchange Scheme Fellowship within the 7th European Community Frame- work Programme (grant no: PIRSES-GA-2011-295232 and PIRSES-GA-2012-318961). Thank you to the anonymous referees for their constructive comments. All mistakes are our own.References Agamben, G. (1998). Homo sacer: Sovereign power and bare life. California: Stanford University Press. Agamben, G. (2005). State of exception. London: The University of Chicago Press. Bender, D. (2004). Sweated work, weak bodies: anti-sweatshop campaigns and languages of labor. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. Boeke, J. (1942). The structure of Netherlands Indian economy. New York: Institute of Paciﬁc Relations. Botsch, W., Romantschuk, L. D., Beltz, D., Handl, J., & Michel, R. (2001). Investigation of the radiation exposure of inhabitants of contaminated areas in northern Ukraine. Centre for Radiation Protection and Radioecology. Bourdieu, P. (2001). Masculine domination. California: Stanford University Press. Bruns, B., & Migglebrink, J. (2012). Subverting borders: Doing research on smuggling and small scale trade. Germany: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschafte. Burawoy, M. (2002). Transition without transformation: Russia's invol- untary road to capitalism. In D. Nugent (Ed.), Locating capitalism in time and space: Global restructurings, politics and identity (pp. 290e310). London: Stanford University Press. Bürkner, D. (2014). The Chernobyl landscape and the aesthetics of invis- ibility. Photography and Culture, 7(1), 21e39. Buyandelgeriyn, M. (2008). Postepost-transition theories: walking on multiple paths. Annual Review of Anthropology, 37, 235e250. T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e45 43Cassidy, K. (2011). Performing the cross border economies of post-so- cialism. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 21(11), 612e618. Castells, M., & Portes, A. (1989). The origins, dynamics and effects of the informal economy. Johns Hopkin University Press. Business & Eco- nomics, Mar 1. Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial thought and historical difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Cook, I. (2004). Follow the thing: papaya. Antipode, 36(4), 642e664. Cross, E. (2000). Managing diversity the courage to lead. Greenwood Publishing Group. Jan 1, Business & Economics. Czegledy, A. (2002). Urban peasants in a post-socialist world: small-scale agriculturalists in Hungary. In P. Leonard, & D. Kaneff (Eds.), Post-so- cialist peasant? Rural and urban constructions of identity in Eastern Europe, East-Asia and the former Soviet Union (pp. 200e221). New York: Palgrave. Danzer, A., & Danzer, N. (2014). The long-run consequences of Chernobyl: Evidence on subjective well-being, mental health and welfare. In CESifo working paper series no. 4855 Accessed via http://papers.ssrn. com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id¼2463587. on 01.08.14. Darden, K. (March 2008). The integrity of corrupt states: graft as an informal state institution. Politics & Society, 36(1), 35e59. Davies, T. (2011). Nuclear mushrooms: attitudes to risk and the state through food consumption in the Chernobyl border region. In Uni- versitas 21 graduate research on food proceedings (pp. 92e96). Not- tingham University, Malaysia Campus, June. Davies, T. (2013). A visual geography of Chernobyl: double exposure. In- ternational Labor and Working-Class History, 84, 116e139. Davies, T. (2014). Ukraine's other crisis: living in the shadow of Chernobyl e where victims receive just 9p a month and are left to fend for themselves. Independent Newspaper, 27/4/2014. Accessed via http:// www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/ukraines-other-crisis- living-in-the-shadow-of-chernobyl–where-victims-receive-just-9p- a-month-and-are-left-to-fend-for-themselves-9293832.html. on 01.08.14. Davies, T. (2015). Nuclear borders: informally negotiating the chernobyl exclusion zone. In J. Morris, & A. Polese (Eds.), informal economies in post-socialist spaces: Between illegality and embeddedness (pp. 299e325). London: Palgrave. Davis, J. (1992). The anthropology of suffering. Journal of Refugee Studies, 5(2), 149e161. Davis, M. (2006). Planet of slums. London and New York: Verso. Della Porta, D. (2009). Movements in a globalizing world (2nd expanded ed.). New York: Macmillan. De Soto, H. (1989). The other path the invisible revolution in the third world. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. Doty, R. L. (2011). Bare life: border-crossing deaths and spaces of moral alibi. Environment and Planning-Part D, 29(4), 599. Egbert, H. (2006). Cross-border small-scale trading in South-Eastern Europe: do embeddedness and social capital explain enough? Inter- national Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 30(2), 346e361. Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the third world. New Jersey: Princeton University Press. Falkof, N. (2013). Heroes with a half life: teenage mutant ninja turtles and America's repression of radiophobia after Chernobyl. Journal of Pop- ular Culture, 46(5), 931e949. Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. New York: Pantheon Books. Gallin, D. (2001). Propositions on trade unions and informal employment in times of globalization. Antipode, 19(4), 531e549. Gaal, P., & McKee, M. (2004). Informal payment for health care and the theory of “INXIT”. International Journal of Health Planning & Man- agement, 19, 163e178. Geertz, C. (1963). The integrative revolution: primordial sentiments and civil politics in the new states. In C. Geertz (Ed.), Old societies and new states. New York: Free Press. Gentile, M., & Sj€oberg, O. (2013). Housing allocation under socialism: the Soviet case revisited. Post-Soviet Affairs, 29(2), 173e195. Gerxhani, K. (2004). The informal sector in developed and less developed countries: a literature survey. Public Choice, 120, 267e300. Gesler, W., & Kearns, R. (2002). Culture, place and health. London: Routledge. Gibson-Graham, J. K. (1996). The end of capitalism. Cambridge and Oxford: Blackwell. Gibson-Graham, J. K. (2006). A postcapitalist politics. U of Minnesota Press. Gibson-Graham, J. K. (2008). Diverse economies: performative practices for ‘other worlds’. Progress in Human Geography, 32(5), 1e20.Gilbert, E., & Ponder, C. (2013). Between tragedy and farce: 9/11 compen- sation and the value of life and death. Antipode, 46(2), 404e425. Goatcher, J., & Brunsden, V. (2011). Chernobyl and the sublime tourist. Tourist Studies, 11(2), 115e137. Grabher, G., & Stark, D. (1997). Restructuring networks in post-socialism legacies, linkages and localities. London: Clarendon Press. Gudman, D. J. (2001). Promoting diversity and social justice. London: Sage Publications. Gupta, A. (1995). Blurred boundaries: the discourse of corruption, the culture of politics, and the imagined state. American Ethnologist, 22(2), 375e402. Gurtoo, A., & Williams, C. C. (2009). Entrepreneurship and the informal sector: some lessons from India. The International Journal of Entre- preneurship and Innovation., 10(1), 55e62. Haller, D., & Shore, C. (Eds.). (2005). Corruption: Anthropological perspec- tives. London: Pluto Press. Hann, C., & Hart, K. (Eds.). (2009). Market and society: The great trans- formation today. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hapke, L. (2004). Sweatshop: The history of an American idea. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. Harboe, I. (2013). New Lithuania in old hands: Effects and outcomes of Europeanization in rural Lithuania. London: Anthem Press. Harboe, I. (2014). The story of Sarunas: an invisible citizen of Lithuania. In J. Morris, & A. Polese (Eds.), The informal postsocialist economy: Embedded practices and livelihood. London: Routledge. Hart, K. (1973). Informal income opportunities and urban employment in Ghana. The Journal of Modern African Studies, 11(1), 61e89. Hudson. (2005). The case for work/life balance: Closing the gap between policy and practice (p. 3). Available from http://au.hudson.com. Isaacs, R. (2011). Party formation in Kazakhstan: Between formal and informal politics. London: Routledge. Isaacs, R. (2013). Bringing the ‘Formal’ back in: Nur Otan, Informal net- works, and the countering of Elite instability in Kazakhstan. Europe- Asia Studies, 65(6), 1055e1079. Kalmbach, K. (2013). Radiation and borders: Chernobyl as a national and transnational site of memory. Global Environment, 11, 130e159. Kevlihan, R. (2012). Designing social inquiry in Central Asia e a case study of Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. Studies of Transition States and Societies, 5(1), 58e68. Kovacs, B. (2014). Nannies and informality in Romanian local childcare markets. In J. Morris, & A. Polese (Eds.), The informal postsocialist economy: Embedded practices and livelihood (pp. 67e84). London: Routledge. Koven, S., &Michel, S. (1990).Womanly duties:maternalist politics and the origins of welfare states in France, Germany, Great Britain, and the United States, 1880e1920. The American Historical Review, 95(4), 1076e1108. Kryshev, I. (1995). Radioactive contamination of aquatic ecosystems following the Chernobyl accident. Journal of Environmental Radioac- tivity, 27. Kuchinskaya, O. (2011). Articulating the signs of danger: lay experiences of post-Chernobyl radiation risks and effects. Public Understanding of Science, 20(3), 405e421. Kuchinskaya, O. (2012). Twice invisible: formal representations of radia- tion danger. Social Studies of Science, 43(1), 78e96. Kuchinskaya, O. (2014). The politics of invisibility: Public knowledge about radiation health effects after Chernobyl. MIT Press. Kuehnast, K., & Dudwick, N. (2004). Better a hundred friends than a hun- dred rubles? Social networks in transition e The Kyrgyz Republic. Washington DC: World Bank working paper. Kuznetsova, I., & Round, J. (2014). Communities and social care in Russia: the role of Muslim welfare provision in everyday life in Russia's Tatarstan region. International Social Work, 57(5), 486e496. Laurie, E. W. (2014). Who lives, who dies, who cares? Valuing life through the disability-adjusted life year measurement. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 1e13. Law, J., & Urry, J. (2004). Enacting the social. Economy and Society, 33, 390e410. Ledeneva, A. (1998). Russia's economy of favour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Ledeneva, A. (2006). How Russia really works: The informal practices that shaped post-soviet politics and business. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Ledeneva, A. (2004). Ambiguity of social networks in post-communist contexts. Working paper no. 48. UCL: School of Slovanicand East Eu- ropean Studies. Lefebvre, H. (2000). Everyday life in the modern world. London: Athlone. Lewis, A. (1959). The theory of economic growth. London: Allen and Unwin. T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e4544Leyshon, A., Lee, R., & Williams, C. (Eds.). (2003). Alternative economic spaces. London: Sage Publications. London, T., & Hart, T. (2004). Reinventing strategies for emerging mar- kets: beyond the transnational model. Journal of International Business Studies, 35, 350e370. Lonkila, A. (1997). Informal exchange relations in post-Soviet Russia: a comparative perspective. Sociological Research Online, 2(2). Lonkila, M. (1999). Social networks in post-Soviet Russia: Continuity and change in the everyday life of St Petersburg teachers. Helsinki: Kikimora Publications. Mæstad, O., & Mwisongo, A. (2011). Informal payments and the quality of healthcare: mechanisms revealed by Tanzanian health workers. Health Policy, 99(2). Maloney, W. (2004). Informality revisited. World Development, 32(7), 1159e1178. Mauss, M. (2002). The gift: The form and reason for exchange in archaic societies. London: Routledge. Minc, A. (1982). L’Apres-Crise a commence. Paris: Gallimard. Mbembe, J., & Meintjes, L. (2003). Necropolitics. Public Culture, 1(5), 11e40. Ministry of Emergencies of Ukraine. (2011). Atlas: Ukraine radioactive contamination commissioned by ministry of Ukraine of emergencies for Ukraine. Kyiv: Intelligence Systems GEO. Mollica, M. (2014). A post-war paradox of informality in South Lebanon: rebuilding houses or destroying legitimacy. Studies of Transition States and Societies, 6(1), 34e49. Morris, J. (2011). Socially embedded workers at the nexus of diverse work in Russia: an ethnography of blue-collar work informalization. Inter- national Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 3(11), 619e631. Morris, J. (2012). Secularization and religious experience: arguments in the historiography of modern British religion. Historical Journal, 55(1), 195e219. Morris, J., & Polese, A. (2014a). Informal health and education sector payments in Russian and Ukrainian cities: structuring welfare from below. European Urban and Regional Studies, 1e16. Morris, J., & Polese, A. (2015). Informal economies in post-socialist spaces: between illegality and extendedness. London: Palgrave. Morris, J., & Polese, A. (2014b). The informal postsocialist economy: Embedded practices and livelihood. London: Routledge. Nelson, M. K., & Smith, J. (1999).Working hard and making do: Surviving in small town America. Berkeley: University of California Press. Newman, D. (2006). The lines that continue to separate us: borders in our ‘borderless’ world. Progress in Human Geography, 30(2), 143e161. O Beachain, D., Sheridan, V., & Stan, S. (Eds.), (2012). Life in post- communist Eastern Europe after EU membership. London: Routledge. O'Brien, M., & Penna, S. (2007). Critical criminology: chaos or continuity, criminal justice review. 32(3), 246e255. Oughton, D., Bay-Larsen, I., & Voigt, G. (2009). Social, ethical, environ- mental and economic aspects of remediation. Radioactivity in the Environment, 14, 427e451. Pallot, J., & Nefedova, T. (2003). Geographical differentiation in household plot production in rural Russia. Eurasian Geography and Economics, 44(1), 40e64. Pardo, I. (1996). Managing existences in Naples: Morality, action and structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Parkhill, K., Butler, C., & Pidgeon, N. (2013). Landscapes of threat? exploring Discourses of stigma around large Energy developments. Landscape Research, 1e17. Parry, J. P., & Block, M. (1989). Introduction. In J. P. Parry, & M. Block (Eds.), Money and the morality of exchange. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pavlovskaya, M. (2004). Other transitions: multiple economies of Moscow households in the 1990s. Annals of the Association of American Geog- raphers, 94, 329e351. Perry, G. E., & Maloney, W. F. (2007). Overview: informality: exit and exclusion. In G. E. Perry, et al. (Eds.), Informality: Exit and exclusion (pp. 1e20). Washington. Petryna, A. (2002). Life exposed: Biological citizens after Chernobyl. Oxford: Princeton University Press. Petryna, A. (2004). Biological citizenship: the science and politics of Chernobyl-exposed populations. Osiris, 19(1), 250e265. Petryna, A. (2011). Chernobyl's survivors: paralyzed by fatalism or over- looked by science? Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 67(2), 30e37. Phillips, S. (2005). Half-lives and healthy bodies: discourses on “contaminated” food and healing in post-Chernobyl Ukraine. In J. Watson, & M. Caldwell (Eds.), The cultural politics of food and eating (pp. 286e298). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. Phillips, S. (2012). Chernobyl forever samatosphere: science medicine and anthropology Accessed via http://somatosphere.net/test/2011/04/ chernobyl-forever.html. on 29.07.14.Pieterse, N. (17 June 2010). Global rebalancing: Cultures of crisis. In Inaugural lecture. Maastricht University. Pinotti, P. (2012). The economic costs of organized crime: Evidence from Southern Italy. Working papers 054. Polanyi, K. (1944). The great transformation. Boston: Beacon Press. Polese, A. (2006a). Border crossing as a daily strategy of post Soviet survival: the Odessa-Chisinau Elektrichka. Eastern European Anthro- pology Review, 24(1), 28e37. Polese, A. (2006b). De jure oder de facto? Die Gesundheits- und Bil- dungssektoren in der Ukraine. Ukraine Analysen, 16, 2e4. Polese, A. (2008). If I receive it, it is a gift; if I demand it, then it is a bribe: on the local meaning of economic transactions in Post-Soviet Ukraine. Anthropology in Action, 15(3), 47e60. Polese, A. (2014a). Informal payments in Ukrainian hospitals: on the boundary between informal payments, gifts and bribes. Anthropo- logical Forum, 24(4), 381e395. Polese, A. (2014b). Drinking with vova: a ukrainian entrepreneur between informality and illegality. In J. Morris, & A. Polese (Eds.), The informal post-socialist economy: Embedded practices and livelihoods. London and New York: Routledge. Polese, A., Morris, J., Kovacs, B., & Harboe, I. (2014). ‘Welfare states’ and social policies in Eastern Europe and the former USSR: where infor- mality ﬁts in? Journal of Contemporary European Studies, 22(2),184e198. Polese, A., Morris, J., & Kovacs, B. (2015). The failure and future of the welfare state in post-socialism. Journal of Eurasian Studies. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.euras.2014.11.001. Rogers, A., & Sheaff, R. (2000). Formal and informal systems of primary healthcare in an integrated system: evidence from the United Kingdom. Healthcare Papers, 1(2), 47e58. discussion 104e107. Ross, C. (2004). Putin's federal reforms. In C. Ross (Ed.), Russian politics under Putin. New York: Manchester University Press. Round, J. (2006). Marginalized for a lifetime: the everyday experiences of gulag survivors in post-Soviet Magadan. Geograﬁska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography, 88(1), 15e34. Round, J., Williams, C. C., & Rodgers, P. (2010). The role of domestic food production in everyday life in post-Soviet Ukraine. Annals of the As- sociation of American Geographers, 100(5), 1197e1211. Round, J., & Williams, C. C (2012). Coping with the social costs of ‘transi- tion’: everyday life in post-Soviet Russia and Ukraine. In S. White, & C. Moore (Eds.), Post-Soviet politics. London: Sage Publications. Round, J., Williams, C. C., & Rodgers, P. (2008). Everyday tactics and spaces of power: the role of informal economies in post-Soviet Ukraine. Social & Cultural Geography, 9(2), 171e185. Routh, S. (2011). Building informal workers agenda: imagining ‘informal employment’ in conceptual resolution of ‘informality’. Global Labour Journal, 2(3), 208e227. Rush-Cooper, N. (2013). Exposures: Exploring selves and landscapes in the Chernobyl exclusion zone (PhD diss.). Durham University. Sassen, S. (1997). Territory and territoriality in the global economy. Manuscript. Sasunkievich, O. (2014). ‘Business as casual’: shuttle trade on the Belar- useLithuania border. In J. Morris, & A. Polese (Eds.), The informal post- socialist economy: Embedded practices and livelihood. London: Routledge. Scott, J. (1984). Weapons of the weak. Yale University Press. Smith, A., & Stenning, A. (2006). Beyond household economies: articu- lations and spaces of economic practice in postsocialism. Progress in Human Geography, 30(2), 190e213. Spinosa, C., Flores, F., & Dreyfus, H. L. (1997). Disclosing new worlds: Entrepreneurship, democratic action and the cultivation of solidarity. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. SSPTW Europe. (2012). Ukraine: old age, disability, and survivors (pp. 206e311). Social Security Programs throughout the World, Europe Accessed via http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2012- 2013/europe/ukraine.pdf. on 28.07.14. Stan, S. (2012). Neither commodities nor gifts: post-socialist informal exchanges in the Romanian healthcare system. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 18(1), 65e82. State Statistics Committee of Ukraine. (2004). Statistical yearbook of Ukraine 2003. Kiev: Ukraine. Stenning, A. (2005). Post-socialism and the changing geographies of the everyday in Poland. Transactions of the institute of British Geographers, 30(1), 113e127. Stepurko, T., Pavlovab, M., Grygaa, I., & Grootb, W. (December 2013). Informal payments for health care services e corruption or gratitude? A study on public attitudes, perceptions and opinions in six Central and Eastern European countries. Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 419e431. Sauvy, A. (1984). Le Travail noir et l’economie de demain. Paris: Calmann- Levy. T. Davies, A. Polese / Journal of Eurasian Studies 6 (2015) 34e45 45Stone, R. (2013). Dark tourism, heterotopias and post-apocalyptic places: the case of Chernobyl. In L. White, & E. Frew (Eds.), Dark tourism and place identity (pp. 79e93). Melbourne: Routledge. Tarrow, S. (2005). Transnational activism. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- sity Press. Tatar, M., Ozgen, H., Bayram, S., Belli, P., & Berman, P. (July 2007). Informal payments in the health sector: a case study from Turkey. Health Af- fairs, 26(4), 1029e1039. Tlaiss, H., & Kauser, S. (2011). The importance of in the career success of Middle Eastern managers. Journal of European Industrial Training, 35(5), 467e486. Van der Veen, M. (2013). After Fukushima: revisiting Chernobyl and the collapse of the Soviet Union. Rethinking Marxism: A Journal of Eco- nomics, Culture & Society, 25, 121e129. Van Schendel, W., & Abrahams, I. (2005). Introduction: the making of illicitness. In Illicit ﬂows and criminal things: States, borders and the other side of globalization. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Walker, C. (2010). Space, kinship networks and youth transition in pro- vincial Russia: negotiating urbanerural and inter-regional migration. Europe-Asia Studies, 62(4), 647e669. Williams, C. C. (2011). A critical evaluation of competing conceptualiza- tions of informal employment: some lessons from England. Review of Social Economy, 69(2), 211e237.Williams, C., & Martinez, A. (2014). Explaining cross-national variations in tax morality in the European Union: an exploratory analysis. Studies of Transition States and Societies, 6(1), 5e18. Williams, C., Nadin, S., Rodgers, P., Round, J., & Windebank, J. (2011). Mapping the social organization of labour in Moscow: beyond the formal/informal labour dualism. Sociological Research Online, 16(1). Williams, C. C, & Round, J. (2007). Re-thinking the nature of the informal economy: some lessons from Ukraine. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 31(2), 425e441. Williams, C. C., Round, J., & Rodgers, P. (2013). The role of informal econ- omies in the post-soviet world. London: Routledge. Williams, C. C. (2005). A commodiﬁed world? Mapping the limits of capi- talism. London: Zed. White, J. B. (1994). Money Makes Us Relatives: Women's Labor in Urban Turkey. Austin: Univ. Windebank, J., & Whitworth, A. (June 2014). Social welfare and the ethics of austerity in Europe: justice, ideology and equality. Journal of Contemporary European Studies, 22(2). Yang, M. (1994). Gifts, favors, and banquets: The art of social relationships in China. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University. Yankovska, G., & Hannam, K. (2013). Dark and toxic tourism in the Chernobyl exclusion zone. Current Issues in Tourism, 1e11. Zelizer, V. (2005). The purchase of intimacy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 