ABSTRACT: 
Ekström and Kroon Lundell, Ekström and Hutchby refer to hybridity in political news interviews as the mix of activities or the systematic shifting between speech exchange systems otherwise associated with non-interview settings. In their examination of journalists’ mixed interactional activities, both Hutchby and Ekström discuss how hybridity is explored as an interactional resource to question politicians and/or create an argumentative environment, breaching the neutralistic role of the broadcast news journalist. In this article, I examine instances of journalists’ breaching neutralism not through their hybrid questioning practices but through their listening practices in one-on-one interviews conducted during the 2012 Greek general election campaigns. In my data, journalists use hybrid listening practices to co-produce politicians’ arguments and to answer their own questions. Findings indicate that journalists’ hybrid listening practices provide political actors with new ways to mainstream and appropriate their manifestos to the public. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 in this paper i examine the hybrid listening practices of three journalists working in private TV channels and four Journalism 0(0) political party leaders from a wide spectrum of political parties , ranging from a right-wing populist party to a communist party . 
 my dataset comprises 13 one-on-one televised interviews from the double 2012 Greek general elections campaign . 
 the interviews were transcribed and analysed qualitatively from a conversation analytic perspective and are presented in the original language , alongside my translation in English . 
 my dataset comprises three journalists working in private TV channels and four Journalism 0(0) political party leaders from a wide 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords hybridity, election campaign interviews, listening practices, reactive tokens, neutralism Corresponding author Argyro Kantara, Centre for Language and Communication Research, School of English, Communication and Philosophy, Cardiff University, John Percival Building, Colum Drive, Cardiff, CF10 3EU, United Kingdom Email: KantaraA@cardiff.ac.uk Journalism 0(0) Introduction Previous research on hybridity in broadcast political news interviews in the Swedish context (Ekström and Kroon Lundell, 2009; Ekström, 2011) and in the Anglo-Saxon context (Hutchby, 2011a, 2011b), has defined the phenomenon as the systematic shifting between speech exchange systems otherwise associated with non-interview settings. In particular, Hutchby (2011a, 2011b) discusses hybridity in the context of the hybrid political news show, a broadcast news genre that combines features of the neutralism1 of broadcast interviews and argumentative/confrontational discourse. Within this hybrid news interview genre, the journalist occupies the role of the sociopolitical advocate and, by means of direct tribuneship, (see Hutchby, 2016, this issue), a highly opinionated argumentative discourse is created. In this way, theΝjournalistΝnotΝonlyΝinvokesΝ‘alignment-ladenΝsectionsΝofΝtheΝpopulation’Ν (Hutchby, 2016: xx) but also moves away from the neutralistic stance. In a similar vein, Ekström and Kroon Lundell (2009) and Ekström (2011), discuss hybridity as a mix of different (frames) of activities (Goffman, 1974; Levinson, 1992; Linell, 2011). In particular, Ekström (2011: 151-152) demonstrates how the mix of discursive roles and resources available to the interviewer in the hybrid format of talk in a political talk show interview enables the interviewer to use them partly as an adversarial resource. And here lies theΝsimilarityΝbutΝalsoΝtheΝdifferenceΝwithΝώutchby’sΝdiscussionΝofΝhybridityέΝ While for both Hutchby and Ekström the mix of discourse roles and different (frames of) activities is used in the hybrid news interview as an adversarial resource, the discursive positions occupied by the interviewer and the resulting genre in the respective datasets examinedΝisΝslightlyΝdifferentέΝInΝώutchby’sΝdataset,ΝtheΝuseΝofΝunmitigatedΝdirectΝandΝ personalised argumentative techniques by interviewers, frequent in mundane argument rather than in hard news interview (Hutchby, 2016), positions the journalist as a socio-political Kantara advocate and marks the interviews analysed as being on the verge between an interview and an argument. InΝEkström’sΝcaseΝstudy,ΝhybridΝframesΝofΝactivities (i.e. humorous and serious political frames) are invoked and negotiated in three environments: (1) in the asking and answering of questions, (2) in relation to host reactions in third position inside the activity of interviewing and (3) in sequential frame shifts. TheyΝresultΝinΝtheΝcreationΝofΝ‘a programme which can reasonably be heard by the audience as simultaneously lively, spontaneous, funny, nasty,ΝcriticalΝandΝadversarial’ (2011: 151). In other words, both participants, by means of mixing frames of activities of ordinary conversation and accountability political interviews, create an interview genre that is on the verge betweenΝaΝfriendlyΝconversationΝ(theΝ‘feel good genre’ΝofΝtalkΝshowsΝ(Clayman and Heritage, 2002) andΝtheΝ‘highΝprofile’Νaccountability interview (Montgomery, 2007). The way I understand and use hybridity in this paper follows broadly the way the aforementioned researchers have approached it, as the systematic shifting between speech exchange systems otherwise associated with non-interview settings. In other words, I understand hybridity as the mixture of activity types usually associated with accountability interviews and ‘feelΝgood’Νinterviews. What differentiates the way I examine hybridity though is that I do not examine it as an (adversarial) questioning practice by journalists but as a listening practice (as discussed by Norrick, 2010). Broadly, that is the use of interviewer feedback activities (e.g. use of reactive tokens) in third position during the interview activity (see the next section for a detailed discussion of listening practices). Evaluative responses and response tokens in third position are not typical of news interviews as they suggest that the journalist is the primary recipient of the answer and not a neutral interrogator asking questions on behalf of the audience (Heritage, 1985, Clayman, 2007). For this reason, absence of these ordinary conversation features is typical of news Journalism 0(0) interviews, where the preference structure, in contrast to ordinary conversation, is for the journalist to ask another question in the turn following an interviewee answer (Ekström, 2011: 1ζζ)έΝχsΝalreadyΝmentioned,ΝcontraryΝtoΝtheΝ‘hard’ΝnewsΝinterviewsΝpreferenceΝ structure, in the hybrid format of the radio talk show political interview examined by Ekström,ΝreactionsΝtoΝinterviewees’ΝanswersΝinΝthirdΝpositionΝareΝcommonΝandΝtheirΝfunctionΝ is manifold. They question what the interviewee is doing, playing with his/her identity, and highlight distinctions between the lay and the expert. In the sections to follow I will review previous research on listening practices in televised (non-accountability) interviews and present my data and analytic approach, before examining how interviewers signal listenership and the uptake of information, how they prompt and aid the politicians, how the latter respond and what the potential impact of these hybrid practices for the election campaign interview genre and the overhearing audience might be. Data and analytic approach My dataset comprises 13 one-on-one televised interviews from the double 2012 Greek general elections campaign. The interviews are between all political party leaders whose parties won seats in the 2012 parliament and leading journalists of three private TV channels (ANT1, MEGA, SKAI) and the (then) public broadcast corporation (NET). The dataset comprises both long interviews (lasting approximately 40') broadcast during special pre- election programmes and short interviews (lasting approximately 15') broadcast during eveningΝ(κΝo’clock) news bulletins. As Clayman and Romaniuk (2011: 15) claim, the election campaign interview, is a variant of the accountability interview (Montgomery, 2007). As they go on to claim, what differentiates election campaign from accountability interviews is that the former involve Kantara only political candidates rather than current office holders and that the focus of the questions is different from questions in other political contexts. Although when journalists interview political candidates they rely on questioning resources that they use in other interviewing contexts,ΝtheΝfocusΝofΝΝ‘campaign’ questions is on a range of substantive issues central to the pre-election arena: on knowledgeability, ideological positioning (political issue questions) and policy promises (promise-soliciting questions). A key theme emerging from their analysis is the dual import of question design in developing a public portrait of the candidate. For Clayman and Romaniuk (2011: 30), [Q]questions matter not only for the responses they elicit, but also for the varying stances that they themselves exhibit toward the candidate. Even though these questions remain for the most part formally ‘neutralistic’ in being designed as interrogativesΝthatΝostensiblyΝ‘request information’, they nonetheless convey informationΝaboutΝtheΝcandidateΝinΝanΝembeddedΝorΝimplicitΝwayέΝ[…]ΝχllΝofΝthisΝ combines to treat the candidate as, for example, more or less knowledgeable, more or less centrist, more or less extreme. Despite the fact that, as they point out, this portrayal is provisional as candidates during the interview can counter the identity proposed for them, the role of the questions asked, how they are being responded to and how the election campaign interview is conducted, are issues of paramount importance in terms of the knowledge created for the overhearing audience. The interviews have been transcribed (see Appendix for the transcription conventions) and analysed qualitatively from a conversation analytic perspective and are presented in the original language, alongside my translation in English. The extracts presented in the subsequent sections involve three journalists working in private TV channels and four Journalism 0(0) political party leaders from a wide spectrum of political parties, ranging from a right-wing populist party to a communist party. Previous research on listening practices in televised (non-accountability) interviews Norrick (2010) has described the listening practices of interviewers in US American television celebrity interviews, examining the listener activities mainly of Oprah Winfrey, Larry King and one example from Jay Leno. In his investigation of interviewer listening activities in the aforementioned shows he explored how interviewers signal listenership, emotional involvement, and the uptake of information, how they prompt, aid and act as a foil to interviewees and how these practices may affect the audience and the trajectory of the interview in progress (2010: 525). In the television celebrity interviews examined, Norrick claims the interviewer listening practicesΝmoveΝfromΝactivitiesΝthatΝmatchΝlisteners’ΝpracticesΝinΝeverydayΝconversationΝtoΝ strategies directed at guiding or entertaining the audience. In the dataset examined, interviewers go as far as to answer their own questions, engage in co-narration, and construct direct speech on behalf of their interviewees. Although investigating different news interview formats, Norrick reaches similar conclusions to Ekström’s in relation to whom the interviewer responses address: Ekström (2011: 153) claimsΝthatΝinterviewerΝreactionsΝ‘draw audience attention to specific aspects of interviewer activities and identities’, while Norrick (2010: ηβη)ΝclaimsΝthatΝ‘interviewer responses may be directed primarily at the audience […] and they can be more or less obtrusive or manipulative’. Furthermore, although not using the term hybrid talk, Norrick’sΝ conclusions are also similar to Ekström’s in relation to the mix of participant roles, identities and activities in his dataset, the televised celebrity interviews. Apparently, the formal roles of Kantara interviewer versus interviewee tend to resemble the ones in every day conversation between equals and the talk show hosts challenge their interviewees in different ways to make the interaction more vivid (Norrick, 2010:541). A significant point of difference though between the two studies in relation to the function of interviewer reactions in third position, is that inΝσorrick’sΝstudy,ΝforΝentertainmentΝ purposes as he claims, interviewers interrupted the interviewee to propose a word or phrase, imposed their own interpretations of the interviewee narrative and/or answered their own questions. Response tokens, evaluative responses, reactive tokens As already discussed, Ekström (2011: 144) has indicated that in the integrated hybrid talk evident in the radio political talk show examined in his study, reactions to interviewee answers in third position were common. These reactions included evaluative responses and response tokens. Response tokens or continuers (Schegloff, 1982; Gardner, 1998, 2001 McCarthy, 2003) are common in everyday interaction and include neutral continuers like uh- huh, mhm and most occurrences of yeah. They indicate listener recipiency, andΝ‘exhibit on the part of the producer an understanding that an extended turn of talk is underway by another’ (Schegloff, 1982:81). On the other hand, Norrick (2010), citing Goodwin (1986) and Heritage (1984: 299) notes that ‘discourse markers like right, okay, some instances of yeah and interjections like wow, oh, really, signal either emotional involvement or register receipt of information indicating that their producer has undergone some kind of a change in his or her locally current state of knowledge, information, orientation or awareness’ (Heritage, 1984:299). In that sense, the latter kind of listener responses may be regarded as evaluative responses indicating not only information uptake but personal involvement as well. As Journalism 0(0) Norrick indicates, in the context of televised interviews, they are directed primarily at the interviewee. Young and Lee (2004: 380-381) on the other hand, carrying out conversation analytic work in cross-cultural every day interaction, argue that all the above listener activities, are reactive tokens as they do not only indicate active listenership but they are conversational resources by which a listener co-constructsΝaΝspeaker’sΝturnΝatΝtalkέΝTheyΝargueΝthatΝinΝaΝ speech exchange between two or more persons, talk in interaction is constructed by both participants, so the resulting talk in progress is a collaborative effort and not the product of a single speaker. In their classification, reactive tokens include backchannels or continuers (Yngve, 1970; Schegloff, 1982) (mm hm), acknowledgements (yeah), newsmakers (oh), change of activity tokens (alright), assessments (wow), (Maynard 1990; Gardner 1997, 2001) brief questions or repair, collaborative completions (Gardener 1997, 2001) and repetitions (Clancy, et al., 1996). The last three listener activities resemble the rest of the types of listener responses identified by Norrick (2010: 529-537) in his dataset of celebrity talk show interviews. These include helping the interviewee respond (e.g. by providing a word or phrase), co-producing talk, providing background information, providing clarifications, proffering formulations of what their interviewees are getting at or proposing interpretations. As Norrick claims, apart from the first listener activity that addresses the interviewee, these activities address the audience. Finally, Norrick (2010: 537-540) has identified two further interviewer listener practices that do not match any of the reactive tokens identified in the relevant literature but can be argued to be variations of the collaborative production type. These are: constructing Kantara dialogue in interviews (interviewers answer their own questions) and providing a team performance. InΝthisΝpaperΝIΝwillΝuseΝYoungΝandΝδee’sΝtermΝreactive tokens as I agree with their view that talk in interaction is co-produced by both participants. This is especially the case in broadcast talk where issues of professional conduct and getting information on behalf of the overhearing audience are of paramount importance, thus the use and type of reactive tokens used, determine to a certain extent the kind of broadcast talk produced. In the following sections I will focus on two types of reactive tokens journalists in my dataset used to ‘help’ political party leaders respond: repetitions and collaborative completions (including journalists answering their own questions). These two types were not used in isolation, but rather in combination, together with other types of reactive tokens. Presentation of the data Journalist answers his own question In the next two extracts two different journalists ‘help’ two different political party leaders respond by answering their own questions. They do so by latching before the politician finishes his evasive answer and provide the answer to the question they, themselves, asked. In both cases the politician accepts both the interactional move and its content and builds his next turn by elaborating on the answer given by the journalist. Extract 1 This extract is taken from a long face to face interview (40' 12") between Antonis Samaras, the then leader of New Democracy (a center-right party) and Yiannis Pretenteris a leading journalist of a private TV channel (Mega TV). The interview was broadcast after the κΝo’clockΝeveningΝnewsΝonΝχprilΝλΝβί1βΝbeforeΝtheΝfirstΝroundΝofΝelectionsΝandΝwasΝoneΝofΝtheΝ most widely viewed interviews of the 2012 double pre-election period. Six turns before the Journalism 0(0) excerpt, the journalist asked the politician whether Troika had accepted the measures he was talking about. The politician evaded answering by attacking the government. Video: 18:20-18:30 Audio: 21:51-21:41 1 ǻβηέμ [θαδ,ΝαζζΪ]Νįİ-įİθΝηκυΝİέπαĲİΝσηπμΝ αθΝĲαΝδıκįτθαηαΝĲαΝαπκįΫξİĲαδ βΝ ↓ĲλσδεαέΝǹυĲάΝİέθαδΝβΝİλυĲβıβΝ ηκυέΝ[AN İıİέμ] Jour.: [yes, but] you have no-not told me thoughΝwhetherΝ↓troikaΝaccepts the equal fiscal measures. This is my question. [IF you] 2 ΠκζμΝ [λπĲάıĲİ]ΝĲβθΝ↑ĲλσδεαΝεέΝ ΠλİĲİ↓θĲΫλβ,οΝ Pol.: [ask]Ν↑troikaΝεrΝPrete↓nteris,οΝ 3 ǻβημΝ οİıİέμΝ↑įİθΝĲβθΝλπ↑ĲάıαĲİςΝ↑ΠπμΝ γαΝĲκΝ↑εΪθİĲİΝ(αυĲσ)ςο Jour: οyouΝhaveΝ↑notΝ↑askedΝthemςΝ ↑ώowΝareΝyouΝgoingΝtoΝ↑doΝ(this)ςοΝ 4 ΠκζμΝ οηαΝıαμΝζΫπ,ΝσĲδΝ↓İΰυΝıαμΝζΫπ,ΝεαδΝ ıαμΝαπαθĲΪπ σĲδο Pol: =but I am saying,ΝthatΝ↓IΝam telling you, and I am answering that= 5 ǻβη: =ĲαΝ↓įΫξİĲαδ.= Jour: οtheyΝ↓acceptΝthemέο 6 ΠκζμΝ =πλΫπİδΝθαΝĲαΝαπκįİ↑ξĲİέ,ο Pol: =they have to accept them,= 7 ǻβημΝ ο↓ηΪζδıĲαο Jour: ο↓right= InΝturnΝ1ΝtheΝjournalistΝ‘sanctionsΝintervieweeΝresistance’ΝinΝRomaniuk’sΝ(βί1γ)Νterms,ΝbyΝ means of explicitly stating what the politician has not doneΝinΝhisΝresponseμΝ‘have not told me though’. This is followed by an almost verbatim repetitionΝofΝtheΝinitialΝquestionΝ‘whether Troika accepts the equal fiscal measures’ and by explicitly referencing the initial question ‘this is my question’, a technique which further highlights interviewee resistance. The politician counterchallenges in turn 2 by reflecting back the question to the interviewer, an equivocation technique according to Bull (2003). The journalist in turn 3 strikes back, by reflecting the question back to the politician ‘youΝhaveΝnotΝaskedΝthemς’ adding another adversarial question ‘howΝareΝyouΝgoingΝtoΝdoΝ thisς’ that invites the politician to account for his future actions. In turn 4 the politician responds by implying that he has alreadyΝansweredΝtheΝquestionsΝ‘but I am saying, that I am telling you, and I am answering that’, using the disjunctive ‘ȝα-but’ and stressing the relevant verbs, not repeating his answer though. This is an equivocation technique according to Bull (2003), or a covert resistance technique according to Clayman and Heritage (2002). Kantara In turn 5, the journalist latches and provides the expected answer to the question himselfΝ‘they accept them (you are telling me)’. By co-constructingΝtheΝpolitician’sΝanswerΝ the journalist breaches neutralism,ΝtakesΝupΝtheΝroleΝofΝtheΝ‘author’ΝandΝtheΝ‘principal’, in ύoffman’sΝ(1λκ1)Νterms,ΝofΝtheΝproposition expressed in the answer to the accountability question and aids the politician in the development of his argument. In turn 6 the politician repeatsΝtheΝjournalist’sΝwordsΝ‘theyΝ(…)ΝacceptΝthem’ adding and stressing ‘πȡȑπİȚ – have to’, which seems to be an effort to have some kind of control over what is being said. The politician in his turn though, does not change the propositional content of the answer offered by the journalist in the previous turn. By repeating almost verbatimΝtheΝjournalists’Νwords,ΝtheΝpoliticianΝvalidatesΝbothΝtheΝinteractionalΝmoveΝandΝitsΝ content. What is equally interesting in this extract is that collaborative completion comes after aΝseriesΝofΝ‘adversarial challenges’ andΝ‘evasiveΝresponses’ΝwithΝbothΝinterlocutorsΝshiftingΝ between accountability interview and ordinary conversation frames within 10 seconds. The exchangeΝfinishesΝoffΝwithΝtheΝjournalistΝusingΝ‘ȝȐȜȚıĲα-right’ΝinΝturnΝι,ΝaΝdiscourseΝmarkerΝ indicating acknowledgement and acceptance of the previous answer. Following Norrick (2010), I would argue that, in this case, the collaborative completion, in the form of the journalist answering his own question after the politician evaded answering it by indicating that he has already done so, addresses both the interviewee and the overhearing audience. In this case though, as the context is different from the one in σorrick’sΝstudy and the purpose of the election campaign interview is different from that of the celebrityΝinterview,ΝtheΝfunctionΝofΝtheΝcollaborativeΝcompletionΝisΝdifferentέΝInΝσorrick’sΝ dataset it was to entertain and make the interview more vivid, while in this case it is to help the politician answer a difficult question, thus maintaining the face he lost by not answering and to keep the interview going. Journalism 0(0) Extract 2 This extract is taken from the first two minutes of a quite long (42' 30") face to face interview between Alexis Tsipras, leader of Syriza (a left-wing party) and the host of an early morning weekend news and current affairs programme that was broadcast every weekend on a private TV channel (SKAI). The journalist (George Autias) is a well-known presenter of that type of TV programmes. The interview was broadcast on 20/5/2012 after the first round of elections. At the beginning of the interview the journalist had asked the politician what the first three measures of his government would be if he won the elections (a policy promising question according to Clayman and Romaniuk, 2011). The politician started answering by detailing the measures his government would take to help the most vulnerable by utilizing unused financial resources. The journalist, eight turns before the excerpt, asked the politician another promise soliciting question, whether this money would come from the National Strategic Reference Framework2 (NSRF), a commitment/clarification the politician did not make in his subsequent turns. Video: 02:06-02:12 Audio: 40:24-40:18 1 ǻβηέμ οηİΝ↑ĲδΝζİ↓φĲΪΝεέΝπλσİįλİςο Jour.: =↑where would the ↓money come from Mr President? 2 Πκζέμ =◦ηαΝıαμΝİδπ- ıαμΝζΫπ◦,= Pol.: =◦but I tol-I am telling you,◦= 3 ǻβηέμ οηİΝαυĲΪΝπκυΝİέπαĲİ,Ν[γαΝ įδİεįδ↓εάıİĲİΝαπσΝĲβθΝǼυ↓λυπβΝĲαΝ ζİ↓φĲΪ,Ν↑θαδ,] Jour.: =from where you said, [the ↓money you will ↓claim from ↓Europe, ↑yes,] 4 Πκζέμ [ĲαΝξλάηαĲαΝαυĲΪ,ΝĲαΝξλάηαĲα] αυĲΪΝ ĲκυΝǼ΢Πǹ,= Pol.: [that money, the money] from the NSRF,= 5 ǻβηέμ =↑θαδ,ο Jour.: =↑yes,= In turn 1, the journalist latches and asks a pursuit (Romaniuk, βί1γ),Ν‘where would the money come from Mr President?’ a slightly modified version of the question he had asked eight turns before. Although the initial question, not included, ‘İθθκİέĲİ Ǽ΢Πǹ – you mean Kantara NSRF’ was a narrow yes/no question, the repetitionΝisΝaΝratherΝbroadΝ‘wh’-question, allowing the politician greater space to maneuver. The politician though seems once again reluctant to commit himself to a specific answer and responds by using the same evasion/covert resistance technique as the politician in extract 1. In particular he indicates that he has already answered the question, in lower voice though in contrast to the politician in extract 1, using the disjunctive ‘ȝα-but’ and the relevant verbs ‘ıαȢ İȚπ- ıαȢ Ȝȑω- I to-I am telling you’ but not repeating his answer. In a similar fashion as the journalist in the previous extract, the journalist in turn 3 latches and provides the answerΝtoΝtheΝquestionΝhimselfΝ‘the money you will claim from Europe’ and a reactive token ‘ȞαȚ-yes’ indicating listener recipiency acknowledgement. What differentiatesΝthoughΝthisΝjournalist’sΝcollaborativeΝcompletionΝfromΝtheΝoneΝexhibitedΝbyΝtheΝ journalist in the previous example is the use of the phrase ‘ȝİ αυĲȐ που İȓπαĲİ-from where you said’ before providing the answer, the use of which (and the stress of the verb ‘İȓπαĲİ- said’ explicitly indicates that the politician has already answered the question. By doing so, the journalist renders his own challenging question/pursuit as not legitimate and legitimises theΝpolitician’sΝnon-answer. In this way, heΝbothΝsavesΝtheΝpolitician’sΝfaceΝandΝkeepsΝtheΝ interview goingΝbyΝhavingΝ‘elicited’Νnewsέ The politician in turn 4, after the overlapping talk,ΝanswersΝtheΝquestionΝaskedΝ‘that money, the money from NSRF’ by using and stressing the cue given by the journalist in the initial question eight turnsΝbeforeΝ‘İȞȞοİȓĲİ ΕΣΠΑ – you mean NSRF’. By not objecting to the propositional contentΝofΝtheΝjournalist’sΝanswerΝ‘the money you will claim from Europe’ and byΝusingΝtheΝcueΝprovidedΝbefore,ΝtheΝpoliticianΝvalidatesΝbothΝtheΝcollaborativeΝ‘completion’Ν of his turn/argument and the content of the interactional move. Journalist co-constructs the politician’s argument by proposing a word or a phrase Journalism 0(0) In the next four extracts, three different journalists help four different political party leaders coming from different political parties to construct their arguments. They do so by proposing a word or a phrase on different points during the interview. These range from providing the word or phrase the politician was looking for after the latter paused to latching and providing themselves a word or phrase. Extract 3 - The extract is taken from a short interview (13') via link between the then general secretary of the Communist Party of Greece (KKE) Aleka Papariga, and a leading journalist (Maria Houkli) of a private TV channel (ANT1). The interview was broadcast after the first round of elections during the 8 o’clockΝeveningΝnewsΝon June 11th 2012. Video: 08:24-08:35 Audio: 04:34-04:25 1 Πκζέμ (…)Ν>ıαμΝπαλαεαζυ<,ΝθαΝεΪθπ εαδΝηδαΝįδσλγπıβΝπκυΝΰέθİĲαδΝıİΝ σζα ĲαμμμΝįİζĲέα,ο Pol.: (…)Ν>please<, may I make a correction, something that is happening in a:::ll news bulletins,= 2 ǻβηέμ οηη,ο Jour: =mm,= 3 ΠκζέμΝ οİηİέμΝįİθΝ↑ζΫηİΝθαΝίΰİδΝβΝ ǼζζΪįαΝαπσΝĲβΝǼυλπ↓αυθβέΝ(0.1) [ΝβΝİικį-] Pol: =we do not ↑say Greece to exit the ↓eurozone. (0.1) [exi-] 4 ǻβημ [θαΝφτΰİδΝαπσΝĲβθΝǼυλππαρεά]Ν ΈθπıβΝıυθκζδεΪ ↑ζΫĲİέοΝ Jour: [to withdraw from the European] Union you are ↑saying.= 5 ΠκζέμΝ οεκδ↓ĲΪιĲİέΝǹελδίυμ. (…) Pol: =↓look. ExactlyέΝ(…) InΝturnΝ1ΝtheΝpoliticianΝasksΝforΝtheΝjournalist’sΝpermissionΝtoΝclarifyΝaΝgeneralΝpolicyΝissueΝ point she feels is being misrepresented in all news bulletins. After being granted permission by the journalist, the politician in turn 3 explains where her party stands on the relations with the EU. In turn 4, the journalist overlaps and completesΝtheΝpolitician’sΝsentenceΝ‘to withdraw from the European Union’. InΝtheΝcontextΝofΝordinaryΝconversationΝtheΝjournalist’sΝinteractional move of overlapping would be quite legitimate, as it came after a one second pause on the part of the politician, i.e. in a Transition Relevance Place (TRP) for Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson (1978). In the Kantara contextΝofΝtheΝ‘hard’Νone-on-one election campaign interviews though, as already discussed, itΝisΝ‘unacceptable’, as journalists should not indicate active listenership3. WhatΝisΝmore,ΝtheΝjournalist,ΝbyΝoverlappingΝandΝfinishingΝoffΝtheΝpolitician’sΝturn,Ν occupies the role of the author of theΝpropositionΝexpressed,ΝwhileΝherΝroleΝisΝ‘just’Νthat of the animatorΝ(inΝύoffman’sΝ1λκ1Νterms)έΝψyΝco-constructingΝtheΝpolitician’sΝtalkΝtheΝjournalistΝ not only breaches neutralism but also aids the politician in the development of her argumentation. In this case also, the reactive token addresses both the politician and the audienceΝasΝtheΝjournalist’sΝturnΝbothΝhelpsΝtheΝpoliticianΝandΝinformsΝtheΝpublicΝofΝherΝparty’sΝ manifesto. The politician in turn 5, by using and stressing ‘ΑțȡȚȕȫȢ –exactly’, confirms the journalist’sΝcontinuationΝasΝvalidΝinΝtermsΝofΝinformationalΝcontentέΝψyΝdoingΝsoΝsheΝindicatesΝ that she does not object either to the breach of neutralism or the content of the overlapping speech,ΝlegitimisingΝthusΝtheΝjournalist’sΝinteractional move/listener activity as appropriate for the speech event. In the next extract a similar active listener activity is used by another journalist. Extract 4 – This extract is taken from a quite long interview (27' 28") via link between the leader of Independent Greeks (a right-wing, anti-austerity, nationalist party) Panos Kammenos, and George Autias, the host of an early morning weekend news and current affairs programme broadcast every weekend in a private TV channel (SKAI). The interview was broadcast after the first round of elections on June 10th 2012. Video: 10:51-11:13 Audio: 17:36-17:13 1 Πκζέμ [ησθκ]ΝκΝΚπθıĲαθĲέθκμΝ Καλαηαθζάμ,ΝΫφυΰİ απσΝĲκΝΝǹΣΟ, >απσΝĲκΝıĲλαĲδπĲδεσΝıεΫζκμ<, ↑ΰδαĲέΝΫφυΰİ? ǻδσĲδΝκυıδαıĲδεΪΝ παλİίέαααθ. (.)Νπαλαίέαααθ,ΝκδμμμμμμΝο Pol.: [only] Constantinos Karamanlis, left NATO, >from the military part<, ↑why did he leave? Because they basically breached. (.) breached the:::::= 2 ǻβηέμ οĲκυμΝ[σλκυμΝĲβμΝİπκξάμ] Jour.: =the [terms of the period] 3 Πκζέμ [ΝαĲκρεκέΝĲσĲİ,]ΝĲβΝıυηφπθέα,ΝĲκυμΝ Pol.: [NATO officials then,] the Journalism 0(0) σλκυμ εαδ,Νπ- İέξαηİΝĲβθΝİ,ο agreement, the terms and p- we had the, e,= 4 ǻβηέμ οĲλαΰπįέαΝ[ĲβμΝΚτπλκυέ] Jour.: =tragedy [in Cyprus.] 5 Πκζέμ [ĲβθΝİδıίκζά]ΝεαδΝĲβθΝεαĲκξάΝıĲβθΝ ΚτπλκέΝΚαδΝĲκΝπζβλυıαηİ αυĲσέΝ Ǻİίαέπμ εαδΝσξδΝαπσΝĲκΝΝǹΣΟέΝΜİμ ıĲκΝΝǹΣΟέΝ΢υθİλΰαıέαΝηİΝĲβΝ Ρπıέα, θαδέΝ΢υθİλΰαıέα, (.) ηİ Ĳκ Ιıλαάζ, θαδ, Pol: [the invasion] and occupation in Cyprus. And we paid dearly for this. Of course not to leave NATO. Inside NATO. Cooperation with Russia, yes. Cooperation, (.) with Israel, yes, In turns 2 and 4, the journalist latches and provides the phrases the politician is looking for. χsΝwasΝtheΝcaseΝinΝtheΝpreviousΝextract,ΝtheΝjournalist’sΝhelpήinteractionalΝmoveΝisΝ‘legitimate’Ν in the context of ordinary conversation (as in both cases it came at a TRP), but not in institutional interaction. In particular, in turn 2 the journalist latches and helps the politician who is evidently trying to find the right phrase in the previous turn. This is indicated by the politician’sΝhesitations,ΝmarkedΝbyΝhisΝfallingΝtoneΝafterΝtheΝverbΝ‘παȡİȕȓαȗαȞ-breached’, followed by a one minute pause, indicated in the transcript by the use of a full stop and a full stop within brackets respectively. Furthermore, the politician repeats the same verb ‘παȡİȕȓαȗαȞ-breached’ and stretches the article ‘οȚ-the’ both signs of him hesitating, not sure how to proceed. In turn 4 once again the journalist latches and provides the phrase ‘ĲȡαȖωįȓα ĲȘȢ ΚȪπȡου- tragedy in Cyprus’ the politician was looking for in the previous turn. In this case, theΝpolitician’sΝhesitationΝinΝturnΝγΝisΝevidentΝbyΝhis sharply cutting his talk in progress, indicated in the transcript by a dash, probably changing his mind about his choice of words, and also the use of the hesitation marker ‘İ-e’ at the end of the turn. All these features in the politician’sΝspeechΝindicate that he is looking for the right phrase, which is provided by the journalistέΝInΝthisΝcaseΝIΝwouldΝargueΝthatΝtheΝjournalist’sΝlatchingΝvergesΝbetweenΝhelpΝandΝ interpretation. Norrick (2010: 535) points out that ‘interviewers do not just suggest words (…)ΝtoΝtheirΝinterviewers,ΝtheyΝsometimes proffer formulations of what their interviewees are getting at.’ This seems to be the case here as the word ‘ĲȡαȖωįȓα-tragedy’, suggested by the Kantara journalist to describe what happened in Cyprus in July 1974, is a word with very strong connotations, a word one would assume the leader of a nationalist party would use to describe what had happened. As in all the examples discussed so far, the politician in turns 3 and 5 uses the word/phrase provided by the journalist as a cue in his own turn, either verbatim and stressing them (‘ȩȡουȢ-terms’ in turn 3) or by slightly changing/modifying them (the general umbrella word, in this context, ‘ĲȡαȖωįȓα- tragedy’ provided by the journalist in turn 4 is changed to the more specific words ‘İȚıȕοȜȒ-invasion’ and ‘țαĲοχȒ-occupation’ in turn 5). In this case also, the reactive tokens used, address both the politician and the audience as the journalist’s turns help the politician develop his argument and at the same time keep the interview going. The next extract taken from the same interview as Extract 1 exhibits a listener activity once again on the verge between the journalist helping the politician and interpreting what he is getting at. Extract 5 – The politician is Antonis Samaras, the then leader of New Democracy (a conservative, liberal party) and the interviewer is Yiannis Pretenteris. Video: 08:41-09:24 Audio: 31:30-30:48 1. ǻβηέμ οΝİεζİξĲάεαĲİ αλξβΰσμΝĲβμΝΝΫαμΝ ǻβηκελαĲέαμΝ>πλκΝįυσηδıβΝİĲυθΝ αθΝįİθΝαπαĲυηαδ<,ΝεαδΝĲβ-ıĲκΝ įδΪıĲβηαΝĲπθΝįυσηδıβΝİĲυθ,Ν ιİπάįβıαθ, įυκΝ↑εσηηαĲαΝαπσΝ ĲκυμΝεσζπκυμΝΝĲβμΝΝΫαμΝ ǻβηκελα↑Ĳέαμ,Ν>σππμΝĲκΝ παλαįİξĲάεαĲİΝηΫξλδΝĲυλα<. ↑ΔεȞ ȑχεĲε ȝȚα ευ↑șȪȞȘ γȚα αυĲȩ? Jour.: = you were elected New Democracy president >two and a half years ago, if I am not mistaken<, and in-in this period, two political ↑parties were formed from within New De↑mocracy, >as you yourself have admitted<. ↑Don’t you have any respon↑sibility for this? 2. Πκζέμ (0.1)ΚκδĲΪιĲİΝεέΝΠλİĲİθĲΫλβ,Ν πİλΪıαηİ ĲδμΝπδκΝįτıεκζİμΝıĲδΰηΫμΝ >πκυΝηπκλκτıİΝθαΝπİλΪıİδΝκΝ Ĳσπκμ<έΝΟδΝįτıεκζİμ ıĲδΰηΫμΝ απαδĲκτθİ, πκζζΫμ φκλΫμ, ıĲβΝįέεβΝ ĲκυΝįİυĲİλκζΫπĲκυ, θαΝηπκλİέ εαθİέμΝθαΝπαέλθİδΝαπκφΪıİδμΝ ελέıδηİμ, >ΰδαΝαυĲσΝηδζΪπΝεαδΝΰδαΝ ĲκΝατλδκΝαθΝİέθαδΝαθαΰεαέκ<έΝ΢ĲδμΝ Pol.: (0.1)Look Mr Pretenteris, we went through the most difficult times >we could ever go through<. In difficult times like these, one has to really quickly make crucial decisions, >that is whyΝI’m also talking about the future if need arises<. ↑SomeΝcanΝ deal with the crucial decisions Journalism 0(0) ελέıδηİμ απκφΪıİδμΝπκυΝπάλαηİ, İέθαδΝ↑ΪζζκδΝπκυΝĲδμΝαθĲΫξκυθΝ ↓Ϊζζκδ πκυΝįİθΝĲδμΝαθĲΫξκυθέΝΌĲαθΝ πάλαηİΝĲβθΝαπσφαıβΝΰδαΝĲκΝπλυĲκ ηθβησθδκΝ↑άηκυθα ↓ησ↓θκμΝ↓ηκυέΝ (.) ΝαΝĲκΝ↓εα↓Ĳα↓οβφέıπέΝΚαδΝįİθΝ ıαμΝελτίπΝσĲδΝκΝαıĲδεσμΝξυλκμ,ΝκΝ εσıηκμ, κΝİυλτĲαĲκμ ĲβμΝ παλΪĲαιβμΝ(έ)Ν[αȞ șȑȜεĲε, țαȚ Ș ȝεıαȓα ĲȐȟȘ,] taken, ↓some cannot. When we decided to vote against the first memorandum ↓I ↓was ↓alone. (.) in my decision to ↓vote ↓against itέΝχndΝit’sΝaΝcommonΝsecretΝthatΝ the bourgeois, the major pool of our voters (.) [and even middle class people,] 3. ΔȘȝέμ [↓γțρȓȞȚαȗε, ↓γțρȓȞȚαȗε țαȚ πȠȜȪ]= Jour.: [were ↓nagging, were ↓nagging a lot]= 4. ΠȠȜέμ =ȒĲαȞε εțεȓȞȠȚ ȠȚ ȠπȠȓȠȚ γțρȓȞȚαȗαȞ.= Pol.: =were the ones nagging.= 5. ǻβηέμ οθαδ,Νθαδο Jour.: =yes, yes= The extract starts with the journalist in turn 1 asking an accountability question (in bold) involving a proposition that portrays the politician in a negative light by means of using a negative interrogative (Greatbatch, 1998; Clayman and Heritage, 2002; Heritage and Clayman, 2010; Heritage, 2002). TheΝnegativeΝinterrogativeΝ‘ϊon’tΝyouΝhaveΝanyΝ responsibility for this?’ presupposes that the politician has some responsibility for the formation of two parties from within New Democracy after he expelled their members for either voting in favour of the first Memorandum or against the second. It invites the politician to either agree or disagree with the fact that he has some responsibility for this, a challenging situation, as he has to defend his decisions without taking on any responsibility that would portray him as making mistakes and/or being inconsistent. TheΝpolitician’sΝresponseΝinΝturnΝβ,Νreflects this tricky interactional task of him trying to shift the topic from his responsibility for the formation of two other parties from within his own party to his responsibility as a leader in times of crisis. This involves him making a semantic shift in the meaning of the word ‘İυșȪȞȘ-responsibility’, a covert resistance technique according to Clayman and Heritage (2002). And it is while the politician builds his argument in relation to what he did during the very difficult period the country was going through,ΝdiscussingΝhisΝsupporters’Νreactions,ΝafterΝaΝmicropauseΝonΝhisΝpart,ΝthatΝtheΝ Kantara journalist overlaps, in which he offers a formulation ‘ȖțȡȓȞȚαȗİ, ȖțȡȓȞȚαȗİ țαȚ ποȜȪ- were nagging, were nagging a lot’ that supposedly reflected the situation back then (both are indicated in bold). This case is different from the ones discussed so far, as the politician was not evidentlyΝlookingΝforΝaΝwordΝorΝaΝphrase,ΝsoΝtheΝjournalist’sΝoverlapΝdidΝnotΝcomeΝatΝaΝTRPέΝItΝ is important to note here, that, although the journalist’sΝoverlapΝcameΝafterΝaΝmicropause,ΝthisΝ was very brief, less than one-tenth of a second, thus not a legitimate TRP. For this reason I argue that, in this case, what the journalist is doing is to co-narrateΝtheΝpolitician’sΝanswerΝ with him. In ordinary conversation terms, it would be as if they co-narrated a story, an interview activity frequently found in (tabloid) talk shows (Thornborrow, 2001). In that sense,ΝthisΝisΝreallyΝaΝjointΝproductionΝofΝtheΝpolitician’sΝargument,ΝaΝlistenerΝactivityΝ addressed both to the politician and the audience. What is equally important to note here is that, in a similar way as in Extracts 1 and β,ΝtheΝjournalist’sΝco-operative overlap during the politician’sΝresponseΝseemsΝtoΝcancelΝhisΝownΝchallengingΝmoveΝinΝtheΝfirst turn. TheΝpolitician’sΝreactionΝinΝtheΝnextΝturn,ΝinΝbold,ΝwhereΝheΝtakesΝupΝtheΝphraseΝofferedΝ and repeats it almost verbatim ‘ȒĲαȞİ İțİȓȞοȚ οȚ οποȓοȚ ȖțȡȓȞȚαȗαȞ- were the ones nagging’ stressing also the verb, indicates acceptance of both the content and the interactional move made by the journalist. The next extract taken from the same interview as Extract 2 exhibits a listener activity that is on the verge of the journalist guessing what the politician is getting at and imposing his interpretation of what he is getting at. Extract 6 – The politician is Alexis Tsipras, leader of Syriza (a left-wing party) and the journalist is George Autias. Video: 30:34-30:46 Audio: 12:08-11:46 1 Πκζμ (…)Νİηİέμ įİθΝ↑ζΫηİ,Νσζα ıĲκΝ ↓ελΪĲκμ,Ν(ίέ1)Ν↑ǹζζΪΝζΫηİ,Ν(έ)ΝσĲδΝ įİθ ηπκ↓λİέ,Ν(έ)ΝηδαΝεκδθπθέα,Ν(έ)ΝθαΝ πκλİτİĲαδ,Ν(έ)Ν↑ΫξκθĲαμΝπαλα↓įυıİδΝ Pol: (…)Νwe are not ↑saying, everything should be ↓state owned. ↑But we are saying, that a society ↓cannot, move on, ↑having ↓given everything in to Journalism 0(0) ĲαΝπΪθĲα,ΝρıĲβΝζκΰδεάΝĲκυΝεΫλįκυμέ εαδΝĲβμΝαΰκλΪμέξΝ(έ)Ν↓ΤπΪλξκυθΝ εΪπκδαΝαΰα↑γΪ,Ν(έ)ΝπκυΝ↑įİθΝ ηπκ↓λİέ,ΝπαλΪ θαΝİέθαδΝįβ↓ησıδαέοΝ the logic of the market and the profit. There ↓are certain goods, (.) that ↑cannot ↓be anything else but public.= 2 ǻβημΝ =βΝ↓υΰİέα, = Jour: =↓health,= 3 Πκζμ οβΝ↓υΰİέα,οΝ Pol: =↓health,= 4 ǻβημΝ =βΝαıφ↓Ϊζİδα,= Jour: =se↓curity,= 5 ΠκζμΝ =βΝπαδ↑įİέα,= Pol: =edu↑cation,= 6 ǻβημΝ =παδ↓įİέα,= Jour: =edu↓cation,= 7 ΠκζμΝ = βΝαı↑φΪζİδα,ΝβΝπλσıίαıβ, (.) ıĲβθ,Νİ- İθΫλΰİδα,Ν(…) Pol: =se↑curity, having access, to, e- energy,ΝΝ(…)Ν From turn 2 to turn 7 we have a very interesting series of collaborative completions of the politician’sΝpoliticalΝmanifestoΝthatΝstartedΝinΝturnΝ1. In turns 2 and 4, the journalist latches and starts listing the goods that should be public, taking over the role of the politician as the interviewee. In this case the journalist is notΝonlyΝtheΝ‘author’ but arguably also theΝ‘principal’ of the words uttered, as by providing the answer he seems also to endorse the proposition expressed. In contrast to all the other extracts examined so far, the journalist’sΝlatchingΝisΝnotΝlegitimatized in any way, as the politician did not hesitate in any way immediately prior to the overlap4, so the journalist did not latch in a TRP. The politician,ΝbyΝrepeatingΝtheΝwordΝ‘υȖİȓα-health’ in turn 3, agrees with the view expressed by the journalistΝinΝtheΝpreviousΝturnΝthatΝ‘health’ is the most important public good, acceptingΝtheΝjournalist’sΝroleΝasΝtheΝauthorΝandΝprincipalΝofΝtheΝpropositionέΝψyΝusingΝaΝ reactive token (repetition) himself, the politician indicates his compliance with co- constructing the narrative of his manifesto. In turn 5 though, he seems to disagree withΝtheΝjournalist’sΝ‘suggestion’ΝinΝtheΝ previousΝturn,ΝasΝheΝdoesΝnotΝrepeatΝ‘αıφȐȜİȚα –security’ as the second most important good thatΝshouldΝbeΝpublic,ΝbutΝsaysΝ‘παȚįİȓα-education’. What is important though is that this is done within the co-constructing turns pattern adopted by both parties, with no marked disruption. In turn 5 the politicianΝclaimedΝbackΝtheΝroleΝofΝtheΝ‘author’ΝandΝ‘principal’ of the Kantara utterance, but he did so in an interactionally cooperative way. In other words, he did not interactionally challenge the journalist but he reclaimed his role as the interviewee by latching, without though using a reactive token (repetition) as he did in the previous turn. By doing so, he indicates that he disagreed with the content of the previous turn but not with the interactional pattern of co-constructing turns. In turn 6, the journalist repeatsΝtheΝpolitician’sΝwordΝ‘education’ uttered in the previous turn, an interactional move that maintains the pattern of co-constructing turns, but at the same time acknowledgesΝthatΝtheΝpoliticianΝisΝtheΝ‘author’ΝandΝ‘principal’ of the views expressedΝandΝthatΝtheΝjournalistΝisΝ‘just’ΝacknowledgingΝtheΝpreviousΝturn,ΝgrantingΝthusΝtheΝ interviewee role as the one providing answers to questions, back to the politician. What is also interesting is that in turn 7 the politician reintroduces ‘αıφȐȜİȚα – security’ that was introduced by the journalist in turn 4 as a good that should be public but he modifies it by making a semantic shift in its meaning that enables him to introduce a slightly different topicέΝInsteadΝofΝtalkingΝaboutΝ‘security from outside and inside enemies of the country’ the politician talks about people feeling secure that they have access to essential goods like electricity, and how this would be jeopardized if the Public Electricity Company were privatized as intended (this part of the extract is not included). So even if he changes the semanticΝmeaningΝofΝ‘security’ to suit his purposes, the politician, by doing so, acknowledges theΝjournalist’sΝcontributionΝtoΝtheΝunfoldingΝinteractionΝandΝusesΝitΝtoΝdevelopΝhisΝownΝ argument. WhetherΝtheΝjournalist’sΝcollaborativeΝcompletionsΝaddressedΝtheΝpoliticianΝorΝtheΝ audience or both is ambiguous, since as discussed above the politician did not hesitate prior toΝtheΝoverlapΝsoΝheΝwasΝnotΝ‘inΝneed’ΝofΝhelpέΝψasedΝonΝthatΝIΝwouldΝargueΝthat the overlap wasΝmanipulativeΝ(inΝσorrick’sΝβί1ίΝterms),ΝtryingΝtoΝimposeΝtheΝjournalist’sΝviewsΝonΝwhichΝ goods should be public, to both the politician and the audience. Journalism 0(0) Discussion/Conclusion In this paper I examined the hybrid listening practices ofΝύreekΝjournalistsΝinΝtheΝ‘hard’Ν political news interview genre of election campaign interviews. Previous research findings in relation to the function of hybrid listening practices in the context of Swedish political radio talk shows (Ekström, 2011, although he did not explicitly use the term listening practices) indicated that journalists can use evaluative responses and response tokens in third position, mainly to challenge the politician. In particular, the journalist in Ekström’s study, used these reactions to question what the interviewee was doing, to play with theΝinterviewee’sΝidentity and to highlight distinctions between the lay and the expert. In my data however, journalists use reactive tokens in third position to collaboratively complete politicians’ΝargumentsΝandΝtoΝanswerΝtheirΝownΝquestionsέΝInΝotherΝwords,Ν journalists in my dataset use reactive tokens in third position not to challenge but to ‘help’ the politicians by co-constructing their turns/arguments. The use of reactive tokens within the same interactional sequence results in two distinct and, arguably, contradictory speech exchange systems to be merged and invoked: adversarial or challenging questioning, typical of the political news interview genre on the one hand and listener activities typical of everyday conversation on the other. By doing so, journalists in my dataset breach the taken for granted professional value of neutralism5,ΝandΝtransformΝtheΝ‘hard’ genre of election campaign interviewsΝintoΝaΝhybridΝformΝwhereΝ‘serious’Νaccountability practices are merged with (celebrity and even tabloid) talk show practices (see also Hutchby, this issue). This seemsΝtoΝbeΝinΝlineΝwithΝbothΝEkström’sΝ(βί11μ 151) claim about the utilization of a talk show format in the high profile electionΝcampaignΝinterviewΝareaΝandΝPatrona’sΝ(βί11)ΝclaimΝthatΝ the norm of journalistic neutralism in news interviews needs to be re-examined taking into account different socio-cultural contexts. Kantara What significantly differentiates the way journalists in my dataset utilize hybrid interactional practices in the election campaign interview genre from the way this was done inΝpreviousΝresearch,ΝisΝitsΝlocalΝfunctionέΝχlthoughΝinΝEkström’sΝcaseΝstudyΝtheΝjournalistΝ used hybrid listening practices to challenge the politician, journalists in my case used hybrid listening practices to ‘help’ the politician develop his/her argument. By facilitating the developmentΝofΝtheΝpoliticians’ΝargumentsΝandήorΝco-narratingΝtheirΝ‘stories’ήmanifestos,Ν journalists co-constructΝknowledgeΝforΝtheΝoverhearingΝaudience,ΝandΝaidΝpoliticians’ΝpracticalΝ processΝofΝpersuasionΝ(orΝpropagandaΝinΝTaylor’sΝ1λλβΝterms)έΝ Politicians on the other hand, by accepting6, or reacting to the content of the turn, but not the breach of neutralism, indicate both that this transformed form of neutralism is co- constructed and that it serves their practical process of persuasion. So it seems that this co-transformed, hybrid from of neutralism, produces co- constructed social knowledge for the overhearing audience, facilitating each and every time theΝpolitician’sΝpropaganda,ΝregardlessΝofΝtheΝpoliticalΝspectrumΝsήheΝisΝinέΝThisΝpartlyΝ supportsΝPatrona’sΝ(βί11μ 174) claim that (Greek) journalistic standards for news interviewingΝfavourΝ‘the construction of societal consensus by ‘imposing’ preferred readings of public politics on the audience.’ Journalists in my dataset did indeed do that, through their listening practices that addressed politicians from different political parties. As all politicians accepted the interactional move, I would argue that the societal consensus was collaboratively constructed and imposed on the audience. In other words, journalists’ΝhybridΝ listening practices provided political actors with new ways to mainstream their manifestos and subsequently appropriate them to the public domain. τrΝtoΝuseΝWarner’sΝ(βίίβ)ΝnotionΝofΝ ‘counterpublicΝdiscourse,’ΝasΝdiscussedΝbyΝMartin (2013: 143-144), it could also be argued that the hybrid listening practices journalists employed in my dataset, function as Journalism 0(0) ‘counterpublicΝdiscourses’, in the sense that they help transform the public domain by providing new means to talk about situations (political manifestos in this case) and guiding the audience in how to respond to them. Appendix (Transcription Glossary) (adapted from Hutchby and Wooffitt (1999)) ↑↓ pointed arrows indicate a marked falling or rising intonation in non-final position ›Ν‹ΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝ ‘moreΝthan’Νand ‘lessΝthan’ΝsignsΝindicateΝthatΝtheΝtalkΝtheyΝencompassΝwasΝ produced noticeably quicker than the surrounding talk. < > used in the reverse order they indicate the encompassed talk is markedly slower or drawn out. ◦Ν◦ΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝΝdegree marks indicate decreased volume of talk between Under underlined fragments indicate speaker emphasis CAPITALS words in capitals mark a section of speech noticeably louder than that surrounding it. (guess) theΝwordsΝwithinΝaΝsingleΝbracketΝindicateΝtheΝtranscriber’sΝbestΝguessΝatΝanΝ unclear utterance. ( ) empty parentheses indicate the presence of an unclear fragment on the tape. . a full stop indicates a stopping fall in tone. It does not necessarily indicate the end of a sentence. , aΝcommaΝindicatesΝaΝ‘continuing’Νintonationέ (0.5) the number in brackets indicates a time gap in tenths of a second. (.) a dot enclosed in a bracket indicates a pause in the talk of less than one-tenth of a second. = theΝ‘equals’ signΝindicatesΝ‘latching’ΝbetweenΝutterances,ΝproducedΝeitherΝbyΝtheΝ same speaker, to accommodate for overlapping speech, or different speakers [ ] square brackets between adjacent lines of concurrent speech indicate the onset and end of a spate of overlapping talk. ? question mark indicates upward intonation in final position - a dash indicates the sharp cut-off of the prior word or sound Kantara : colons indicate that the speaker has stretched the preceding sound or letter. The more colons the greater the extent of stretching. Acknowledgements I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback on an earlier draft of this paper. Needless to say that any shortcomings are entirely my own. Notes 1 Neutralism as discussed by Clayman (1992) and Greatbatch (1998), cited in Hutchby (2006:127), refers to the fact that journalistsΝ actuallyΝ achieveΝ theΝ statusΝ ofΝ ‘beingΝ neutral’,Ν through a set of specialised discourse practices. 2 The NSRF (National Strategic Reference Framework) constitutes the reference document for the programming of European Union Funds at national level for a given period (source: http://www.espa.gr/EN/Pages/staticWhatIsESPA.aspx) 3 But see Patrona (2006, 2009, 2011) for a discussion of the interviewing practices of Greek journalists during prime-time TV news debates and political talk shows. 4 The full stop used in the transcript after the last word uttered by the politician before the journalist latched, indicates a stopping fall in tone. It does not necessarily indicate the end of a sentence. 5 See also Tolson (2012) for a discussion on the non-compliance of journalists to neutralism in his longitudinal (1983-2000) study of UK election interviews and Patrona (2011) for a discussion on how neutralism is practiced by journalists in Greek evening news. 6 See also Bull and Fetzer (2006) for politicians accepting presuppositions of journalists. References Bull PE (2003) The Microanalysis of Political Communication. London: Routledge. Bull P and Fetzer A (2006) Who are we and who are you? The strategic use of forms of address in political interviews. Text & Talk 26(1): 3-37. Journalism 0(0) Clancy PM, Thomson SA, Suzuki R and Tao H, (1996) The conversational use of reactive tokens in English, Japanese and Mandarin. Journal of Pragmatics 26: 355-387. Clayman SE (1992) Footing in the achievement of neutrality: The case of news interview discourse. In: Drew P and Heritage J (eds) Talk at Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 163-198. Clayman SE and Heritage J (2002) The News Interview: Journalists and Public Figures on the Air. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Clayman SE (2007) Speaking on behalf of the public in broadcast news interviews. In: Holt E and Clift R (eds) Reporting Talk: Reported Speech in Interaction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.221-243. Clayman SE and Romaniuk T (2011) Questioning candidates. In: Ekstrom M and Patrona M (eds) Talking Politics in Broadcast Media: Cross Cultural Perspectives on Political Interviewing, Journalism and Accountability. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp.15-32. Ekström M and Kroon Lundell A (2009) The news interview: Diversity and hybridity in the communicative activities of broadcast news. In: Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference for Media and Communication Research, Sweden, Karlstad 13-15 August 2009. Available at: http://nordicom.statsbiblioteket.dk/ncom/en/publications/the- news-interview(39c4a890-3738-11df-bf62-000ea68e967b)/export.html (accessed: 27 October 2015). Ekström M (2011) Hybridity as a resource and challenge in a talk show political interview. In: Ekström M and Patrona M (eds) Talking Politics in Broadcast Media: Cross Cultural Perspectives on Political Interviewing, Journalism and Accountability. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp.135-155. Gardner R (1997) The conversational object mhm: Weak and variable acknowledging token. Research on Language and Social Interaction 30(2): 31-135. Kantara Gardner R (1998) Between speaking and listening: The vocalisation of understandings. Applied Linguistics 19(2): 204-24. Gardner R (2001) When Listeners Talk: Response Tokens and Listener Stance. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Goffman E (1974) Frame Analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Goffman E (1981) Footing. In: Goffman E (ed) Forms of Talk. Oxford: Blackwell, pp.124- 159. Goodwin C (1986) Between and within: alternative sequential treatments of continuers and assessments. Human Studies 9: 205-217. Greatbatch D (1998) Conversation analysis: Neutralism in British news interviews. In: Bell A and Garrett P (eds) Approaches to Media Discourse. Oxford: Blackwell, pp.163-185. Heritage J (1984) A change-of-state token and aspects of its sequential placement. In: Atkinson JM and Heritage J (eds) Structures of Social Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 299-345. Heritage J (1985) Analysing news interviews: Aspects of the production of talk for an overhearing audience. In: Van Dijk T (ed) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Volume 3: discourse and Dialogue. London: Academic Press, pp. 95-117. Heritage J (2002) The limits of questioning: negative interrogatives and hostile content. Journal of Pragmatics (34): 1427-1446. Heritage J and Clayman SE (2010) Talk in Action: Interactions, Identities and Institutions. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell Hutchby I (2006) Media Talk: Conversation Analysis and the study of Broadcasting. Berkshire: Open University. Hutchby I (2011a) Doing non-neutral: Belligerent interaction in the hybrid political interview. In: Ekstrom M and Patrona M (eds) Talking Politics in Broadcast Media: Journalism 0(0) Cross Cultural Perspectives on Political Interviewing, Journalism and Accountability. Amsterdam: John Benjamins pp.115-133. Hutchby I (2011b) Non-neutrality and argument in the hybrid political interview. Discourse Studies 13(3): 349-365. Hutchby I (2016) Hybridisation, personalisation and tribuneship in the political interview. Journalism xxx Levinson SC (1992) Activity types and language. In: Drew P and Heritage J (eds) Talk at Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 66-100. Linell P (2011) Samtalskulturer. Kommunikativa Verksamhetstyper i Samhället [Conversational Cultures. Communicative Activity Types in Society] (Vols. 1 and 2). Linköping, Sweden: Linköping University. Martin J (2013) Politics & Rhetoric. London: Routledge. McCarthy M (2003) Talking backμΝ‘small’ΝinteractionalΝresponseΝtokensΝinΝeverydayΝ conversation. Research on Language and Social Interaction 36(1): 33-63. Maynard SK (1990) Conversation management in contrast: Listener responses in Japanese and American English. Journal of Pragmatics 14: 397-412. Montgomery M (2007) The Discourse of Broadcast News: A Linguistic Approach. London: Routledge. Norrick NR (2010) Listening practices in television celebrity interviews. Journal of Pragmatics 42(2): 525-543. Patrona M (2006) Conversationalisation and media empowerment in Greek television discussion programmes. Discourse and Society 17(1): 5-27. Patrona M (βίίλ)Ν‘A mess’ΝandΝ‘rows’: evaluation in prime-time TV news discourse and the shaping of public opinion. Discourse and Communication 3(2): 173-194. Kantara Patrona M (2011) Neutralism revisited: when journalists set new rules in political news discourse. In: Ekström M and Patrona M (eds) Talking Politics in Broadcast Media: Cross Cultural Perspectives on Political Interviewing, Journalism and Accountability. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 157-176. Romaniuk T (2013) Pursuing answers to questions in broadcast journalism. Research on Language and Social Interaction 46(2): 144-164. Sacks H, Schegloff E and Jefferson G (1978) A simplest systematics for the organisation of turn taking for conversation. In: Schenkein J (ed) Studies in the Organisation of Conversational Interaction. New York: Academic Press, pp.7-55. Schegloff EΝ(1λκβ)ΝϊiscourseΝasΝanΝinteractionalΝachievementέΝSomeΝusesΝofΝ‘uhΝhuh’ΝandΝotherΝ things that come between sentences. In: Tannen D (ed) Analysing Discourse: Text and Talk. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, pp. 71-93. Taylor PM (1992) Propaganda from Thucydides to Thatcher: Some Problems, Perspectives and Pitfalls. Address to the annual conference of the Social History Society of Great Britain. Available at: http://media.leeds.ac.uk/papers/vf01d900.html (accessed: 27 October 2015). Thornborrow J (2001) ‘ώasΝitΝeverΝhappenedΝtoΝyouς’ΝTalkΝshowsΝasΝmediatedΝperformanceέ In: Tolson A (ed) TV Talk Shows: Discourse, Performance, Spectacle. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, pp.117-138. Tolson A (2012)Ν‘You will need a miracle to win this election’ (J. Paxman 2005): Interviewer assertiveness in UK general elections 1983-2010. Discourse, Context & Media (1): 45-53. Warner M (2002) Publics and Counterpublics. Quarterly Journal of Speech 8(4): 413-425. Young RF and Lee J (2004) Identifying units in interaction: Reactive tokens in Korean and English conversations. Journal of Sociolinguistics 8(3): 380-407. Journalism 0(0) Yngve VH (1970) On getting a word in edgewise. In: Papers from the 6th Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, April 16-18. Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society, pp. 567-578. Biographical note Argyro Kantara is a PhD candidate at the Centre for Language and Communication Research, Cardiff University, UK. Her PhD examines the use of hybrid interactional practices by journalists and politicians in one-on-one election campaign interviews and the role these might play in the knowledge producing practices of the transformed genre. 