ABSTRACT: 
In recent years the rise of culture as a universal cure to a myriad of urban, social and economic ‘diseases’ has been celebrated without precedent, both in policy and academic accounts. Unlike these celebratory discourses, this paper provides a critique of the politics underpinning culture-led urban regeneration in order to unsettle the role of culture as panacea. Drawing on a case study – the on-going redevelopment of the post office palace into a commemorative cultural centre in Buenos Aires, Argentina – the analysis offers an in-depth account of the policy process by which industrial heritage is redeveloped through a cultural rhetoric. The analysis reveals how the recycling of the post office building enabled multiple meanings of culture to emerge and circulate within a range of policy, architectural, urban regeneration, real estate and media discourses. These, in turn, express existing disputes over the making of cultural policies, the uses of heritage, the image of the capital city and the value of the post office. In the redevelopment of the postal building, the paper argues, policy invocations of culture were aimed at de-politicising cultural activities in post-2001/2002 crisis Argentina, when politics had become a synonym of corruption and mismanagement. The paper concludes by drawing attention to the urgent need to adopt a critical perspective to the study of culture-led urban regeneration in Latin America, one which situates the analysis in historical and political terms and acknowledges the contending circumstances out of which these urban strategies often emerge. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this paper examines the political function of cultureand itsrole in urban regeneration inBuenos Aires , argentina . 
 the paper examines how culture-led urban regeneration acquired a peculiar form , one that underscoresthe political function of culture . in the redevelopmentof the postal building , 
 the paper argues , policy invocations of culture were aimed at de-politicising cul-tural activities in post-2001/2002 crisis Argentina , when politics had become a synonym of corruptionand mismanagement . 
 this paper concludes by drawing attention to the urgent need to adopt a criticalperspective to the study 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Dinardi, C. (2015). Unsettling the role of culture as panacea: The politics of culture-led urban regeneration in Buenos Aires. City, Culture and Society, 6(2), pp. 9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ccs.2015.03.003 City Research OnlineOriginal citation: Dinardi, C. (2015). Unsettling the role of culture as panacea: The politics of culture-led urban regeneration in Buenos Aires. City, Culture and Society, 6(2), pp. 9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ccs.2015.03.003 Permanent City Research Online URL: http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/12367/ Copyright & reuseCity University London has developed City Research Online so that its users may access the research outputs of City University London's staff. Copyright © and Moral Rights for this paper are retained by the individual author(s) and/ or other copyright holders. All material in City Research Online is checked for eligibility for copyright before being made available in the live archive. URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and linked to from other web pages. Versions of researchThe version in City Research Online may differ from the final published version. Users are advised to check the Permanent City Research Online URL above for the status of the paper.EnquiriesIf you have any enquiries about any aspect of City Research Online, or if you wish to make contact with the author(s) of this paper, please email the team at publications@city.ac.uk.Unsettling the role of culture as panacea: The politics ofculture-led urban regeneration in Buenos AiresCecilia Dinardi *Department of Culture and Creative Industries, City University London, Northampton Square, London EC1V 0HB, UKA R T I C L E I N F OArticle history:Received 9 June 2014Received in revised form 11 November2014Accepted 4 March 2015Available online 11 May 2015Keywords:Culture-led urban regenerationCultural policiesBuenos AiresPublic architecturePost oﬃceHeritageA B S T R A C TIn recent years the rise of culture as a universal cure to a myriad of urban, social and economic ‘dis-eases’ has been celebratedwithout precedent, both in policy and academic accounts. Unlike these celebratorydiscourses, this paper provides a critique of the politics underpinning culture-led urban regeneration inorder to unsettle the role of culture as panacea. Drawing on a case study – the on-going redevelopmentof the post oﬃce palace into a commemorative cultural centre in Buenos Aires, Argentina – the analysisoffers an in-depth account of the policy process by which industrial heritage is redeveloped through acultural rhetoric. The analysis reveals how the recycling of the post oﬃce building enabled multiple mean-ings of culture to emerge and circulate within a range of policy, architectural, urban regeneration, realestate and media discourses. These, in turn, express existing disputes over the making of cultural poli-cies, the uses of heritage, the image of the capital city and the value of the post oﬃce. In the redevelopmentof the postal building, the paper argues, policy invocations of culture were aimed at de-politicising cul-tural activities in post-2001/2002 crisis Argentina, when politics had become a synonym of corruptionand mismanagement. The paper concludes by drawing attention to the urgent need to adopt a criticalperspective to the study of culture-led urban regeneration in Latin America, one which situates the analy-sis in historical and political terms and acknowledges the contending circumstances out of which theseurban strategies often emerge.© 2015 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).IntroductionWhen the former Argentinean Economy Minister,Roberto Lavagna, suggested during a business meetingin 2004 that the national post oﬃce headquarters couldbe transformed into a spectacular cultural centre, hewas keenly aware of the remedial capacities of culturein the renewal of cities. He knew places like Bilbao,Barcelona, London and Sydney and was familiar withthe ﬁnancial and aesthetic beneﬁts brought about byculture-led urban regeneration – when urban and eco-nomic development become inextricably bound upwith cultural projects. Clearly, Lavagna is not alone inhis enchantment with cultural regeneration. Policy-makers, architects and marketing consultantsincreasingly invoke culture as a magical solution to thecity’s myriad of social, economic and urban prob-lems (Pratt, 2009). From renovating inner-city areasand recreating the city’s image, to constructing artis-tic quarters and sustaining nationalist claims (Bianchini& Parkinson, 1993; Landry, Greene, &Matarasso, 1996),culture constitutes a crucial component of today’surban policy agendas, not only in the city of tango butelsewhere in the Western world.This paper aims to examine the politics of culture-led urban regeneration in order to unsettle the role ofculture as a panacea, that is, as one of those tradi-tional plants meant to heal all diseases. Despite – orprecisely because of – itsmuch celebrated rise in recentdecades, culture’s function as apanaceaposes anumberof problems,which this paper is rather concernedwith,in termsof thehistory,materiality andusesof theplacesto be regenerated. While there is suﬃcient evidencethat culture has become ‘a new orthodoxy by whichcities seek to enhance their competitive position’ (Miles& Paddison, 2005, p. 833), the reasons why culture is* Department of Culture and Creative Industries, City University London,Northampton Square, London EC1V 0HB, UK.E-mail address: Cecilia.Dinardi.1@city.ac.uk.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccs.2015.03.0031877-9166/© 2015 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18Contents lists available at ScienceDirectCity, Culture and Societyjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/ locate /ccsinvoked inparticular local contexts andby speciﬁc socialactors are less clear, and tend to be subsumed undera policy rationale purely preoccupied by economic de-velopmentand theaesthetisationof thecity’s landscape.Three main questions are explored: Why is cultureinvoked as a solution to the city’s various problems?How are oﬃcial meanings of culture contested by al-ternative claims? What is at stake in redeveloping anindustrial site through cultural use?To answer these questions, the paper analyses a casestudy in depth: the transformation of the Palacio deCorreos y Telecomunicaciones – the national post oﬃceheadquarters – into a commemorative cultural centre(the Bicentenary Cultural Centre, CCB, recentlyrenamed Centro Cultural Kirchner), and the plannedregeneration of its surroundings. The building is locatedin one of the most expensive lots in downtown BuenosAires, between the renovated docks, the city’s ﬁnan-cial district and the Government House. It underwentmetamorphosis: from representing a symbol of prog-ress and civilisation in the nineteenth and earlytwentieth century, to becoming neglected as a site ofstate bureaucracy in the 1990s, and more recently ithas been projected as the emblem of spectacularmodern culture, only to be lately re-appropriated asa symbol of the national-popular in the context of thecountry’s bicentenary celebrations in 2010.This case study represents an example of global trendsof post-industrial urbanism and a unique casecharacterised by local features. As part of widely adoptedurban regeneration strategies, post oﬃce buildings incountries as different as the United States, Costa Rica,Germany,Malawi, Brazil, Spain, theUnited Kingdom, andGuatemala, to mention just a few, have been renovatedand transformed into oﬃces, retail spaces, hotels or cul-tural facilities. These initiatives are aimed at therevitalisation of historical centres, revalorisation of cul-tural heritage and creation of new resources for tourismand business investment. In Argentina, this global phe-nomenon acquires a peculiar form, one that underscoresthe political function of culture, as we will later see.This paper contributes to urban cultural policydebates about the instrumental uses of culture and itsrole in urban regeneration, taking the discussion toan important but less explored area – the politics sus-taining the policy decision to convert industrialinfrastructure for cultural use, embedded in histori-cally situated local conﬁgurations and the subsequentcontestations over the meaning and uses of materialculture. Studies on culture-led urban regeneration havelargely focused on its effectiveness to improve the physi-cal features of decayed areas, boost the local economyand enhance the branding of places, mostly in Euro-pean and American cities. Research has broadlyoscillated between celebration and critique. On the onehand, a policy-oriented body of work has focused onmeasuring the evidence of the power of culture torenew, reinvent and regenerate cities and on providingbest practice guidelines (Evans, 2009; García, 2004;Ghilardi, 2003;Montgomery, 2003, 2004). On the other,another strand of research has stressed the tensions sur-rounding the transformation of space through a culturalrhetoric, questioning the claimed universality of suchprocesses and revealing their social and political im-plications (Bailey,Miles, & Stark, 2004; Keith, 2009; Pratt,2009; Shin & Stevens, 2013; Yúdice, 2003; Zukin, 1995).Speciﬁcally this paper will add a critical perspectiveto projects for urban regeneration through culture inBuenos Aires, a city largely overlooked in the interna-tional academic debates, with some exceptions(Arrese, 2003; Carman, 2006; Dinardi, 2012; Kanai &Ortega-Alcázar, 2009; Lacarrieu andAlvarez, 2008;Welch,2005; Zunino Singh, 2007). In Latin America, the rhe-torical importance given to cultural policy discourses forurban development has not been accompanied by sys-tematic academic approaches that analyse these policies(Rubim&Bayardo, 2008). In this sense, the analysis dem-onstrates how the different redevelopment alternativesaimed at repairing the ﬁssures in the body of the em-blematic building express existing disputes over themaking of cultural policies, the uses of heritage, the imageof the capital city, the value of the post oﬃce, and themeaning of culture. The paper has three main sections.The ﬁrst analyses the decision to convert the post oﬃcepalace for cultural use; the second explores contentionovermultiplemeanings of culture related to themeaningand new function of the building; and the third exam-ines the complex relationshipbetweenculture andpoliticsin light of the problem of hegemony. In emphasising thecontending political dimension through an innovativemethodological approach, this paper shifts the predomi-nant focus on economic development and urban impactof studies of culture-led urban regeneration.MethodologyThis article is part of a larger investigation con-ducted over a ﬁve-year period between 2007 and 2012,involving several ﬁeldtrips to Buenos Aires. Adoptinga qualitative approach and an exploratory researchstrategy, I drew on a range of methods, including in-depth semi-structured interviews, visual analysis,archival research and critical discourse analysis. Thirtyin-depth interviews were conducted with policy-makers at themunicipal and national levels, architects,postal workers, postal museum staff, journalists, realestate developers, cleaners, and vendors. The selec-tion criteria responded to participants’ involvement inthe redevelopment project. I also looked at the build-ing from outside by making on-site observations,undertook a guided visit to the building, and attendedseven relevant events that enabled me to contact new10 C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18participants. The large corpus of data was further com-pleted with archival documents (such as those fromthe National General Archive, the Communications Na-tional Commission and the Postal Museum), President’sspeeches, historical and contemporary photographs ofthe site, newspaper articles, an online blog on thebuilding’s redevelopment, and a variety of institu-tional materials.This paper is situated within cultural sociology.As the subjects of culture, national heritage andplace-making cut across different disciplines and epis-temological traditions, however, the analysis alsoengages with issues of urban studies, historical soci-ology, material culture and political sociology. Themateriality of buildings offers an invaluable practicalmeans, however unusual in sociology, through whichto investigate how culture is produced through socialactors’ views and practices. Buildings can be very pow-erful. They have the potential to be carriers of meanings,containers of memories, and triggers of commemora-tion. They alter our environment physically and informand reorganise our experience through their variousavenues of meaning (Goodman, 1985, p. 652). In thepower to represent, the control over that representa-tion is usually at stake in the battle over the creation,preservation, uses and transformation of buildings.Central to my enquiry is a conception of culture asintimately related to, and therefore inevitably insepa-rable from, politics. I look at culture at a particularmoment of contemporary Argentina, focusing on thedebates over the redevelopment of material heritage,the social imagination of the future of the nation andthe use of a cultural rhetoric for urban regeneration inBuenos Aires. The term culture is therefore employedhere in a twofold way: as that which refers to the spaceof contingency over signiﬁcation and interpretation,and as the open-ended category differently used andconceived by social actors in particular situations. Thecomplexity and apparent ambivalence surrounding theterm culture derive not only from the different intel-lectual histories and disciplines that have appropriatedthe word, ranging from geography, economy, litera-ture, anthropology and sociology, but also the diversesocial and geographical contexts in which its usage hasbecomewidespread, particularly beyondWestern con-ceptions. Yet it is precisely in its active history and vastrange and overlap of meanings that the term becomessigniﬁcant (Williams, 1976), for this contestabilityreinforces the character of culture as political – as a siteof conﬂicts and struggles.From postal hub to cultural centreOne of the taken-for-granted aspects of culture-led urban regeneration is the unquestioned consensusover the convenience of culture to re-functionalise andre-signify a speciﬁc building or area, particularly overother redevelopment alternatives. In this section Iexplore how the deployment of culture for the trans-formation of the emblematic Palacio de Correos yTelecomunicaciones emerged as a result of a combi-nation of political, economic and material processes,embedded both on the city and the national levels withreference to an international context.What to do with a large, monumental and historicindustrial building (Fig. 1) that has been rendereduseless and left abandoned in one of the most expen-sive central areas of the city? This is the question theArgentinean Economy Ministry faced over the futureof the postal palace following the aftermath of theprivatisation of the national postal services, whichwereassigned by concession to a private company in 1997with great contention and as part of a series of statereform policies aimed at the reduction of public spend-ing. After six years of private management, theprovision of postal services proved to be more inef-ﬁcient than when under state control. In 2004 thepostal services were the ﬁrst public company to be re-nationalised under former President Néstor Kirchner’sadministration. This way, the Palacio de Correos, amonumental palatial building of French Beaux-Arts ar-chitecture inaugurated in 1928 after over forty yearsof construction, was to be preserved. Yet the build-ing’s original function as the national postalheadquarters would not survive for longer: plans toconvert it for cultural use were announced shortly afterthe re-nationalisation of the post oﬃce.1From the perspectives of the social actors involved,twomain reasons were given to explain why the build-ing was assigned a new cultural use: ﬁrst, to fulﬁl thecity’s need for a symphonic music venue and, second,to give value to a ‘devalued’ listed building. It was saidthat Buenos Aires needed a cultural venue of ‘inter-national quality’. Concurrently, the Palacio de Correoswas perceived as abandoned and decayed. The issueof value is of complicated nature not only due to itsundeniably subjective character, but also because ofthe discursive operation of ‘devaluation’ that is re-quired to legitimise the subsequent need for‘revalorisation’. If the postal building was ‘aban-doned’ then giving value to it was certainly the wayforward to rescue it. In this logic, creating a culturalcentre would re-value the postal palace and convertit into a tourist site which with its regenerated sur-roundings would then become a cultural hub. Thepublic value of culture – when ‘culture’ is under-stood as conventional cultural institutions such as a1 For a detailed analysis of the construction of the building, its uses, privatisation,re-nationalisation and architectural competitions organised to re-imagine it as a cul-tural centre, see Dinardi (2012).11C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18classical music venue – was considered higher thanthat of an under-used factory.At stake in the recycling of such building was pri-marily the function it would perform – a luxurioushotel, a shopping mall, government oﬃces, a museum,or a cultural centre. The relocation of postal workers,postal activities and the postal and telecommunica-tions museum was also at stake, as was control overthe symbolic image of the building. Other issues of con-tention included: whowould organise the competitionsfor the recycling of the building; what the role of thestate would be in relation to the management of thepostal institution; the cultural content of the imag-ined cultural centre; the feasibility of the projectedurban transformation; the actual refurbishment op-erations due to the technical complexity and high costof the project; the timetable planned for the works (thecultural centre failed to be inaugurated in 2010, asplanned, to commemorate the national bicentenary);the management and sustainability of the new cul-tural venue; and the credit for the project. In light ofthese contending views, the building’s new functionwould be in the interest of some but not of others.The idea that a cultural use was convenient circu-lated in most interview accounts. References weremade to the international experience of culturalregeneration and the prestige often associated withconventional cultural activities and the expected posi-tive impact of culture in social, economic and urbanterms. This idea, which Yúdice (2003, p. 38) de-scribes as the expediency of culture given by theexistence of an end which renders it a resourcewith the subsequent struggles over its control, issummarised by one of the architects who acted asadvisor in the architectural competition to design a cul-tural centre in 2006:[Culture] It has a good press, it is politically correct.If they had said ‘we are going to build a shoppingmall in the postal building’, the media would havedestroyed them. If they say ‘let’s recycle rubbishthere’, the media would destroy them. If they say‘let’s build oﬃces’, the media would destroy them.But if they say ‘we are going to build the biggest cul-tural centre in the city’, everybody applauds.In this logic the particular content or the functionof a ‘cultural centre’ does not seem tomatter; the shellabove all is what counts. In his imagining of hypo-thetical scenarios for the futureof thePalaciodeCorreos,this architect identiﬁeswhat the likely outcome of thedifferent alternatives would be: a tacit social repro-bation expressed through media condemnation.Fig. 1. The Palacio de Correos y Telecomunicaciones, prior to refurbishment.12 C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18According to him only one of these options – the cre-ation of a large cultural centre – would receiveenthusiastic social endorsement. The different rede-velopment possibilities he identiﬁes and dismissescrystallise in disparate elements such as a shoppingmall, a recycling centre and an oﬃce block, each ofwhich in turn could evoke different senses of theconcept of culture, for instance based upon consump-tion and entertainment, social awareness aboutenvironmental issues, or a particularwork organisationand ethic, respectively.The decision to convert the postal palace for cul-tural use was above all the result of the will of ahigh-ranking government oﬃcial in the EconomyMin-istry. It resulted fromwhat he deﬁned as ‘a deplorablearea in urban terms, in an absolutely central place inBuenos Aires, with an heliport, a dump of busses,frankly, a horrible thing’, and the fact that ‘the postoﬃce building was taken over’ after privatisation byother public servants who tried to get settled in thebuilding. When asked about how the decision torecycle the palace was taken, he explained that ‘itdepends on the functionary’s will and if the function-ary has power. I had decided that it would be likethat and while I was there, it was like that’. Thisstatement is indicative not only of a blatant enact-ment of national politics in the ‘ﬁrst person’ basedupon the power of a single man, but also of theweakness of institutional democracy in Argentinawhere one government oﬃcial’s will in the eco-nomic realm decides the fate of a national historicalmonument, an emblematic building in the culturalﬁeld. Far from being an exception, this form ofpersonalised politics responds to a pattern of policy-making which has been common in Argentina sincethe late 1990s in the absence of long-term national,integral and detailed plans for culture, which pavedthe way for discontinuous, personalised policies(Bayardo, 2008).Whose culture?Culture is never ﬁxed or pre-given, but a categorythat social actors contest and ﬁll in according to theirown interests. In this section, I examine the multiplemeanings of culture that emerged during discus-sions about the heritage redevelopment project. I willshow how culture mediates the redevelopment op-erations, and in turn how these operations enable socialactors to imagine, produce or enactmeanings of cultureand heritage. This contested process of meaningmaking (Wright, 1998) has characterised the concep-tion phase of the new cultural centre in the postalbuilding. Most likely, it will equally shape the imple-mentation and future development of this publicproject in terms of its content and users.The intricate ways in which the concept of culturecirculates in contemporary Argentina are rooted inhistory, in long-standing views that bring ideas ofculture together with notions of national identity,modernity, progress, civilisation and barbarism. His-torically, the ﬂuctuating trajectories of the concept ofculture have encapsulated some of the material andsymbolic disputes that ﬁercely erupted in the nine-teenth century, such as the constant struggles betweenBuenos Aires and the Argentine provinces over powerand economic resources. This confrontation undoubt-edly shaped understandings of culture linked tothe ‘centrism’ of the capital city, both in politicaland cultural terms, and the alleged ‘backwardness’ ofother territorial areas: ‘culture’ was to be located solelyin the metropolitan capital city. When talking aboutthe new cultural use of the Palacio de Correos,interviewees conjure up different senses, images andhistories of the term culture, rooted in nationalhistories.For example, another high-ranking oﬃcial respon-sible for, whowas also responsible for the postal palace,explained how terrible it was for himwhen staff at theNational Culture Ministry suggested having a ﬂoor inthe postal building for each province to use as exhi-bition spaces, like the nations’ fair. Similarly, the seniorcolleagues had warned of the ‘awful’ idea of havingprovincial cultural expressions in the palace, whichcould be detrimental to having ‘a grand building’. Im-plicit in these views was also the idea that BuenosAires’ culture was at the forefront of global develop-ments, and that of the provinces lagged behind, for the‘culture’ embodied in the capital city was seen as onelinked to the cultural and creative industries, and there-fore of an unquestionably trendy and global character.These views are sustained by an idea of ‘Culture’deﬁned by opposition to that of ‘cultures’. While‘Culture’ encompasses conventional artistic forms, suchas classical music, ballet and ﬁne arts, ‘cultures’ arethose forms and expressions that are not included inthe former category. Reviving an old distinctionbetween elite/popular, high/low culture, these gov-ernment oﬃcials dreamed of a Cultural Palace as anembodiment of the Great Culture in which the fore-seen grandiosity of Buenos Aires was to be expressed.They rejected provincial expressions, for these wereseen as too popular or uncivilised and naïvely mis-represented provincial cultures as reduced to theconsumption of certain gastronomic goods. This wayof seeing culture represents a conventional perspec-tive in the making of cultural policies by the statewhichwas so characteristic in the ﬁrst half of the twen-tieth century and which restricts its ﬁeld of action tothe ﬁne arts and humanities.Binomial thinking continues to nurture the na-tional political culture. Svampa (1994) persuasively13C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18argues that the classical dichotomy between civilisationand barbarism condenses the various oppositions thathave signalled Argentina’s national history – betweenunitarios and federales, the capital city and the rest ofthe country, peronismo2 and anti-peronismo, the peopleand the oligarchy, patria and imperialism. It is impor-tant to highlight here that the different politicaltraditions in Argentina have re-appropriated this imageand made it work in their interests so as to discreditpolitical adversaries. Indeed, these different, long-standing oppositions come to be re-activated incontemporary times through the concept of culture.Speaking of culture, then, can act as a code that revealshistorical traces, unresolved disputes, and contempo-rary concerns, both symbolically and materially.The relationship between forms of elite and popularculture was addressed differently by some of thewinning architects of the third competition.3 In theirproposal for the recycling of the postal palace, they en-visioned an open plaza outside the building to housepopular cultural expressions which, as they explain,sit more comfortably in outdoor, more informal spacesthan in the seriousness of a grand auditorium.The central government’s view on the postal palace– for example, that of the Ministry of Federal Plan-ning or the Presidency oﬃce – highlighted the role ofthe building in national history and stated that the cre-ation of the CCB would imply a continuation of thesense of federalism and national integration once rep-resented by the post oﬃce headquarters. ‘The buildingsymbolised a golden age in Argentina….It was a won-derful emblem’, stated the Chief Advisor of theMinistryof Federal Planning. In this sense, the palace is con-ceived of as being of high social value, ‘the focus ofnational, political and cultural sentiments, awaken-ing a sense of belonging, attachment and pride incitizens’ (Ministerio de Planiﬁcación Federal, InversiónPública y Servicios, 2003–2011).Argentina’s President Cristina Kirchner expressedsimilar views at the temporary inauguration of thepostal palace during the 2010 national commemora-tions, referring to it in her speech as ‘the beginningof the fulﬁlment of a long cherished dreamwhich wasone of giving Buenos Aires, the capital of all Argen-tinians, and therefore, our country, a great CulturalCentre, the great Cultural Centre that brings togetherand expresses all cultures’ (author’s translation). In theoﬃcial commemorative performance,4 she also re-membered that Eva Peron’s Foundation oﬃce waslocated in the building, reviving the need to imaginethe national community (Anderson, 2006 [1983])through a project rooted in peronismo. Culture is un-derstood here as the expression of the national-popular in post-2001 crisis Argentina and as that whichwould materialise in the (federal and popular) pro-gramme of the future cultural centre.A different sense of culture was expressed by theGovernment of the City of Buenos Aires (GCBA). TheMacri municipal administration (since 2007) has re-currently stated the value of culture for the exploitationof tourism through urban marketing and the impor-tance of attracting the private sector to the culturalﬁeld. The decision to reduce the budget of the networkof community cultural centres, accompanied by evic-tion orders and the closure of many of these popularcultural venues, was a clear example of the GCBA’s in-tention to apply a proﬁtability logic to culturalplanning.Finally, another view of culture was represented bythe postal workers and the heritage NGO Basta deDemoler! (Stop Demolishing!), who interpreted it inconnection with local history, spiritual development,education and learning, and deﬁned it as a constitu-ent part of heritage and identity. In this view, the postalpalace was a unique example that the governmentshould protect on the grounds of its value for the pres-ervation of urban and cultural landscapes, theremembering of a particular époque in Argentina andthe identity of local places. Culture here is intimatelyrelated to an idea of vernacular heritage, one that high-lights the role of architecture in condensing the pastof the nation and its ability to act as aide memoire.In tandemwith these different ways of understand-ing culture, alternative redevelopment ideas for thepostal palace were put forward by some of my re-spondents. These included building a new spectacularcultural centre in thewaterfront, ‘like the Sydney OperaHouse’, and keeping the post oﬃce headquarters ‘asit is’. Others suggested the creation of a ﬁne artsmuseum in the postal palace which would require nodemolition but rather would integrate the existing dis-persed art collections, and in doing so, would helpmuseums resolve their problem of the lack of space.The creation of a cultural centre was also suggested,but one that could assign great visibility and space tothe post oﬃce activities, including the postal museum.Others proposed the use of the existing city govern-ment’s initiative ‘La Usina de la Música’ (The MusicFactory) to house the Symphonic Orchestra in the Southof Buenos Aires.Asking ‘whose culture?’ in Buenos Aires today, asZukin (1995) has done so eloquently in New Yorkalmost two decades ago, allows us to conceive thepostal palace as a site of disputes over culture andthe city, an artefact of material culture engrained in2 Peronismo is a national-popular political movement that originated in Argen-tinawith Colonel Juan Domingo Perón during themid-1940s and had also institutionalrepresentation with the Peronist Party. For a classical sociological study of the originsof peronismo see Murmis and Portantiero (1971).3 For an extensive analysis of the three competitions involving the redevelop-ment of the Palacio de Correos see Dinardi (2012).4 Dinardi (2012), Chapter 5.14 C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18the nation’s past and the city’s current culture-ledrevitalisation projects and place branding strategies.The different senses interviewees attributed to cultureinformed their imaginings of the future cultural centrein downtown Buenos Aires. In short, these can be de-scribed as:• culture expressing distinction and the ﬁne arts: thebuilding as a modern and spectacular ‘CulturePalace’;• culture encompassing both elite and popular culture:the building as an inclusive cultural centre;• culture as social bonds, constitutive of the na-tional identity: the building as embodiment ofArgentineness;• culture as an abstract notion crucial for tourism pro-motion and economic and urban development: thebuilding as a multi-purpose tool, mainly an urbanmarketing resource;• culture as heritage: the palace as a listed buildingand part of one’s history; and• culture as remedy: the converted palace as a symbolof the failure and decadence of neoliberalprivatisation and its recovery through culture.The ambiguity surrounding the term culture did notimpede different social actors from appropriating it andconsidering it meaningful; on the contrary, it is the veryambiguity of the word, its malleable capacity to con-dense different meanings that encourages them toimagine what this term may mean. The various con-notations of the concept of culture found inmy analysisreassert the complexity and contestability of the termand certainly represent a very small proportion of theover a hundred deﬁnitions that Kroeber and Kluckhohn(1952) have found in anthropological discourses. Thestruggle over the uses of the postal building was ﬁnallydeﬁned by the power of a bureaucrat who decided toturn it into a cultural centre. The disputes over the cul-tural content of the CCB are not yet resolved, as thecultural centre is only under construction and its actualcultural programme is still uncertain.Culture and politics: divorce and reunionIn this section, I discuss the complex relationshipbetween culture and politics in light of the questionof hegemony. This question is central to an under-standing of culture as imbricated with politics throughits enabling of the production of consent and the craft-ing and acceptance of common sense. In the case studyof this paper, some interview narratives viewed cultureas an ‘apolitical’ resource, one that nonetheless playeda key political role: crafting consensus over the con-venience of cultural projects.At the core of the redevelopment of the postal build-ing were political reasons, that is, disputes over powerand prestige over the management of the building.Culture was invoked as an impartial strategy aimed atdefusing the existing tensions. This way,Projects with a cultural aura have a good press, theyare politically correct, for any functionary or poli-tician it is good to put them forward. On the otherhand, when residents want to do something some-where, they ask for a cultural centre, a generic one.They don’t even know what it may have inside, butthey think it is prestigious for their neighbourhoodto have a cultural centre (Architect and CCB Com-petition Advisor).The supposed political correctness and conve-nience of cultural projects are located in a context inwhich politics had come to be seen as a synonym ofcorruption, mismanagement and distrust. The con-testation of the whole government on these groundsand its subsequent rejection has characterised thegeneral feeling towards politics of vast sectors of theArgentine population during the last few decades, es-pecially in the aftermath of former President CarlosMenem’s mediatisation, spectacularisation and deni-gration of politics. This feeling of discontent reachedits peak in 2001 and exploded with the institutional,social, economic and political crises of Argentina whenthe collective slogan ‘Que se vayan todos’ (Out withthem all) called out for bringing down all politicians.In the wake of this distrust of politicians, oﬃcial culturewas presented in the aftermath of the crisis as de-politicised, as ideology-free, and therefore not stained withthe dirty image that politics had. In this logic, an ideaof culture as apolitical acquires prestige and mobilisesthe support of those who reject traditional politics andpoliticians. The political rationale of the CCB is clearin the following views on why a cultural centre wasto be built in the postal building:Because I think it was the neutral terrain. On the onehand, because it was a neutral issue, on the otherhand, because it is an issue that is always well re-ceived, is always appreciated (Architects’ CentralSociety Member).In this quotation culture is given two main conno-tations – it is convenient for politicians for it has ‘goodpress’ and it is ‘neutral’, that is, apolitical. They makepossible the operation I was describing earlier: the in-vocation of culture by politicians on the grounds of itsassumed apolitical character. This way of conceivingculture as distanced from politics and values repre-sents a dissociation from the political in relation to itsemancipatory discourse, the construction of citizen-ship and the possibility to tackle cultural inequalities(Wortman, 1997, pp. 80–81). Of course this bestows15C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18amythical5 character on culture, as there can be no cul-tural planning outside politics. If we understand cultureas the multiple ways in which systems of meaning,structures of power and institutions intermingle toproduce traditions, beliefs and rituals (Donald &Rattansi, 1992), these symbolic forms are in con-stant transformation and are not exempt from ideologyor power relations. They are, in fact, constituent partsof processes of domination (Ortner, 2005). Alluding tothe confrontation, alliances and negotiation betweensocial actors, culture is inescapably constituted by dis-putes, agency and power, history and change (Grimson& Semán, 2005, p. 20).It is important to consider here Gramsci’s ([1975]2007) concept of hegemony in relation to the centralrole that culture plays in the reproduction of the in-terests of the ruling classes, political leadership andthe production of consent. Hegemony alludes to thegeneral acceptanceof dominant ideas as ‘normal reality’or ‘common sense’ by those who are in positions ofsubordination in relation to a ruling class (Williams,1976, p. 145). Thinking through hegemony is particu-larly useful to see how the postal services and postalbuilding came to be seen as outdated, a threat to mo-dernity, devalued and almost useless, especiallywhencompared to cultural activities, perceived as of higherstatus. These ideas were taken for granted by someinterviewees; the conversion of the building into a cul-tural centrewas, therefore, seen bymany as inevitable.However, the cultural meaning of the redevelop-ment project today seems to have distanced itself fromthat which gave it birth in 2004. Culture, which wasconceived of as apolitical, is now re-politicised in thecontext of the current (national-popular) political ad-ministration. In fact, the Bicentenary Cultural Centre(CCB) has now been re-named after former Presi-dent Néstor Kirchner as the Centro Cultural NéstorKirchner (CCK). According to the new announce-ments, a broader conception of culture would sustainthe management of the new cultural centre wherepopular culture would be expressed and given a placeto be exhibited in the ‘modern’ rooms of the reno-vated postal palace. It is diﬃcult to assert at this pointwhether the CCK would be capable of challengingneoliberal trends in cultural planning and indeedbecome an inclusive space for the enactment of publicculture, beyond city marketing or nationalist cam-paigns. The unexpected ways in which policy projectsmobilise ideas of culture to re-signify public build-ings signal the uncertain future of the new culturalcentre in the emblematic post oﬃce building.ConclusionThe aim of this paper has been to examine the poli-tics underpinning culture-led urban regeneration inBuenos Aires, Argentina. When exploring why culturewas invoked as the solution to various problems af-fecting an emblematic public building in the city centre,the idea of culture as panacea has been employed todraw attention to the policy deployment of culture asthe inevitable path to the redevelopment of the postalbuilding. Particularly, it was seen as the solution to arange of problems claimed by interviewees: theunderuse of a national historical monument; the de-terioration of the city’s centre; the lack of a symphonicmusic venue in the capital city; the absence of greatarchitectural projects to honour the national bicen-tenary; and the lack of an international high-qualitycultural institution that could position the city in theglobal cultural map.The idea that ‘culture’was of higher value than thepostoﬃce became hegemonic and served to legitimise thecontinued dismantling of the postal institution throughthe displacement of the postal employees and the con-version of the postal palace into a cultural centre. Thisresonateswithwhat Carman (2006, p. 242) found in herstudy of the shopping-led regeneration of the Abastoneighbourhood in Buenos Aireswith its subsequent dis-placementofmigrants residents: ‘thatwhich is considered‘Culture’, in capital letters, or historical heritage – beyondits antiquity or authenticity – acquires the status of anindisputable andultimate truth’ (author’s translation). Thevalue of culture, in urban regeneration policy, was takenfor granted, and therefore remained out of question.The analysis has demonstrated that culture-ledurban regeneration acquired a peculiar form in Ar-gentina. Policy invocations of culture were aimed atde-politicising cultural activities in a particular his-torical moment post-2001/2002 crisis, when politicshad become a synonym of corruption and misman-agement. It was expected that the cultural initiativeswould come to legitimise political projects, other-wise of a suspicious or reprehensible nature. Thefunction of culture as a panacea came to erase a historyof neoliberal privatisation of public services thatequated state’s management with failure. Under thekirchnerista national administrations, however, the re-politicisation of culture became apparent with itsinvocation of national-popular elements, whichenacted understandings of culture associated withideas of national identity, reminding political adver-saries that culture is inevitably political. In turn, thisbrings back the fundamental role of the state at thecentre stage of urban cultural policy in Latin America.The paper has also explored how oﬃcial mean-ings of culture were contested by alternative claims.By tracing the emergence of a cultural use as the5 The idea of culture as myth is not new. Roland Barthes (1993), amongst others,has shown through his semiological analysis how culture can appear as depoliticiseddiscourse, yet as a myth it masks bourgeois ideology and contributes to reproduc-ing structures of power and domination.16 C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18solution to the problems affecting the postal build-ing, I examined the contested circumstances out ofwhich processes of culture-led urban regenerationemerge. Discussions over the refurbishment plansallowed social actors to imagine senses of culture andto represent them through their desired redevelop-ment ideas for the building. At stake were a numberof disputes over the practical and symbolic functionof the building. Talking about ‘culture’ encoded mean-ings about the value of the post oﬃce, the image ofthe city, the modernity of the nation, national iden-tity and political autonomy. Similarly, speaking of the‘post oﬃce’ condensed an image of the state based onthe quality of its provision of public services. Throughthese imaginaries, different understandings of culturewere produced. Indeed, these represented alterna-tive ways of imagining culture led to urbanregeneration strategies.This contention over urban cultural policy, undoubt-edly, illustrates the political nature of culture, forprocessesof signiﬁcationare composedof sharedmean-ings and values particular to a way of life (Williams,[1981] 1995, 1989), rooted in history and entangledwith relations of power (Storey, 2010, pp. 3–5). En-capsulating contending views, culture inexorably givesway to political controversywith its ‘skirmishes’, if notwars (Benhabib, 2002, p. 1), for the process of con-testation is concerned with the power to deﬁneconcepts, including the meaning of culture itself(Wright, 1998, p. 13). It is my intention to emphasisethe existence of diﬃculties in replicating policymodelsbased on a cultural rhetoric: culture is not a pre-given, universal category but one that social actors,embedded in local contexts and national histories,imagine, contest and re-signify in their engagementwith speciﬁc redevelopment projects.The paper has also examined what was at stake inredeveloping an industrial site through a cultural use.While the process of democratisation in many LatinAmerican cities enabled the development of urban cul-tural policy for socio-economic and urban regeneration(Kanai & Ortega-Alcázar, 2009), my research revealedthat policy-led cultural interventions in this area haveequally, and paradoxically, led to the destruction ofheritage and the displacement of postal workers. Thisoperation, in turn, was largely questioned by thosewithstake in the building in ﬁnancial, material, historical,cultural and political terms. These competing inter-ests showed that the building’s new function wouldbe in the interest of some but not of others. The controlover what the building would represent, what its newfunction would be and whose building would it endup being were matters of contention. Clearly culture-led urban regeneration is a process with winners andlosers (Dean, Donnellan, & Pratt, 2010; Keating &Frantz, 2004).Future research into such processes need to ac-knowledge their contending nature, framed withinexisting local histories, discussed in light of empiri-cal engagementswith stakeholders’ views and interests,and questioning the politics of cultural policies. Farfrom being neutral, the intervention of material cultureis always embedded in a local conﬁguration that shapesthe building at stake through intricate political pro-cesses. This reinforces the inadequacy of ‘one-size ﬁtsall’ models, so acclaimed internationally in the de-ployment of culture-led urban regeneration strategies.Furthermore, attention needs to be paid to under-standing how culture-led initiatives ‘from below’ alsocontribute to urban revitalisation in creative ways, forcultural ﬂagship projects have aweak relationship withartists (Comunian & Mould, 2014) in times when pro-moting creative cities has become the new mantra ofurban policy (Pratt, 2010). Investigating how the voicesof those with a stake in the sites to be regenerated canbest shape oﬃcial culture-led urban regeneration isequally required, if we are to critically interrogate,rather than simply celebrate, policy invocations ofculture as panacea.AcknowledgementsThe author would like to thank Prof Paul Gilroy forhis helpful guidance on the doctoral research whichthis paper is based upon. The Department of Sociol-ogy at the London School of Economics and PoliticalScience (LSE) provided ﬁnancial support for theconduct of this research. The University of London, theFoundation for Urban and Regional Studies Limited andThe Sir Richard Stapley Education Trust provided fundsto cover ﬁeldwork expenses during the PhD years. Theauthor is equally grateful to the research partici-pants for their time and cooperation.ReferencesAnderson, B. (2006 [1983]). Imagined communities. London: Verso.Arrese, A. (2003). Crisis en la Argentina, nuevos roles de la infraestructura cultural.In M. Carmona (Ed.), Globalización, Forma Urbana y Gobernabilidad. Valparaíso:Universidad de Valparaíso.Bailey, C., Miles, S., & Stark, P. (2004). Culture-led urban regeneration and therevitalisation of identities in Newcastle, Gateshead and the North East of England.International Journal of Cultural Policy, 10(1), 47–65.Barthes, R. (1993).Mythologies. London: Vintage.Bayardo, R. (2008). Políticas Culturales en la Argentina. In A. Rubim & R. Bayardo(Eds.), Políticas Culturais na Ibero-América (pp. 19–50). Salvador: EDUFBA.Benhabib, S. (2002). The claims of culture. Oxford: Princeton University Press.Bianchini, F., & Parkinson, M. (Eds.), (1993). Cultural policy and urban regeneration:The West European experience. Manchester: Manchester University Press.Carman, M. (2006). Las Trampas de la Cultura: Los “intrusos” y los nuevos usos del barrioGardel. Buenos Aires: Paidós.Comunian, R., & Mould, O. (2014). The weakest link: creative industries, ﬂagshipcultural projects and regeneration. City, Culture and Society, 5(2), 65–74.Dean, C., Donnellan, C., & Pratt, A. C. (2010). Tate modern: pushing the limits ofregeneration. City, Culture and Society, 1(2), 79–87.Dinardi, C.. (2012). Unsettling the culture panacea: The politics of cultural planning,national heritage and urban regeneration in Buenos Aires, (Doctoral thesissubmitted to the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE)).<http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/589/>.Donald, J., & Rattansi, A. (1992). Introduction. In J. Donald & A. Rattansi (Eds.), ‘Race’,culture and difference (pp. 1–8). London: Sage.17C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18Evans, G. (2009). From cultural quarters to creative clusters: Creative spaces inthe New City economy. In M. Legner (Ed.), The sustainability and developmentof cultural quarters: International perspectives (pp. 32–59). Stockholm: Instituteof Urban History.García, B. (2004). Urban regeneration, arts programming and major events.International Journal of Cultural Policy, 10(1), 103–118.Ghilardi, L. (2003). Culture at the Centre. Cultural planning: a strategic approachto successful and sustainable community-based regeneration in Scotland. NCPSGreport.Goodman, N. (1985). How buildings mean. Critical Inquiry, 11(4), 642–653.Gramsci, A. (2007 [1975]). Prison notebooks (Vol. 3 ed.) (A. Buttigieg, Trans.). NewYork: Columbia University Press.Grimson, A., & Semán, P. (2005). Presentación: La Cuestión “Cultura”. EtnografíasContemporáneas, 1(April), 11–22.Kanai, M., & Ortega-Alcázar, I. (2009). The prospects for progressive culture-led urbanregeneration in Latin America: cases from Mexico City and Buenos Aires.International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 33(2), 483–501.Keating, M., & Frantz, M. (2004). Culture-led strategies for urban regeneration: acomparative perspective on Bilbao. International Journal of Iberian Studies, 16(3),187–194.Keith, M. (2009). Figuring city change; understanding urban regeneration and Britain’sThames Gateway. In R. Imrie, L. Lees, & M. Raco (Eds.), Regenerating London:Governance, sustainability and community in a Global City (pp. 75–92). London:Routledge.Kroeber, A. L., & Kluckhohn, C. (1952). Culture: A critical review of concepts anddeﬁnitions. Cambridge, MA: Papers of the Peabody Museum. 47:1.Lacarrieu, M., & Alvarez, M. (2008). La (Indi)Gestión Cultural. Una Cartografía de losprocesos culturales contemporáneos. Buenos Aires: La Crujía.Landry, C., Greene, L., & Matarasso, F. (1996). The art of regeneration: Urban renewalthrough cultural activity. Bournes Green: Comedia.Miles, M., & Paddison, R. (2005). Introduction: the rise and rise of culture-led urbanregeneration. Urban Studies, 42(5/6), 833–839.Ministerio de Planiﬁcación Federal, Inversión Pública y Servicios. Centros Culturales,Área Sistemas, Subsecretaría de Coordinación y Control de Gestión. (2003–2011).<http://institucional.minplan.gov.ar/html/ccb/centros_culturales.php> Accessed5.07.12.Montgomery, J. (2003). Cultural quarters as mechanisms for urban regeneration. Part1: conceptualising cultural quarters. Planning, Practice & Research, 18(4), 293–306.Montgomery, J. (2004). Cultural quarters as mechanisms for urban regeneration. Part2: a review of four cultural quarters in the UK, Ireland and Australia. Planning,Practice & Research, 19(1), 3–31.Murmis, M., & Portantiero, J. C. (1971). Estudios sobre los Orígenes del Peronismo.Buenos Aires: Siglo Veintiuno Editores.Ortner, S. (2005). Geertz, Subjetividad y Conciencia Posmoderna. EtnografíasContemporáneas, 1(1), 25–54.Pratt, A. (2009). Urban regeneration: from the arts ‘Feel Good’ factor to the culturaleconomy: a case study of Hoxton, London. Urban Studies, 46(5&6), 1041–1061.Pratt, A. (2010). Creative cities: tensions within and between social, cultural andeconomic development. A critical reading of the UK experience. City, Culture andSociety, 1, 13–20.Rubim, A., & Bayardo, R. (Eds.), (2008). Políticas Culturais na Ibero-América. Salvador:EDUFBA.Shin, H., & Stevens, Q. (2013). How culture and economy meet in South Korea: thepolitics of cultural economy in culture-led urban regeneration. InternationalJournal of Urban and Regional Research, 37(5), 1707–1723.Storey, J. (2010). Culture and power: The politics of signiﬁcation. In J. Storey (Ed.),Culture and power in cultural studies. The politics of signiﬁcation (pp. 1–10).Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.Svampa, M. (1994). El Dilema Argentino: Civilización o Barbarie. De Sarmiento alRevisionismo Peronista. Buenos Aires: El Cielo por Asalto, Imago Mundi.Welch, G. (Ed.), (2005). Buenos Aires a la Deriva: Transformaciones Urbanas Recientes.Buenos Aires: Editorial Biblos.Williams, R. (1976). Keywords: A vocabulary of society and culture. London: Fontana/Croom Helm.Williams, R. (1995 [1981]). The sociology of culture. Chicago: The University of ChicagoPress.Williams, R. (1989). Culture is ordinary. In Resources of hope (pp. 3–18). London: Verso.Wortman, A. (1997). Nuevos Sentidos de la Palabra Cultura en la Sociedad Argentinadel Ajuste. Estudios Sociales: Revista Universitaria Semestral, 7(13), 59–84.Wright, S. (1998). The politicization of ‘Culture’. Anthropology Today, 14(1), 7–15.Yúdice, G. (2003). The expediency of culture: Uses of culture in the global era. Durhamand London: Duke University Press.Zukin, S. (1995). The cultures of cities. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.Zunino Singh, D. (2007). Los usos económicos de la cultura en los procesos de renovaciónurbana. Las políticas de patrimonio y el turismo en el caso del barrio de San Telmo(Casco Histórico de la ciudad de Buenos Aires. Master Thesis, IDAES-UNSAM.18 C. Dinardi/City, Culture and Society 6 (2015) 9–18