ABSTRACT: 
This paper proposes a new conceptual framework for jointly analysing the production of staff and patient welfare in health systems. Research to date has identified a direct link between staff and patient well-being. However, until now, no one has produced a unified framework for analysing them concurrently. In response, this paper introduces the "Frontier Framework". The new conceptual framework is applicable to all health systems regardless of their structure or financing. To demonstrate the benefits of its use, an empirical example of the Frontier Framework is constructed using data from the UK's National Health Service. This paper also introduces eight "Frontier Archetypes", which represent common patterns of welfare generation observable in health organisations involved in programmes of change. These archetypes may be used in planning, monitoring or creating narratives about organisational journeys. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this paper introduces the Frontier Framework , a new conceptual framework for jointly analysing the production of staﬀ and patient welfare in healthsystems . to demonstrate the beneﬁts of its use 
 , an empirical example of the Frontier Framework is constructed using data from the UK's National Health service . 
 this paper also introduces eight Frontier Archetypes,which represent common patterns of welfare generation observable in health or-ganisations involved in programmes of change . 
 these archetypes may be used in planning , monitoring orcreating narratives about organisational journeys . to demonstrate the beneﬁts of 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirectSocial Science & Medicinejournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/socscimedThe Frontier Framework (and its eight Frontier Archetypes): A newconceptual approach to representing staﬀ and patient well-being in healthsystemsDarrin L. BainesProfessor in Health Economics, Bournemouth University, Department of Accounting, Finance & Economics, 89 Holdenhurst Rd, Bournemouth BH8 8EB, United KingdomA R T I C L E I N F OKeywords:Conceptual frameworkFrontier frameworkFrontier ArchetypesWelfareWell-beingProductivityA B S T R A C TThis paper proposes a new conceptual framework for jointly analysing the production of staﬀ and patient welfarein health systems. Research to date has identiﬁed a direct link between staﬀ and patient well-being. However,until now, no one has produced a uniﬁed framework for analysing them concurrently. In response, this paperintroduces the “Frontier Framework”. The new conceptual framework is applicable to all health systems re-gardless of their structure or ﬁnancing. To demonstrate the beneﬁts of its use, an empirical example of theFrontier Framework is constructed using data from the UK's National Health Service. This paper also introduceseight “Frontier Archetypes”, which represent common patterns of welfare generation observable in health or-ganisations involved in programmes of change. These archetypes may be used in planning, monitoring orcreating narratives about organisational journeys.1. IntroductionA growing body of research suggests a clear relationship betweenemployee wellbeing and organisational performance (Renee Baptiste,2008; Truss et al., 2013; Anitha, 2014; Alfes et al., 2013; Harter et al.,2013; Grawitch and Ballard, 2016). Whilst the performance of healthsystems at producing beneﬁts for patients is routinely measured inmany countries worldwide, the creation of health gain is not the onlyset of beneﬁts that health systems can aﬀect (Evans et al., 2000).Through policy choices and management decisions, they can alter theenvironment, the work practices and the remuneration of their em-ployees, which can directly impact upon their well-being (ReneeBaptiste, 2008). As an example, poor working conditions can lead toboth physical and psychological problems such as work-related injuries,stress, depression and other detrimental conditions (Iacovides et al.,2003). In turn, deteriorating staﬀ welfare can lead to worsening patientoutcomes (Heinz, 2004). Therefore, it is vital that staﬀ experience ismanaged in ways beneﬁcial to patients.Even though most health systems collect large datasets that could beused to analyse the relationship between staﬀ and patient well-being,there is a currently a lack of scientiﬁcally valid methods for jointlypresenting this information so decisions can be made (Coulter et al.,2014). The “healthy workplace” is a widely acknowledged occupationalhealth concept that links staﬀ well-being (and its determinants) withorganisational productivity and success (Kelloway and Day, 2005).Researchers in the area make the foundational assumption that em-ployee well-being has a causal relationship with organisational per-formance (Van De Voorde et al., 2012). This belief is receiving in-creasing empirical support (Wright and Cropanzano, 2000). The WorldHealth Organisation (WHO) recently acknowledged its importance bypublishing a global framework for healthy workplaces (Burton, 2010).The document contains ﬂexible, evidence-based models for action thatcan be applied worldwide regardless of the sector or the setting.The WHO also provides a deﬁnition of a “healthy workplace” as“one in which workers and managers collaborate to use a continualimprovement process to protect and promote the health, safety andwell-being of workers and the sustainability of the workplace” (Burton,2010, p.16). The WHO's description is comprehensive in its coverage. Inresponse, the organisation called for the creation of new ways of pro-moting well-being and productivity in diﬀerent organisational settings.For instance, the global framework could easily be applied to healthsystems in most countries. The WHO's guidance on the healthy work-place is based upon the assumption that organisational performance isaﬀected by employee welfare. The evidence for such a relationship in ahealthcare setting is compelling. For instance, Pines and Maslach(1978) found that stress and subsequent burnout amongst staﬀ inmental health settings reduced the quality of care for patients. Simi-larly, Rauhala et al. (2007) observed that work overload reduced thequality of nursing care for patients due to staﬀ stress and absenteeism.In a similar vein, Firth-Cozens (2001) concluded that deﬁcits in patienthttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.04.043Received 5 September 2016; Received in revised form 21 December 2017; Accepted 24 April 2018E-mail address: dbaines@bournemouth.ac.uk.Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106Available online 04 May 20180277-9536/ © 2018 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).Tcare were associated with stress, depression and alcoholism amongstdoctors and other healthcare employees. In contrast, Maben et al.(2012) found that patients treated by satisﬁed, dedicated and positivestaﬀ can have a better experience, with direct implications for theirwell-being. As a result, they recommended that investment in employeewell-being is essential for the consistent delivery of high-quality care.As these studies suggest, there is much more to generating patientwelfare than just the performance of technical tasks (such as the pre-scription of drugs, the provision of surgery and the like).The purpose of this paper is to outline a new conceptual frameworkfor jointly analysing the production of staﬀ and patient welfare inhealth systems. The approach is novel because there has been no pre-vious attempt to create a conceptual tool that allows the mapping ofthese two variables simultaneously. Our approach facilitates perfor-mance measurement that reﬂects the growing evidence that staﬀ andpatient welfare are correlated, as well as reﬂecting the WHO's healthyworkplace initiative. In creating this novel framework, the approach isnot based upon the principles of microeconomics or welfare economics,which carry many theoretical stipulates that shape the analysis (Kaldor,1939). For instance, the former is concerned with the relationship be-tween the input of resources and the output of physical production,whilst the FF is concerned with mapping the two outputs of staﬀ andpatient well-being. The diﬀerence between the two approaches is thatmicroeconomics is concerned with the expenditure of resources toproduce outputs, whilst we do not conceptualise staﬀ welfare assomething expended in the traditional economic sense. In relation towelfare economics, it is assumed that welfare is maximised. In contrast,we make no normative assumptions about the eﬃciency of welfareallocations. Instead, we oﬀer a framework that maps observed re-lationships, which may show higher of levels of eﬃciency. In doing so,we make no normative claims about the desirability of any outputcombination. This is purely a performance measuring framework. It isdoes not adhere to the principles of welfare or microeconomics.The framework is constructed from a health system's point of viewand represents staﬀ and patient welfare simultaneously in a “FrontierFramework” diagram. Plotting the two forms of well-being on the samegraph allows healthcare decisions-makers to see if organisations withlow (or high) levels of staﬀ well-being also produce low (or high) levelsof beneﬁts for patients. The approach also highlights when the re-lationship between staﬀ and patient welfare is unexpected or deviatingfrom the norm. For instance, an organisation with very high employeewell-being may produce poor patient outcomes. The framework is animprovement on the current ways of linking staﬀ well-being and or-ganisational performance (Cotton and Hart, 2003). Fig. 1.1 shows theusual way of conceptualising this relationship. Employee welfare isassumed to be inputs into a unidimensional production function, whichhas performance as the output. This is problematic because the com-plexity of the connections between the two variables remains hidden. Incontrast, the Frontier Framework provides a better picture of the healthof an organisation than either analysing staﬀ or patient well-being se-parately or using an input-output approach.To show how management decisions can aﬀect staﬀ and patientwelfare over time, eight Frontier Archetypes (FAs) are presented dia-grammatically within the Frontier Framework. If adopted in practice,the archetypes could support planning, management and governance inways that could directly improve patient health and create better-working lives for employees. In particular, each FA has an accom-panying narrative (or story), which can help frame health systemplanning and decision-making.The Frontier Framework, and its associated archetypes, could makea signiﬁcant contribution to both research and practice, with a clearpotential to generate measurable improvements in health systems per-formance worldwide. The framework is designed to appeal to a broadinterdisciplinary and international readership. The approach has re-levance for research in a wide range of disciplines, including eco-nomics, management science, medical sociology, health psychology,epidemiology and public health. As health systems in all countries(regardless of their structure and public/private mix) can inﬂuenceboth staﬀ and patient welfare, the Frontier Framework is applicableinternationally and the concept is transferrable to all health settings. Tooutline the new framework in full, the following steps are taken: (i) theFrontier Framework diagram is introduced and explained, (ii) the use-fulness of the approach is demonstrated using an empirical example,(iii) the eight archetypes are speciﬁed and examples of their applicationgiven, (iv) beneﬁts and limitations are discussed, and (v) the conclusionis drawn that the Frontier Framework and its archetypes have make animportant contribution to both research and practice in a way thataFig. 1. 1: Standard Wellbeing and Performance model. 2: Frontier Frameworkdiagram. 3: Features of the Frontier Framework.abFig. 1. (continued)D.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–10699supports health systems monitoring and decision-making worldwide.2. The production frontierFig. 1.2 shows a production frontier created by plotting levels ofpatient and staﬀ welfare for thirteen hypothetical healthcare DMUs.The number of DMUs usually plotted will depend on the number oforganisations being studied, but here we use a small sample as an ex-ample. The vertical and horizontal axes represent staﬀ and patientwelfare, respectively. In the diagram, greater well-being is shown bylocations plotted further away from the origin (0). As it is commonpractice to rank healthcare providers in terms of their performance, thegraphed positions may be used to compare the relative ability of thethirteen DMUs to produce staﬀ and patient well-being (Jacobs, 2001).Out of the organisations plotted, numbers 1, 4, 7, 11 and 13 are themost productive because they exist at the points furthest away from theorigin. Their locations are linked by a solid line that represents thefrontier of what is technically possible in terms of production. Thehashed shading shows output levels outside of the frontier that are notfeasible at current levels of performance.Fig. 1.2 represents the highest levels of performance currentlyachieved by DMUs. Organisations within the frontier (2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10and 12) exhibit lower levels of output than their frontier counterparts.The relative performance of each organisation may be judged in termsof its position relative to the frontier and other DMUs. For instance,organisation 6 outperforms organisation 8 because of its position isnearer the frontier. If it wishes to move closer to the frontier, an or-ganisation may improve staﬀ welfare only (a vertical move upwards),increase patient welfare only (a horizontal move only), or a combina-tion of both (which involves a simultaneous increase in both forms ofwell-being). Therefore, positive gains are always shown by transitionsdue north, due east or northeasterly. In the Frontier Framework, it isassumed that such moves are always beneﬁcial regardless of whetherthe gains accrue to staﬀ only, patients only, or a mixture of the two.Fig. 1.2 also illustrates how trade-oﬀs are made between staﬀ andpatient welfare. DMUs frequently make decisions to produce one formof welfare by sacriﬁcing another. For instance, a short-term push toimprove patient well-being (that is, shifting right in the frontier 7diagram) may be achieved at a cost to staﬀ (that is, a downward shift inposition). A trade-oﬀ of this type can be represented by a downwardsloping arrow. For instance, if organisation 6 wishes to move to theposition occupied by organisation 10, then staﬀ welfare must be sa-criﬁced to create patient beneﬁts. This is signiﬁed by the south-easterlysloping arrow. Wherever they are located within the Frontier Frame-work diagram, downward sloping arrows like the one presented inFig. 1.2 always represent a trade-oﬀ because one type of welfare isgained by a loss of another. The same logic also applies to arrowspointing northwesterly. As well as showing rankings and trade-oﬀs, theFrontier Framework diagram can be used to represent a shift outwardsin the productive capabilities of frontier DMUs.As Fig. 1.3 shows, an improvement in maximum possible output canbe shown as a shift similar to that from PPF1 to PPF2. If organisations(1, 2, 3 and 4) on the frontier improve their ability to generate staﬀ andpatient welfare, then the frontier will be pushed north-easterly to PPF2.Fig. 1.2 may also be used to illustrate the economic concept of “op-portunity cost”. In standard economic theory, opportunity cost is de-ﬁned as the “value of beneﬁts foregone” by choosing one alternativeover the next best equivalent (Palmer and Raftery, 1999). For instance,DMUs that choose to increase pressure on key staﬀ by increasing thestrictness of management practices may observe welfare gains for pa-tients who receive better care. Therefore, the opportunity cost of thedecision to reduce staﬀ experience is the value of the patient well-beinggained.An example is shown in Fig. 1.2 where organisation 1 is at the pointwhere PPF1 touches the vertical axis. At this position, all of 1's pro-duction eﬀort is focused on producing staﬀ welfare only. (In mosthealthcare settings, this position is unrealistic because patient welfare isparamount. However, this extreme example is useful at illustrating theconcept of opportunity cost.) If organisation 1 decides to reduce staﬀwelfare 8 from S1 to S2, but uses its productive capacity to stay onPPF1, then the result will be an increase in patient welfare from P1 toP2. As shown, the gain in patient welfare is much larger than the loss ofstaﬀ welfare (because of the assumption of diminishing marginal re-turns). In economic terms, we may say that the opportunity cost ofproducing (P2 – P1) is (S1 – S2). Therefore, the diagram illustrates thatimprovements in patient welfare often have an opportunity cost, whichhealth system decision-makers should identify, measure and consider.The same is true in the opposite situation where staﬀ welfare is im-proved at a cost to patients.An important part of the FF approach is the acknowledgement thatthe relationship between staﬀ and patient welfare may be both positiveand negative. The assumption underpinning the literature is that, em-ployee welfare is often aﬀected by employer actions. As a result, patientwellbeing can fall signiﬁcantly. For this very reason, The WHO pro-motes health workplaces. The FF is equally able to accommodate po-sitive and negative relationships between staﬀ and patient welfare.Indeed, the archetypes presented below are designed to show howmanagement decisions can have both positive and negative implica-tions for both staﬀ and patients.2.1. An empirical exampleThe Frontier Framework is designed to be used empirically inplanning, management and research. To demonstrate the usability ofthe approach, data from the UK's National Health Service (NHS) wascollected and plotted in Fig. 2. To represent staﬀ welfare, data on theFig. 2. Percentage of staﬀ not experiencing stress versus patient overall experience of hospital care.D.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106100“percentage of staﬀ suﬀering work-related stress in last 12 months” inNHS Acute Trusts in England was taken from the NHS Staﬀ Survey 2015(NHS, 2015). To make this variable useable in the Frontier Framework,inverse results were created, so that the vertical axis of Fig. 2 representsthe percentage of staﬀ who did not experience work-related stress in thelast twelve months. To create a joint output co-ordinate for each acutehospital, data for the horizontal axis was collected from the NHS AdultInpatient Survey 2015 (Care Quality Commission, 2015). Questions 72of this survey asked patients to rank their overall experience of hospitalcare on a scale of 0–10, which is shown on the horizontal axis of Fig. 2.Combining the two datasets, information for 149 trusts was useable inthe analysis.The data presented in Fig. 2 is exploratory. Other sources could havebeen used, and wider measures of staﬀ and patient welfare adopted. Forour current purposes, employee stress and patient experience seem toreﬂect staﬀ and patient welfare very well. For the following reasons thedistribution of the data points ﬁt nicely into a frontier diagram. First,there are a small number of productive organisations that deﬁne thefrontier. Next, the majority of hospitals sampled are within the frontier,suggesting that their performance could be improved. Finally, there isclear evidence that some hospitals perform better at producing staﬀwelfare than patient well-being, and vice versa. Combined, these ob-servations suggest that there is a relationship between staﬀ and patientwelfare in UK acute hospitals.3. Frontier ArchetypesThe ﬁgures presented in this paper so far plot multiple DMUs on thesame diagram. This method is useful for comparisons between manyorganisations and establishing their position relative to what is pro-ductively feasible. In contrast, in this section the Frontier Frameworkrepresents single (or a small number of) organisations. The frontiersapproach is still adopted, but the emphasis is on dynamic movements inDMU position (that is, changes in staﬀ/patient welfare co-ordinates)rather than a static ranking of comparable organisations. In the dy-namic analysis, several stages (that is, two or more) in the transitionpath are shown in a single diagram. For instance, if a productive acutehospital merges with a failing neighbour, then the various stages oftheir merger are shown in terms of improvements and/or deteriorationsin staﬀ and/or patient welfare. Representing the stages of change in thisway is important because: (i) DMUs wish to know the welfare con-sequences of their decisions, (ii) the trade-oﬀs between staﬀ and patientwelfare are not ignored, and (iii) patterns in welfare pathways may beidentiﬁed and used in health systems decision-making.As transitions in staﬀ and patient welfare tend to follow commonlyobservable patterns, in this paper we adopt an “archetypes” (that is,original patterns or models from which all things of the same kind arecopied or based) methodology for mapping the intended and the un-intended consequences of change. The archetype approach is not new(Kirkpatrick and Ackroyd, 2003). It is particularly useful for the com-parative study of healthcare organizations (Dent et al., 2004). The in-novation in this paper is not the use of the archetypes in a healthcaresetting, but their application within a frontier diagram that includeboth staﬀ and patient welfare.As the eight FAs presented below illustrate, the Frontier Frameworkis particularly amenable to representing the consequences of DMUchoices in dynamic stages. For instance, the ﬁrst archetype clearlyshows how a short-term push for gains in patient welfare (in stage one)can have the unintended consequence of reducing staﬀ well-being (bythe end of stage two). As the framework is conceptual, no speciﬁc time-period is allocated to each of the transitional periods. However, it isrecommended that: (i) each stage is comparable in time to all others inthe same diagram, and (ii) stages are of a signiﬁcant length to generatesizeable and observable changes in the key variables of staﬀ and patientwelfare. By designing appropriate stages, FAs can represent commonpatterns of change (and their related feedback loops) diagrammatically.For instance, archetype seven shows how a plan to improve patientwelfare (in the short term) can create an unintended spiral downwardsin both patient and staﬀ well-being (in the longer-term). As this ex-ample illustrates, the dynamic structure of the various archetypesmakes them useful for mapping the welfare 11 consequences of choicesmade by DMUs.The FAs are designed to be valuable for health systems planning,strengthening and research. As well as the archetypes listed in thesubsections below, readers may be able to identify and to create ar-chetypes of their own, based upon the principles outlined here.Therefore, the Frontier Framework, and its associated archetypes, couldmake a signiﬁcant contribution to both research and practice, with aclear potential to generate measurable improvements in health systemsperformance worldwide.3.1. Archetype OneWithin frontier organisation, short-term push for patient welfareimprovements Within most healthcare systems, the majority of provi-ders are less productive than their leading-edge counterparts. Thepoorest performing organisations tend to have common features such asreduced patient outcomes, low staﬀ morale and inadequate budgetmanagement (Verbeeten, 2008). Fig. 3.1, represents a DMU with rela-tively low staﬀ and patient welfare, which is shown by point A. Toimprove performance, the hospital develops a new mission statement(McDonald and Sarfraz, 2015). In the short term, it achieves an im-mediate gain in patient welfare only (with no improvement in staﬀwell-being). This is shown as a horizontal move from A to B. Althoughpatient care improves initially, increased pressure on employees resultsin a fall in their welfare. As an example, staﬀ burnout is commonamongst nurses pushed too hard to care for patients (Khamisa et al.,2015). As their well-being deteriorates, staﬀ are less able to sustainimprovements in patient care. The organisation consequently movesfrom B to C, which yields fewer beneﬁts in both dimensions. In sum, FAOne represents an organisation unable to maintain planned improve-ments in patient outcomes, with detrimental consequences for staﬀ. If adownward sloping arrow was drawn from A to C, this would representthe opportunity cost of staﬀ beneﬁts sacriﬁced for patient gains.3.2. Archetype twoWithin frontier organisation, virtuous cycle of improvements Wellmanaged, healthy organisations are able to create beneﬁts for theircustomers whilst improving staﬀ quality of life. Often, within frontierDMUs have the capacity to achieve the same level of outcomes as theirpeers on the frontier, but fail to do so because of a lack of appropriateleadership. For instance, Archetype Two shows an organisation far fromthe frontier in both dimensions of well-being. A change in its seniormanagement team results in better planning, stronger governance andenhanced delivery mechanisms. In particular, stricter adherence to thelatest evidence-based practice generates better patient outcomes, whichhelps clinicians discover what works, leading them to seek more evi-dence (Kovacs, 2015). Consequently, both staﬀ and patient welfareincreases from A to B. Because the improvements were properlyplanned and executed, they are sustainable. In contrast to ArchetypeOne, beneﬁts for patients are not achieved at an opportunity cost toemployees. In this archetype, strong leadership and good managementpractice create a “virtuous circle”, which makes the achievements se-cured during stage one, the stimulus for further positive changes duringthe next stage. As a result, the advances secured during the move fromA to B lead to further gains for both staﬀ and patients, from B to C.Then, further gains are made from C to D. The process of improvementstops when the frontier is met because the organisation knows how tocatch-up with its leading-edge peers but does not know how to surpasstheir performance. In sum, FA Two represents a successful DMU, whosemanagement practices create a virtuous circle that leads to continualD.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106101improvements for both staﬀ and patients until the frontier is reached.3.3. Archetype threeWithin frontier organisation, focusing on patients more than staﬀExcellent management can create excellent results. However, not allobjectives can always be achieved with available resources. Good lea-dership involves choosing the best alternatives amongst competingoptions. Consequently, diﬃcult decisions must be made and compro-mises reached. Successful management involves delivering results asplanned based upon such hard choices. Archetype Three shows an or-ganisation choosing to focus more on patient outcomes than staﬀ well-being. With limited resources, few DMUs can aﬀord to generate equalbeneﬁts for patients and employees as they strive to deliver better re-sults. As an example, this could be a healthcare provider that has failedto involve staﬀ in the process of re-designing patient services (Robertet al., 2015).With constant pressure on delivering improved outcomes for pa-tients, most healthcare providers focus less on enhancing the wellbeingof their employees. For instance, the organisation represented byArchetype One did nothing to promote staﬀ well-being. At the otherextreme, Archetype Two did as much for staﬀ as patients. Betweenthese two approaches, Archetype Three probably represents thepathway most commonly followed by healthcare organisations seekinggains. The DMU is well within the frontier at point A and decides tofocus its energies on improving patient wellbeing. During this process,staﬀ welfare improves slightly, but there is no substantial push toimprove the quality of their lives. For instance, a mental health servicemight oﬀer staﬀ wellbeing initiatives (Coates and Howe, 2015). How-ever, extra resources are not provided to cover growing workloads.In balance, small gains are secured for employees, with the resultthat their well-being is not deteriorated by patient-focused policies. Inthe diagram, the move from A to B is beneﬁcial for patients, but alsoavoids deteriorations in staﬀ well-being that could aﬀect patient care.Despite its success, the organisation does not reach the frontier. As fewDMUs actually reach their target frontier, position B probably reﬂects agood achievement for a lagging organisation keen to improve. In sum,FA Three shows an organisation within the frontier that focuses pri-marily on patient welfare, but in a way that does not deteriorate staﬀwell-being.3.4. Archetype fourFrontier organisation, trading-oﬀ but not improving Archetype Fourportrays an organisation in the challenging position of wishing to makesubstantial gains in patient welfare but being limited in its ability to doso by its nearness to the frontier. As Fig. 3.4 shows, if the organisationtries to improve patient welfare only (shifting horizontally to the right),the frontier would soon be reached. This implies that the technicalmeans of creating patient well-being (such as the provision of drugs andsurgery) are almost exhausted in their ability to generate substantiallymore improvements. With the potential for technical gains being lim-ited, the DMU may choose to deteriorate staﬀ welfare as a short-termmeans of improving patient outcomes. For instance, clinicians can bea bdcFig. 3. The eight Frontier Archetypes. 1: Within frontier organisation, short term push for patient welfare improvements. 2: Within frontier organisation, virtuouscycle of improvements. 3: Within frontier organisation, focusing on patients more than staﬀ. 4: Frontier organisation, trading-oﬀ but not improving. 5: Frontierorganisation, sustainable improvements. 6: Frontier organisation successfully merging with organisation within the frontier. 7: Stuck within the frontier, failingorganisation. 8: Frontier hospital working with failing nursing home.D.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106102pushed to work harder, to sacriﬁce more and to give from their ownstock of well-being (Scheepers et al., 2015). In the short-term, patientsmay beneﬁt from this tradeoﬀ. However, the opportunity cost is a lossof staﬀ welfare. As overall gains are not made, the DMU moves nonearer to the frontier. Instead, the trade-oﬀ between patient and staﬀwelfare is represented by the south-easterly shift from A to B. Eventhough this shift helps the DMU achieve short-term gains for patients,the deterioration in employee well-being suggests that the gains may beshort-lived. In sum, FA Four represents an organisation near to thefrontier that is forced to diminish the well-being of its staﬀ to makeshort-term gains in patient well-being. This may not be a sustainablestrategy, particularly when the path followed by Archetype One isconsidered.3.5. Archetype ﬁveFrontier organisation produces sustainable shift in frontier Leading-edge organisations often push forward the frontier of what is possible.For instance, hospitals recognised for transformational leadership, ex-emplary professional practice and constant innovation are likely toimprove both staﬀ and patient well-being (Kutney-Lee et al., 2015).Very rarely do DMUs situated within a frontier ﬁnd ways of movingbeyond the leaders in their ﬁeld. This is because followers tend to adoptexisting technical means of production rather than innovating the waysthings are done. Archetype Five shows a leading-edge organisation thatdeﬁnes the bounds of what is possible with current technology. Situatedat A, the DMU cannot improve upon its current performance unless itsfrontier shifts away from the origin. Frontiers usually move outwardsbecause of a change in technology or enhanced methods of production.If better ways of treating patients are developed, or new ways ofincreasing staﬀ well-being are implemented, the frontier will move.Such a situation is shown in Fig. 3.5 where new technology and/orimproved production methods shift the DMU from A to B. At the newfrontier, the organisation produces more of both forms of welfare,which beneﬁts both staﬀ and patients. For example, a hospital in-troduces transformational leadership that improves job satisfaction andcreates a better patient experience (Medley and Larochelle, 1995;Jabnoun et al., 2005). As both groups gain, the increased productionoutput is likely to be sustainable. In sum, FA Five represents an orga-nisation that utilises new technology and/or production methods tosuccessfully shift out its frontier.3.6. Archetype sixFrontier organisation successfully merging with organisation withinthe frontier As shown in Fig. 3.6, leading edge organisations such as theone at A often try to push the boundaries of what is possible. Within theFrontier Framework, this is shown by an outward shift in the frontier.As well as innovating the production process, the best organisations areoften asked to help those struggling to raise their standards. For in-stance, the DMU at point 1 has staﬀ and patient welfare levels wellbelow those achievable. To improve its productivity, the organisation at1 merges with the organisation at A and a shared goal is formalised forthem both. However, the experienced management teams at bothhospitals understand the factors that promote success (Cohen et al.,2001). For instance, no clinical service should be integrated simply forthe sake of merging. Constant communication is necessary betweenleadership and staﬀ. The Board should be patient in having eventsprogress over time. During the merger, the DMU at A decides tomaintain a steady state in its performance, whilst helping its newe fhgFig. 3. (continued)D.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106103partner reach the frontier at point 2. This move is the ﬁrst stage in themerger process. As the initial transition is successful, the merged or-ganisations decide to innovate their production processes so that theirjoint frontier is pushed outwards. Given its relatively high staﬀ sa-tisfaction levels, the leading organisation focuses on improving patientwelfare only (a horizontal move from A rightwards). Because of itscentral location, the partner decides to generate both staﬀ and patientwell-being (a north-easterly shift from point 2). As a result of theircombined eﬀorts, both organisations successfully reach their sharedgoal during the second stage of the merger. Consequently, a newfrontier is created and both DMUs achieve similar levels of staﬀ andpatient well-being. In sum, FA Six shows how a frontier organisationcan successfully help an organisation within the frontier improve itsperformance, with longer-term gains for both.3.7. Archetype sevenStuck within the frontier, failing organisation Sometimes organisa-tions cannot break their vicious cycle of poor performance. For in-stance, the DMU shown in Fig. 3.7 has relatively low levels of both staﬀand patient welfare. In response, the Chief Executive is sacked andmanagement consultants are employed to take remedial action. In-troducing a new management regime, short term gains are made inboth forms of well-being, shifting the organisation from A to B. Al-though this success is celebrated, the organisation does not have anysubstantial new money to promote sustainable change. Desperate toreplicate their achievements to date, the management consultants in-crease pressure on clinical staﬀ. As a result, patient outcomes improve,but only because there is a trade-oﬀ with staﬀ well-being that moves theorganisation from B to C. From a management perspective, this tran-sition is not viewed negatively. Patient outcomes have improved greatlyover the last two periods, whilst staﬀ welfare has not dropped below itsoriginal position at A. Given their success, the consultants leaveclaiming that the failing organisation has been “turned around”. On thesurface, their claim is true: things have gotten much better for patients.However, underneath a seed of future failure has been sown. As anexample, evidence suggests that insecurity amongst health workersundermines their trust in their workplace. In turn, this aﬀects theirperformance and the services that patients receive (Aﬀord, 2003). Al-though they are not objectively worse oﬀ, staﬀ feel relatively deprivedbecause they compare their current welfare to the peak (at B) not theiroriginal position (at A). The perceived loss of welfare demoralisesemployees and their sense of well-being drops signiﬁcantly, pullingpatient welfare down as well. The organisation is now at point D.During the next period, staﬀ welfare stabilises but patient well-beingfalls, returning the organisation to the original level of patient welfare(observed at A). The organisation is now at E. In two transition periods,the work of the management consultants at improving patient well-being has been completely undone, whilst driving staﬀ welfare to itslowest ever level. Given the downward cycle, the organisation reaches acrisis point, and both forms of welfare rapidly fall to F. This organisa-tion is clearly failing as a result of short-term solutions creating long-term problems. At point F, the situation is so bad that the organisationprobably has little option but to close. In sum, FA Seven shows how anorganisation can become stuck within a vicious circle of poor perfor-mance, despite initial eﬀorts to improve.3.8. Archetype eightFrontier hospital working with failing nursing home Economists talkabout “hidden action” and “hidden information” as being commonfeatures of any situation in which an individual or organisation tries totransact with a third party (Arrow, 1984). In Fig. 3.8, the hospitalshown at point A decides to work more closely with the nursing homeshown at point 1 in order to improve patient discharge times. From thehospital's perspective, the joint working partnership is ideal becausethey both have similar levels of patient welfare. What the hospital doesnot know (because of hidden information) is that the nursing home hasrelatively low levels of staﬀ well-being. As the two organisations beginto work together, diﬀerences in their levels of staﬀ ﬂourishing begin toshow. During transition period one, the motivated and happy staﬀ inthe hospital improve patient well-being from A to B, pushing theirfrontier outwards. In the nursing home, a decline in staﬀ welfare re-duces patient welfare from 1 to 2. For instance, staﬀ experience burn-out and inappropriate medication use begins to rise (Cooper et al.,2016; Beers et al., 1991). Given the unacceptably low levels of staﬀ andpatient well-being in the home, the hospital ceases the joint workingrelationship. During the period that follows, the hospital remains at itsproductive limit (shown by B), whilst the nursing home declines furtherto 3. If properly monitored and sanctioned, the nursing home may beforced to close or to change management because of its unacceptablypoor performance. In sum, FA Eight shows how a leading-edge orga-nisation can misinterpret signals from a potential partner and enter intoa short-term relationship that fails to deliver expected outcomes.4. DiscussionThe Frontier Framework focuses on the importance of the re-lationship between staﬀ and patient well-being. Evidence that staﬀwell-being directly aﬀects patient outcomes is widespread but receivesless attention than deserved because studies are published in a widerange of journals, across place and time. Staﬀ input is vital to patientwelfare (Mitchell, 2013). Unhappy staﬀ are likely to produce pooreroutcomes (Aiken et al., 2002). For instance, Eaton (2000) found a linkbetween human resource management and the quality of patient care innursing homes. West (2001) argued that the management of staﬀmatters for the quality of patient care. Garman et al. (2002) discovereda connection between staﬀ burnout and patient satisfaction. West et al.(2002) reported that the management of employees aﬀects patientmortality in acute hospitals. Chang et al. (2009) found a relationshipbetween job satisfaction and patient perceptions of care quality. Simi-larly, McHugh et al. (2011) suggested that job dissatisfaction, burnoutand frustration amongst nurses creates problems for patients. Graban(2011) presented the case that hospital management could improveemployee satisfaction alongside patient outcomes if a lean methodologyis adopted. This handful of examples (combined with those cited in theintroduction) reﬂects a wider literature that outlines a direct link be-tween staﬀ and patient well-being.Given the importance of this relationship, the Frontier Framework islikely to be a useful tool for analysing performance in health systems.From the perspective of ranking DMUs, the Frontier Framework canhelp decisionmakers determine which organisations are performingbest. However, the basic diagram does not capture the dynamic natureof welfare creation. In response, the Frontier Framework was accom-panied by eight FAs. These archetypes show how common patterns ofchange aﬀect staﬀ and patient well-being. Although archetypes are notnormally incorporated into frontier diagrams, there is much support forthis approach. For instance, Woodward et al. (1999) examined a singlehospital that attempted to re-engineer its working practices. Attemptsto improve hospital performance resulted in depression, anxiety, emo-tional exhaustion and job insecurity amongst employees, particularlyduring the ﬁrst year of the change process. According to the authors,this pattern continued. Two years after the initial reforms, they ob-served deteriorations in team working, lack of role clarity and an in-creased use of distractions to cope. During both periods of change,patient welfare suﬀered. As this example illustrates, most organisationsare on a journey.The FAs capture the steps in eight journeys commonly followed byhealth system organisations. Given their dynamic nature, the arche-types (along with those created by users themselves) are likely to beinvaluable in health systems planning, management and research. To beuseful, the Frontier Framework must be adopted in practice. As the NHSD.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106104example in Section Three outlined, data on staﬀ and patient welfaremust be collected for a frontier to be created. To be useful in a healthsystem context, data must be locally relevant, meaningful and acceptedas a good proxy for the welfare types being measured. Once the relevantdata is collected, a Frontier Framework diagram can be easily created ina software package such an Excel by creating a scatterplot of the twovariables. Such a diagram will help decision-makers and analysts ranktheir DMUs in terms of productivity. As this analysis is static, furtherinsights can be created by working with FAs that reﬂect local circum-stances.The various archetypes can be used as a conceptual tool for framingdiscussions or can be constructed with data from individual organisa-tions. The FAs have many uses but are probably most relevant whenlarge changes in staﬀ or patient welfare are involved. In sum, theconceptual framework outlined here suggests that the FrontierFramework and its accompanying archetypes could have an importantplace in health systems planning, management and analysis.Limitations Frontiers are usually used by economists and operationalresearchers to measure eﬃciency and have been frequently used inhealth care settings (Worthington, 2004). The frontiers approach is nowwidely accepted (Caro et al., 2010). In a healthcare setting, frontierestimation has been used to analyse the uppermost levels of eﬃciencyachievable by DMUs (Newhouse, 1994). Data Envelopment Analysis(DEA) is a main approach to frontier estimation used by economists andoperational researchers (Seiford and Thrall, 1990; Bates et al., 1998;Cooper et al., 2004). In contrast to the usual DEA approach, the FrontierFramework is not designed to measure eﬃciency. The frontiers drawnin the diagrams are designed to show the limits of what may be pro-duced. They are not meant to represent maximum levels of costeﬀec-tiveness. This could be seen as a limitation of the approach when ap-plied to cash-limited health systems. In defence, the framework isconcerned with production possibilities rather than levels of economy.Whether organisations use less or more resources to secure their posi-tion is irrelevant. Just as spectators ignore the eﬃciency (measured interms of the caloriﬁc inputs they consumed versus their positioncrossing the ﬁnishing line) of athletes who win a race, the FrontierFramework is only interested in the position or ranking against thefrontier. Therefore, the approach is not applicable to situations wherethe relationship between resource use and outcomes is deemed im-portant. The Frontier Framework solely focuses on welfare outputs.Resource inputs are not considered in this conceptual framework.5. ConclusionsThe Frontier Framework is a novel approach to analysing staﬀ andpatient well-being. The framework has relevance for research in a widerange of disciplines and is transferrable to all health settings worldwide.This paper demonstrates the validity of this novel methodology. Toenrich the analysis, eight FAs were introduced to represent commonpatterns of change. If adopted in practice, the archetypes could supportplanning, management and governance. Therefore, the conclusion isdrawn that the Frontier Framework, and its associated archetypes,could make a signiﬁcant contribution to both research and practice,with a clear potential to generate measurable improvements in healthsystems performance worldwide.AcknowledgementThe author would like to thank Dr. Vivian Lin, Director, HealthSystems, WHO Western Paciﬁc, and her team for their comments on theﬁrst draft of this papers. Thanks also to the two anonymous refereeswho provided useful comments and suggestions.ReferencesAﬀord, C.W., 2003. Corrosive Reform: Failing Health Systems in Eastern Europe.International Labour Oﬃce, Geneva.Aiken, L.H., Clarke, S.P., Sloane, D.M., Sochalski, J., Silber, J.H., 2002. Hospital nursestaﬃng and patient mortality, nurse burnout, and job dissatisfaction. Jama 288 (16),1987–1993.Anitha, J., 2014 Apr 1. Determinants of employee engagement and their impact on em-ployee performance. Int. J. Prod. Perform. Manag. 63 (3), 308.Alfes, K., Truss, C., Soane, E.C., Rees, C., Gatenby, M., 2013 Nov 1. The relationshipbetween line manager behavior, perceived HRM practices, and individual perfor-mance: examining the mediating role of engagement. Hum. Resour. Manag. 52 (6),839–859.Arrow, K.J., 1984. The economics of agency (No. TR-451). Stanford univ Ca inst formathematical studies. In: The Social Sciences.Bates, J.M., Baines, D.L., Whynes, D.K., 1998. Assessing eﬃciency in general practice: anapplication of data envelopment analysis. J. Health Serv. Manag. Res. 11, 1–6.Beers, M.H., Ouslander, J.G., Rollingher, I., Reuben, D.B., Brooks, J., Beck, J.C., 1991.Explicit criteria for determining inappropriate medication use in nursing home re-sidents. Arch. Intern. Med. 151 (9), 1825–1832.Burton, J., World Health Organization, 2010. WHO Healthy Workplace Framework andModel: Background and Supporting Literature and Practices.Care Quality Commission, 2015. NHS Adult Inpatient Survey 2015. Care QualityCommission, London.Caro, J.J., Nord, E., Siebert, U., McGuire, A., McGregor, M., Henry, D., Kolominsky-Rabas,P., 2010. The eﬃciency frontier approach to economic evaluation of health-careinterventions. Health Econ. 19 (10), 1117–1127.Chang, W.Y., Ma, J.C., Chiu, H.T., Lin, K.C., Lee, P.H., 2009. Job satisfaction and per-ceptions of quality of patient care, collaboration and teamwork in acute care hospi-tals. J. Adv. Nurs. 65 (9), 1946–1955.Coates, D.D., Howe, D., 2015. The design and development of staﬀ well-being initiatives:staﬀ stressors, burnout and emotional exhaustion at children and young people'smental health in Australia. Adm. Pol. Ment. Health 42 (6), 655–663.Cohen, J.R., Dowling, M., Gallagher, J.S., 2001. The trials, tribulations, and relativesuccess of the ongoing clinical merger of two large academic hospital systems. Acad.Med. 76 (7), 675–683.Cooper, W.W., Seiford, L.M., Zhu, J., 2004. Data Envelopment Analysis. In Handbook onData Envelopment Analysis. Springer US, pp. 1–39.Cooper, S.L., Carleton, H.L., Chamberlain, S.A., Cummings, G.G., Bambrick, W.,Estabrooks, C.A., 2016. Burnout in the nursing home health care aide: a systematicreview. Burnout Res. 3 (3), 76–87.Cotton, P., Hart, P.M., 2003. Occupational wellbeing and performance: a review of or-ganisational health research. Aust. Psychol. 38 (2), 118–127.Coulter, A., Locock, L., Ziebland, S., Calabrese, J., 2014. Collecting data on patient ex-perience is not enough: they must be used to improve care. BMJ 348 (mar26 1)g2225–g2225.Dent, M., Howorth, C., Mueller, F., Preuschoft, C., 2004. Archetype transition in theGerman health service? The attempted modernization of hospitals in a North Germanstate. Publ. Adm. 82 (3), 727–742 25.Eaton, S.C., 2000. Beyond ‘unloving care’: linking human resource management andpatient care quality in nursing homes. Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 11 (3), 591–616.Evans, D.B., Tandon, A., Murray, C.J., Lauer, J.A., 2000. The Comparative Eﬃciency ofNational Health Systems in Producing Health: an Analysis of 191 Countries. WorldHealth Organization, Geneva.Firth-Cozens, J., 2001. Interventions to improve physicians' well-being and patient care.Soc. Sci. Med. 52 (2), 215–222.Garman, A.N., Corrigan, P.W., Morris, S., 2002. Staﬀ burnout and patient satisfaction:evidence of relationships at the care unit level. J. Occup. Health Psychol. 7 (3), 235.Graban, M., 2011. Lean Hospitals: Improving Quality, Patient Safety, and EmployeeSatisfaction. CRC Press.Grawitch, M.J., Ballard, D.W., 2016. The Psychologically Healthy Workplace: Building aWin-Win Environment for Organizations and Employees. American PsychologicalAssociation.Harter, J.K., Schmidt, F.L., Agrawal, S., Plowman, S.K., 2013 Feb. The RelationshipBetween Engagement at Work and Organizational Outcomes. Gallup Poll ConsultingUniversity Press, Washington.Heinz, D., 2004. Hospital nurse staﬃng and patient outcomes: a review of current lit-erature. Dimens. Crit. Care Nurs. 23 (1), 44–50.Iacovides, A., Fountoulakis, K.N., Kaprinis, S., Kaprinis, G., 2003. The relationship be-tween job stress, burnout and clinical depression. J. Aﬀect. Disord. 75 (3),209–221 26.Jabnoun, N., Juma, A.L., Rasasi, A., 2005. Transformational leadership and servicequality in UAE hospitals. Manag. Serv. Qual.: Int. J. 15 (1), 70–81.Jacobs, R., 2001. Alternative methods to examine hospital eﬃciency: data envelopmentanalysis and stochastic frontier analysis. Health Care Manag. Sci. 4 (2), 103–115.Kaldor, N., 1939. Welfare propositions of economics and interpersonal comparisons ofutility. Econ. J. 549–552.Kelloway, E.K., Day, A.L., 2005 Oct. Building healthy workplaces: what we know so far.Can. J. Behav. Sci./Rev. Can. Sci. Comport. 37 (4), 223.Khamisa, N., Oldenburg, B., Peltzer, K., Ilic, D., 2015. Work related stress, burnout, jobsatisfaction and general health of nurses. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 12 (1),652–666.Kirkpatrick, I., Ackroyd, S., 2003. Archetype theory and the changing professional or-ganization: a critique and alternative. Organization 10 (4), 731–750.Kovacs, R.J., 2015. Using practice-based evidence to reduce disparities in care: a virtuouscycle turns. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 66 (11), 1234–1235.Kutney-Lee, A., Stimpfel, A.W., Sloane, D.M., Cimiotti, J.P., Quinn, L.W., Aiken, L.H.,2015. Changes in patient and nurse outcomes associated with magnet hospital re-cognition. Med. Care 53 (6), 550–557.D.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106105Medley, F., Larochelle, D.R., 1995. Transformational leadership and job satisfaction.Nurs. Manag. 26 (9), 64JJ.Maben, J., Peccei, R., Adams, M., Robert, G., Richardson, A., Murrells, T., Morrow, E.,2012. Exploring the Relationship between Patients' Experiences of Care and theInﬂuence of Staﬀ Motivation, Aﬀect and Well-being. Final report. NIHR ServiceDelivery and Organization Programme, Southampton.McDonald, A., Sarfraz, A., 2015. Failing hospitals: mission statements to drive serviceimprovement? Leader. Health Serv. 28 (2), 77–82.McHugh, M.D., Kutney-Lee, A., Cimiotti, J.P., Sloane, D.M., Aiken, L.H., 2011. Nurses'widespread job dissatisfaction, burnout, and frustration with health beneﬁts signalproblems for patient care. Health Aﬀ. 30 (2), 202–210 27.Mitchell, G., 2013. Selecting the best theory to implement planned change: improving theworkplace requires staﬀ to be involved and innovations to be maintained. GaryMitchell discusses the theories that can help achieve this. Nurs. Manag. 20 (1), 32–37.National Health Service, 2015. NHS Staﬀ Survey 2015. Pickering Institute, London.Newhouse, J.P., 1994. Frontier estimation: how useful a tool for health economics? J.Health Econ. 13 (3), 317–322.Palmer, S., Raftery, J., 1999. Opportunity cost. BMJ 318 (7197), 1551–1552.Pines, A., Maslach, C., 1978. Characteristics of staﬀ burnout in mental health settings.Psychiatr. Serv. 29 (4), 233–237.Rauhala, A., Kivimäki, M., Fagerström, L., Elovainio, M., Virtanen, M., Vahtera, J., et al.,2007. What degree of work overload is likely to cause increased sickness absenteeismamong nurses? Evidence from the RAFAELA patient classiﬁcation system. J. Adv.Nurs. 57 (3), 286–295.Renee Baptiste, N., 2008. Tightening the link between employee well-being at work andperformance: a new dimension for HRM. Manag. Decis. 46 (2), 284–309.Robert, G., Cornwell, J., Locock, L., Purushotham, A., Sturmey, G., Gager, M., 2015.Patients and staﬀ as codesigners of healthcare services. BMJ 350, g7714.Scheepers, R.A., Boerebach, B.C., Arah, O.A., Heineman, M.J., Lombarts, K.M., 2015. Asystematic review of the impact of physicians' occupational well-being on the qualityof patient care. Int. J. Behav. Med. 22 (6), 683–698.Seiford, L.M., Thrall, R.M., 1990. Recent developments in DEA: the mathematical pro-gramming approach to frontier analysis. J. Econom. 46 (1), 7–38.Truss, Catherine, et al., 2013. Employee Engagement, Organisational Performance andIndividual Well-being: Exploring the Evidence, Developing the Theory. pp.2657–2669.Van De Voorde, K., Paauwe, J., Van Veldhoven, M., 2012. Employee well-being and theHRM–organizational performance relationship: a review of quantitative studies. Int.J. Manag. Rev. 14 (4), 391–407.Verbeeten, F.H., 2008. Performance management practices in public sector organizations:impact on performance. Account Audit. Account. J. 21 (3), 427–454.West, E., 2001. Management matters: the link between hospital organisation and qualityof patient care. Quality in Health Care 10 (1), 40–48.West, M.A., Borrill, C., Dawson, J., Scully, J., Carter, M., Anelay, S., et al., 2002. The linkbetween the management of employees and patient mortality in acute hospitals. Int.J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 13 (8), 1299–1310.Woodward, C.A., Shannon, H.S., Cunningham, C., McIntosh, J., Lendrum, B.,Rosenbloom, D., Brown, J., 1999. The impact of re-engineering and other cost re-duction strategies on the staﬀ of a large teaching hospital: a longitudinal study. Med.Care 37 (6), 556–569.Worthington, A.C., 2004. Frontier eﬃciency measurement in health care: a review ofempirical techniques and selected applications. Med. Care Res. Rev. 61 (2), 135–170.Wright, T.A., Cropanzano, R., 2000 Jan. Psychological well-being and job satisfaction aspredictors of job performance. J. Occup. Health Psychol. 5 (1), 84.D.L. Baines Social Science & Medicine 208 (2018) 98–106106