ABSTRACT: 
This article examines the changes and continuities in the depiction of the violent relationship between the popular glove puppets, Punch and Judy, over the course of the nineteenth century. While the puppet show emerged as a low-brow street entertainment during the first decades of the nineteenth century, by 1850 it had been hijacked by the middle and upper classes, and began to appear with increasing frequency in fashionable drawing rooms. At the same time, the relationship between the two central characters, Punch and Judy, was substantially modified. On the streets, during the first half of the century, the Punches' marriage had both reflected the continuing popularity of the early modern theme of the 'struggle for the breeches' and encapsulated familial tensions that resulted from the pressures of industrialisation and urbanisation. However, from 1850 the middle classes attempted to reshape the relationship into a moral tale in order to teach their children valuable lessons about marital behaviour. Yet, at the same time, the maintenance of violence in the portrayal of the Punches' conjugal life exposed crucial patterns of continuity in attitudes towards marriage, masculinity, and femininity in Victorian England. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this article examines the changes and continuities in the depiction of the violent relationshipbetween the popular glove-puppets , Punch and Judy , over the course of the nineteenth century . while thepuppet show emerged as a low-brow street entertainment during the ﬁrst half of the century , by 1850 it had been hijacked by the middle and upper classes , and began to appear with increasing frequencyin fashionable drawing rooms . at the same time 
 , the relationship between the two central characters , Punchand Judy , was substantially modiﬁed . on the streets , during the ﬁr 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Open Research OnlineThe Open University’s repository of research publicationsand other research outputsMr and Mrs Punch in Nineteenth-Century EnglandJournal ItemHow to cite:Crone, Rosalind (2006). Mr and Mrs Punch in Nineteenth-Century England. The Historical Journal, 49(4) pp.1055–1082.For guidance on citations see FAQs.c© [not recorded]Version: [not recorded]Link(s) to article on publisher’s website:http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1017/S0018246X06005735Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyrightowners. For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult the policiespage.oro.open.ac.ukMR AND MRS PUNCH INNINETEENTH-CENTURY ENGLAND*ROSAL IND CRONESt John’s College, CambridgeA B S T R ACT. This article examines the changes and continuities in the depiction of the violent relationshipbetween the popular glove-puppets, Punch and Judy, over the course of the nineteenth century. While thepuppet show emerged as a low-brow street entertainment during the ﬁrst decades of the nineteenth century, by1850 it had been hijacked by the middle and upper classes, and began to appear with increasing frequencyin fashionable drawing rooms. At the same time, the relationship between the two central characters, Punchand Judy, was substantially modiﬁed. On the streets, during the ﬁrst half of the century, the Punches’marriage had both reﬂected the continuing popularity of the early modern theme of the ‘ struggle for thebreeches ’ and encapsulated familial tensions that resulted from the pressures of industrialization andurbanization. However, from 1850 the middle classes attempted to reshape the relationship into a moraltale in order to teach their children valuable lessons about marital behaviour. Yet, at the same time, themaintenance of violence in the portrayal of the Punches ’ conjugal life exposed crucial patterns of continuity inattitudes towards marriage, masculinity, and femininity in Victorian England.On accepting Mr McLean’s oﬀer of marriage, Miss Ailie, the well-loved schoolteacher of the village, invited her class of young pupils to the wedding receptionand, as a farewell treat before handing them over to the new teachers,Mr McLean organized a Punch and Judy show for their entertainment. However,given the nature of the occasion, Miss Ailie thought that this entertainment mightbe inappropriate. She consulted many respectable people in the village, butnone could see a way out of the diﬃculty. Then Tommy, her favourite pupil,found a solution.The performance took place, and none of the fun was omitted, yet neither Miss Ailienor Mr Dishart could disapprove. Punch did chuck his baby out of the window (roarsof laughter) in his jovial, time-honoured way, but immediately thereafter up popped theshowman to say, ‘Ah, my dear boys and girls, let this be a lesson to you never todestroy your oﬀspring. Oh, shame on Punch, for to do the wicked deed; he will becatched [sic] in the end, and serve him right. ’ Then, when Mr Punch had wallopedLiterature Department, Faculty of Arts, The Open University, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA R.H.Crone@open.ac.uk* I would like to thank Peter Mandler, Vic Gatrell, Margot Finn, Elizabeth Foyster, SimonDevereaux, Ben Griﬃn, participants of the Modern Cultural History Seminar in Cambridge, and thetwo anonymous referees for their tremendously helpful comments and advice on the preparation ofthis article.The Historical Journal, 49, 4 (2006), pp. 1055–1082 f 2006 Cambridge University Pressdoi:10.1017/S0018246X06005735 Printed in the United Kingdom1055his wife with the stick, amid thunders of applause, up again popped the showman:‘Ah, my dear boys and girls, what a lesson is this we sees, what goings on is this? Hehave bashed the head of her who should ha’ been the apple of his eye, and he doesnot care a – he does not care; but mark my word, his home will now be desolate, nomore shall she meet him at his door with kindly smile, he have done for her quite, andnow he is a haunted man. Oh, be warned by his sad igsample [sic], and do not bashthe head of your loving wife. ’1This ﬁctional account of a late nineteenth-century Punch and Judy show con-tained in J. M. Barrie’s Sentimental Tommy (1896) is perhaps slightly exaggerated,but its satirical value is important. The glove-puppet show ﬁrst appeared onLondon’s streets at the turn of the nineteenth century, its violent portrayal of wifemurder proving popular with audiences. At the beginning of the Victorian age,Punch and Judy were invited into the middle-class home, their troubles trans-formed by respectable adults into a didactic nursery tale. However, as Barrie’snarrative demonstrates, the process of change was never fully completed. Instead,the juxtaposition of violence and morality ultimately came to reﬂect the confusionand contradictions inherent in contemporary assumptions about marriage andconﬂict.Recent scholarship has displayed a growing interest in the issue of conﬂict andviolence within the home. Focusing predominantly on cases of actual violencebetween co-habiting men and women, historians have exposed the prevalence ofconﬂict, especially in working-class households, despite the emergence of com-panionate ideals of marriage. While historians on the one hand emphasize theworsening position of women, particularly victims of domestic violence, historianson the other hand demonstrate ways in which women were able to manipulatenew gender deﬁnitions in order to seek redress for the behaviour of theirhusbands.2 In an eﬀort to review these conclusions, Martin Wiener has examinednarratives of violence in the cultural imagination. By comparing famous intimatemurders from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, Wiener concludes that,with the rise of sensibility and the redeﬁnition of roles of men and women,the prevailing ‘public nightmare ’ changed. While women were increasingly1 J. M. Barrie, Sentimental Tommy: the story of his boyhood (London, 1896), p. 397.2 For example, see A. James Hammerton, Cruelty and companionship : conﬂict in nineteenth-century marriedlife (London, 1995) ; Nancy Tomes, ‘A ‘‘ torrent of abuse’’ : crimes of violence between working-classmen and women in London, 1840–1875’, Journal of Social History, 11 (1977), pp. 328–45; Anna Clark, Thestruggle for the breeches : gender and the making of the British working class (Berkeley, 1995) ; Anna Clark,‘Domesticity and the problem of wife-beating in nineteenth-century Britain: working-class culture,law and politics ’, in Shani D’Cruze, ed., Everyday violence in Britain, 1850–1950: gender and class (Harlow,2000), pp. 27–37; Ellen Ross, ‘ ‘‘Fierce questions and taunts ’’ : married life in working-class London,1870–1914’, Feminist Studies, 8 (1982), pp. 575–602; Judith Walkowitz, ‘ Jack the Ripper and the myth ofmale violence’, Feminist Studies, 8 (1982), pp. 543–74; Shani D’Cruze, Crimes of outrage : sex, violence andVictorian working women (De Kalb, 1998) ; Mary Lyndon Shanley, Feminism, marriage and the law in VictorianEngland, 1850–1895 (Princeton, 1989) ; Maeve Doggett, Marriage, wife-beating and the law in VictorianEngland (Columbia, 1993).1056 RO S A L I N D C RON Erepresented as less dangerous and more in need of protection, men becameperceived as more dangerous and more in need of control.3However, this cultural imagination, especially in the nineteenth century, wasfar more complicated and ambiguous than Wiener suggests. Ideals and expec-tations of marriage that achieved such crucial status during the Victorian periodwere not so clear-cut. Instead, the persistence of older stereotypes and paradigms,as well as the harsh realities of conjugal life, meant that confusion and contra-diction became entrenched in nineteenth-century discourses on marital conﬂict.Unease with behaviour that did not conform to respectable norms and dis-appointment with the limited achievements of companionate marriage helpedto muddy the waters and allowed for a large measure of continuity in additionto the change that Wiener highlights.With its comical representation of domestic violence and its great popularity,the Punch and Judy show formed an important component of the culturalimagination. From its emergence at the turn of the nineteenth century, thisglove-puppet show followed a basic episodic structure in which Punch dealt withdiﬀerent antagonists, ﬁnishing scenes by either murdering or otherwise disposingof his opponents. The show was very socially sensitive and the cast of charactersfeatured in its episodes frequently changed, reﬂecting wider contemporarydevelopments. However, throughout the century, one episode consistentlyfeatured as part of the performance: Punch’s turbulent and violent relationshipwith his wife, Judy. The regularity with which this scene was played and its greatpopularity (to the extent that the colloquial name of the show became ‘Punch andJudy’) meant that Punch and Judy became icons of marital conﬂict. Thesecharacters and their problems were regularly extracted from the show bycontemporaries as their violent relationship oﬀered an opportunity for privatematters to be discussed in the public sphere.IPast historians of Punch and Judy have long debated the roots of the glove-puppetshow, drawing attention to both domestic and foreign inﬂuences as well asPunch’s former glory as a marionette.4 However, the emergence of Punch inglove-puppet form at the opening of the nineteenth century marked a signiﬁcantturning point for both the entertainment and his characterization. In contrastto the popular eighteenth-century marionette shows, this new glove-puppetperformance was extremely violent as Punch wielded his deadly stick against3 Martin J. Wiener, ‘Alice Arden to Bill Sikes : changing nightmares of intimate violence inEngland, 1558–1869’, Journal of British Studies, 40 (2001), pp. 184–212; and Martin J. Wiener, Men ofblood : violence, manliness and criminal justice in Victorian England (Cambridge, 2004), especially pp. 123–68.4 Robert Leach, The Punch and Judy show: history, tradition and meaning (Athens, GA, 1985) ; GeorgeSpeaight, Punch and Judy : a history (London, 1979) ; Scott Cutler Shershow, Puppets and ‘popular ’ culture(Ithaca, 1995) ; Peter Fraser, Punch and Judy (London, 1970) ; Michael Byrom, Punch and Judy : its origin andevolution (Aberdeen, 1972).M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1057any who crossed his path. The puppet’s new brutality signiﬁcantly modiﬁed theportrayal of his marriage, as the hen-pecked buﬀoon of the eighteenth centurywas transformed into a murderous wife-beater. George Speaight attributes thisviolence to the mechanics of glove puppetry as, given the limited actions of glove-puppets and the diﬃculties of dialogue within the showman’s box, violent ﬁghtsprovided the lively action necessary to attract an audience.5 But whatever thereason for high levels of violence, the new Punch and Judy show rapidly provedto be a success. Audiences enjoyed Punch’s violent conquests. Although theincreasingly common name given to the thuggish puppet was clearly anabbreviation of his eighteenth-century appellation, ‘Punchinello ’, ‘Punch’, in thecontext of his new role, was also certainly suggestive.With the development of the glove-puppet show, a cast of characters wasintroduced to share the stage with Punch. While there was some variationbetween showmen, a number of these characters were common to all shows,including Punch’s wife Judy, a foreigner, blind man, publican, constable, hang-man, and the Devil. As the showman attempted to attract a casual audience,Punch’s encounters with each adversary were performed as self-contained epi-sodes, so that passers-by could join or leave at any time. Punch’s violent dealingswith these characters have prompted attempts by historians to decipher themeaning of the Punch and Judy show. George Speaight, for example, argues thatto try to extract a meaning from Punch’s progress is to seek the impossible, yetRobert Leach asserts that Punch, rebelling against the constraints of varioussocial controls, was a working-class hero and in his triumph Leach discovers asubversive and dangerous message.6 However, this violent entertainment needsto be placed more ﬁrmly within the context of early nineteenth-century societyand theatrical culture for its purpose, and the symbolic use of its characters, tobe understood.While the Punch and Judy show was not entirely devoid of meaning, it wasalso not as contrived as Leach believes. Instead, its wide appeal to such a diverseaudience and its emergence in a gregarious and masculine Regency culture hintsat both subversive and conservative undertones.7 As Punch murders the variouscharacters who cross his path, the show presents a kind of mini-revolution, yet atthe same time mocks this very idea in its exaggerated and outrageous violence.Punch’s progress thus becomes a satire. Moreover, the puppet show presents aninteresting and important contrast with the theatrical genre of melodrama. Itspopularity challenges the presumed ascendancy of melodrama in popular cultureduring the ﬁrst half of the century. In his study of the melodramatic genre,Peter Brooks identiﬁes the operation of a ‘moral occult ’ : by presenting thehighly dramatic conﬂict between good and evil, melodramatic plays sought5 Speaight, Punch and Judy, p. 76.6 Ibid., pp. 78–9, 84; Leach, The Punch and Judy show, pp. 35, 54–5.7 J. M. Golby and A. W. Purdue, The civilisation of the crowd: popular culture in England, 1750–1900(London, 1984), p. 65.1058 RO S A L I N D C RON Eto demonstrate the existence of a moral universe. The apparent triumph ofvillainy in a frightening new world devoid of moral order presented at thebeginning of a melodrama is thus shattered with the eventual victory of virtue.8With its banal violence and the ultimate triumph of the immoral murderer,Punch, early nineteenth-century Punch and Judy shows present a stark oppositeto melodrama, particularly with their debunking of sentimentality. In thiscontext, Punch and Judy’s relationship is also suggestive. Historians have usedmelodrama and its presentation of seducer-betrayal narratives to highlightthe place of the ‘delicate damsel ’ in the cultural imagination, demonstratingthe increasing acceptance of changing deﬁnitions of femininity.9 The character-ization of Mr and Mrs Punch, however, presents an important contrast.The turbulent but not especially violent relationship shared by the hen-peckedPunch and his eighteenth-century wife Joan emerged from a tradition in earlymodern plebeian culture that, in seeking to enforce marital ideals and expec-tations, regularly depicted marital conﬂict as arising from female challenges tothe ‘natural ’ patriarchal order. Street ballads and broadsides from the seven-teenth and eighteenth centuries presented humorous images of disorderly womenor shrews and weak, unmanly husbands in order to ridicule alternatives topatriarchal marriage.10 For example, one broadside, The married man’s complaintwho took a shrow [sic] instead of a saint, described the fate of an ineﬀectual‘Hen-peckt Husband’ under the authority of his ‘Head-Strong wife ’, with anaccompanying illustration of the couple’s tug-of-war with the symbolic breeches.11While the portrayal of Punch and Judy’s conjugal life during the nineteenthcentury continued this tradition, the puppets ’ relationship also became infusedwith a new brutality as Punch now used his deadly stick to reassert his mascu-linity. This crucial development largely reﬂected the substantial impact oftremendous social upheaval on cultural perceptions of marriage and gender.As a result of shifts in deﬁnitions of masculinity and femininity as well as socialand economic upheaval during the early industrial period, the traditional themeof the ‘struggle for the breeches ’ was dramatically reshaped. A misogynist streak8 Peter Brooks, The melodramatic imagination : Balzac, Henry James, melodrama and the mode of excess (NewHaven, 1976), pp. 13–17, 20–2.9 Wiener, ‘Alice Arden to Bill Sikes’, pp. 184–212. See also Judith Walkowitz, City of dreadful delight :narratives of sexual danger in late Victorian London (Chicago, 1992), pp. 85–102; Anna Clark, ‘Rape orseduction? A controversy over sexual violence in the nineteenth century’, in London Feminist HistoryGroup, ed., Men’s power, women’s resistance : the sexual dynamics of history (London, 1983), pp. 13–27; AnnaClark, ‘The politics of seduction in English popular culture, 1748–1848’, in Jean Radford, ed., Theprogress of romance : the politics of popular ﬁction (London, 1986), pp. 47–72; Martha Vicinus, ‘Helpless andunfriended: nineteenth-century domestic melodrama’, New Literary History, 13 (1981), pp. 127–43.10 Joy Wiltenburg, Disorderly women and female power in the street literature of early modern England andGermany (Charlottesville, 1992), p. 7, 9, 28; Natalie Zemon Davis, Society and culture in early modern France(Stanford, 1975), pp. 124–51, especially pp. 142–3.11 The married man’s complaint who took a shrow instead of a saint, Oxford, Bodleian Library (Bod.), FrancisDouce Collection, vol. II. See also Advice to bachelors, or, a caution to be careful in their choice, Bod., FrancisDouce Collection, vol. I.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1059emerged in popular culture. Women, rather than men, became primary targetsfor mockery and images of violence began to feature in representations ofmarriage.12 Anna Clark relates the appearance of such songs and caricatures, aswell as the increase of domestic violence, to new sources of tension that aroseduring the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Libertine pleasures ofmetropolitan life and the increasing ﬂexibility of plebeian morals could sparkﬂares of jealousy and fanned fears of abandonment. More signiﬁcantly,traditional bachelor journeyman culture clashed with new realities of married life.Mechanization, the growth of large-scale production, and the decreasing relianceon skilled labour had severely disrupted traditional patterns of artisan life.Although many journeymen were now unable to proceed to the status of master,they still chose to marry or cohabit, but at the same time refused to transferloyalty from their workmates to their wives. Furthermore, journeymen’s limitedincomes meant that they were dependent on their wives’ earnings to support thefamily economy. Conﬂict erupted when women’s independence gained fromwage earning clashed with their husbands ’ desire to dominate. The misogyny andviolence inherent in artisan fraternities also emerged in mainstream culture.Clark describes at some length the role of the wife-beating cobbler, the subject ofmany ballads and jokes.13 Just as prominent was the brutal puppet Punch, whobeat his wife into submission almost daily before large audiences.Although Punch and Judy made regular appearances on London’s streetsduring the ﬁrst half of the century, John Payne Collier’s transcription ofGiovanni Piccini’s Punch and Judy show, published in 1828, is the only survivingscript of a performance. In the autumn of 1827, Piccini performed an exclusiveshow in the parlour of the King’s Arms, Drury Lane, for Collier and GeorgeCruikshank, who had been commissioned by a publisher to transcribe andillustrate a Punch and Judy show. Collier’s Punch and Judy, complete with scriptand note on the history of the show, was a great success and many subsequenteditions were released to meet popular demand.14As evidence of an actual street performance, Collier’s script contains inherentproblems. First, this is a transcript of a private show for two gentlemen.Moreover, Piccini constantly paused the performance to allow Collier to tran-scribe and Cruikshank to sketch, thus some of the impact of the live performancemay have been lost. Finally, Collier’s addition of mock scholarly notes on thehistory of the show immediately raises some questions about the seriousness of hisintentions and suggests that he may have even added some literary ﬂair to thescript itself.15 Despite these reservations, when added to other descriptions ofcontemporary Punch and Judy shows, Collier’s script seems to be quite accurate12 V. A. C. Gatrell, ‘Sex, men and caricature in London, 1770–1820’ (unpublished paper presentedat the Modern Cultural History Seminar, Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, 23 Feb. 2005).13 Clark, The struggle for the breeches, pp. 5–7, 31–4, 64, 87.14 Paul McPharlin, ‘The Collier–Cruikshank Punch and Judy’, Colophon, 1 (1936), pp. 371–87.15 Speaight, Punch and Judy, p. 81.1060 RO S A L I N D C RON Eand, for the most part, the performance seen would have been the performancethat was transcribed. The episode between Punch and his wife certainly follows aﬁrmly established pattern, as does the rest of the show, and it is doubtful thatthe book would have achieved such popularity if the script was too remotefrom the performance. Furthermore, the fact that this script forms an account ofhow Collier (and Cruikshank) saw and absorbed the show, makes it even moreuseful for understanding how the Punches’ relationship was perceived andinterpreted, informing contemporary views on conjugal life.The marital relationship between Punch and Judy forms a substantial part ofthe ﬁrst act of Piccini’s show and the nature of conﬂict between the couple unfoldsthrough song, dialogue, and combat. Throughout the scene important lessons onshrew-taming are invoked as the power relationship between the spouses is clearlyestablished. Although the audience does not meet Judy immediately in this text,her voice is heard from below the stage, refusing to comply with Punch’s requeststo appear with him. When she ﬁnally does emerge, the ﬁrst few seconds of thescene establish the nature of their life together. Punch attempts to be aﬀectionatewith his ‘pretty ’ wife, but instead receives a slap across the face and Judy’sshrewishness or ‘disorderliness ’ is conﬁrmed. Judy then fetches their baby andplaces it in Punch’s care. Punch plays with the child in an inappropriate manner,singing homespun nursery ditties which emphasize the unbearable state of hismarriage. For example,Oh rest thee, my darling,Thy mother will come,With a voice like a starling ;-I wish she was dumb!The baby soon wakes and, unable to stop it from wailing and screaming, Punchbecomes impatient and throws it out the window.Judy soon returns and is devastated to learn of the fate of her child. She rushesto fetch a stick and begins a savage assault on her husband. Violence is initiatedby Judy as she strikes the ﬁrst blow, and it is only after pleading with his wifeto cease her attack against him that Punch snatches the stick. He begins amurderous assault, attempting to ‘ tame’ his unruly wife, crying ‘How you likemy teaching Judy, my pretty dear … Yes, one littel [sic] more lesson. ’ Judy soonfalls to the ﬂoor and becomes silent. Punch, at ﬁrst, believes she is play acting:‘There, get up Judy, my dear ; I won’t hit you anymore … This is only your fun. ’When he ﬁnally realizes that he has murdered her, Punch shrugs his shoulders,tosses her body from the stage and celebrates her death in song:Who’d be plagued with a wifeThat could set himself freeWith a rope or a knife,Or a good stick, like me.1616 John Payne Collier, Punch and Judy (London, 1828), pp. 69–76.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1061Figs. 1, 2, and 3. For legend see opposite page.1062 RO S A L I N D C RON EThe grossly exaggerated violence and Punch’s nonchalant attitude about hiswife’s death make the scene rather humorous and ridiculous. Moreover, Punch’sdisposal of his wife’s body objectiﬁes her. Thus, with his re-establishment ofmastery in his household, Punch becomes a hero, while little sympathy is left forhis painful and ugly wife.Extreme violence also characterizes Punch’s encounters with other puppets inPiccini’s show, including the doctor, servant, and blind man. When Punch isﬁnally sent to the gallows, he succeeds in tricking the hangman into placing hisown neck in the noose and the show closes with Punch’s terriﬁc defeat of theDevil. These ﬁnal conquests create a sense of closure. However, while John PayneCollier transcribed an entire Punch and Judy show, in reality performances couldhave been concluded at any point.Accompanying Collier’s transcription of the show are George Cruikshank’sillustrations of the puppets in action. Judy is presented as the instigator of theviolence. After Punch’s careless disposal of his child, Judy charges with stick inhand towards her husband who cowers in a corner. Punch only reacts to thisassault and in the next illustration we see Punch clutching the stick while Judy’slimp body hangs over the edge of the stage (see Figs. 1, 2, and 3). The physicalappearance of the puppets themselves is also signiﬁcant. Captured in theseFigs. 1, 2, and 3. George Cruikshank’s illustrations for John Payne Collier’s Punch and Judy, 1828.Author’s private collection.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1063sketches are the well-known ﬁgures of Punch and Judy; these portraits closelyresemble illustrations of the show by contemporary artists such as Robert andIsaac Cruikshank (see Figs. 4 and 5). Judy is shabbily dressed with an eighteenth-century mop cap, has a long crooked, warty nose and is generally quiteunattractive. She represents the stereotypical shrew. Although Punch has someFig. 5. Isaac Cruikshank, ‘Punch’s puppet shew’, 1795. By permission of the Bodleian Library,University of Oxford: John Johnson Collection, Miniature Theatre 3.Fig. 4. Robert Cruikshank’s ‘Doings of Punch and Judy’, featured in George Smeeton, Doings inLondon, 1828. By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.1064 RO S A L I N D C RON Esimilar features (the long nose and red face), he resembles a more comicalcharacter, especially with his jester’s hat. George Cruikshank also assumes someartistic licence in his interpretation of Piccini’s show: his puppets changeexpressions – Punch shows fear, while Judy scowls. In performance, the comicaland exaggerated features of Punch and Judy, as well as the inability of theirwooden faces to express emotion or pain, are crucial as the audience is distancedfrom the violence and the characters themselves become diﬃcult to identify with.When respectable Victorians later used the puppets for diﬀerent purposes theywould attempt to exploit this feature.The layout and appeal of Collier’s Punch and Judy also provides some cluesabout the audience present at Punch’s performances. Given the tone of theliterary analysis and script itself, those who purchased this book would have beenadult and educated. In Regency London, Punch enjoyed fame in all classes ashis audiences were so diverse. The location of the show on the street meant thatthe performance became popular with those who regularly used this public space,from working people and their families to men of the higher classes. Sketches ofPunch and Judy shows from this period illustrate this heterogeneity : working menand women, pausing between errands, congregate at the front of Punch’s stage,while higher elements gather around the edges. Adults also far outnumberchildren.17Literary men regularly wrote about the Punch and Judy shows they saw,describing this audience and celebrating Punch as their hero. In their accounts,they describe with particular pleasure the Punches ’ marital conﬂict. They isolatethese characters and, while not identifying with the puppets themselves, usePunch and Judy to symbolize the inevitable clash between the sexes. A corre-spondent to Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine in 1839 pondered,if I were a woman of the lower grade, in which alone men are privileged to beat their wives,I would raise a female mob, and draw the merry ruﬃan [Punch] from the streets [as theremust have been many a husband present who] would see, in the general applause, anexcuse for beating his wife.18But this correspondent fundamentally misunderstood the puppet show. Despitethe enjoyment of violence, the Punch and Judy show did not expressly condonewife-beating, or indeed, wife-murder, for those in the audience. Humour andsatire trivialized the beatings administered by Punch to his wife, ridiculing Judy’splight. The ‘utility ’ of violence in marriage was, in part, recognized. After all,in this case violence did achieve a solution to Punch’s domestic problems.17 See for example audience descriptions in John Eagles, ‘Reﬂections on Punch: morals andmanners’, Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, 45 (1839), pp. 190–200; Anon., ‘The puppet show’, LiterarySpeculum, 1 (1821), p. 155; and J. T. Smith, Nollekens and his times (London, 1828), p. 114.18 Eagles, ‘Reﬂections on Punch’, p. 190. The German Prince Puckler-Muskau similarly questionedwhat eﬀect the Punch and Judy show had on the morality of the lower classes. See Prince Hermannvon Puckler-Muskau [E. M. Butler, ed.], A Regency visitor : the English tour of Prince Puckler-Muskau, trans.Sarah Austin (London, 1957), p. 87.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1065However, its extreme presentation overrode any explicit sanctioning of violencein the domestic sphere. The irony inherent in Punch and Judy is all-important, asthe following author recognized.Charles Molly Westmacott’s The English spy (1826) is a satirical portrayal ofthe life of the ﬁctitious Bernard Blackmantle. In seeking to make a proﬁtablemarriage, Blackmantle is forced by his father to visit the Alderman, Mr Marigold,and his daughter, Miss Biddy. During his visit, a Punch and Judy show beginsbeneath the window. Westmacott provides an animated description of theaudience that gathers at the sound of Punch’s trumpet, including the butcher’sboy, lamplighter, cook, and servant girl, all pausing to enjoy the violent conquestsof the heroic puppet. This rather diverse audience is reﬂected in RobertCruikshank’s accompanying aquatint (see Fig. 6). Wealthy Londoners, forexample, the Alderman’s family, watch from their windows and balconies. In thetop right-hand corner, one such aﬄuent lady, captivated by Punch’s fear of Judy’sghost, absent-mindedly drops her baby from the window, reﬂecting Punch’scareless disposal of his own child. This image establishes a contrast with thethoughts of the Alderman. As he and Blackmantle delight in Punch’s reassertionof authority over his shrewish wife, the Alderman cries ‘what a true picture ofthe storms of life ! – how admirable an essay on matrimonial felicity ! ’. Thus theAlderman ponders, as did other literary gentlemen, about the hen-pecked menin the audience who may follow Punch’s example. At the same time, CruikshankFig. 6. Robert Cruikshank’s ‘The great actor, or Mr Punch in all his glory’, featured in Charles MollyWestmacott, The English spy, 1826. By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.1066 RO S A L I N D C RON Esuggests that this domestic scene, and the attitudes reﬂected within it, were not soisolated from their own lives.19Thus, Punch, in spite of his unlawful behaviour and murderous deeds, waswelcomed in literature as a hero. As a correspondent to the Literary Speculum (1821)exclaimed, ‘Oh! Punch! with all thy faults I love thee still ! ’20 In contrast, theseliterary gentlemen have little sympathy for Judy, the termagant, who is often heldaccountable for the Punches’ marital problems. Her unwomanly behaviour and‘provocations ’ are used to excuse Punch’s violence. Furthermore, commentsmade in higher-class journals demonstrate how Judy, as an icon, continuedto evolve outside the actual performance. She is frequently portrayed as anunfaithful wife, even though accounts of performances suggest no such con-clusion. 21 Moreover, the character of Judy is invoked to describe other disorderlywomen. In an article in Fraser’s Magazine (1831), the author wrote of an encounterexperienced by his travelling companion at a dinner party. The young gentlemanwas imposed upon by his host’s cousin, Miss Snooks, whose outspoken natureand physical appearance reminded him precisely of Mrs Punch from the pagesof Collier’s Punch and Judy : ‘Yes, Miss Snooks, the old maid, was the wife ofMr Punch … The same weasel eyes, the same sharp voice and hooked chin, andthe same nose. ’22I IDespite the great popularity of the Punch and Judy puppet shows with all classesduring the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century, when Henry Mayhew met with ashowman during the early 1850s a grave sense of pessimism pervaded the inter-view. It was immediately apparent that business was not as lucrative as it hadbeen in previous decades. The showman explained that twenty years ago hecollected ﬁve pounds a week on average, earning seven or eight shillings fromeach street performance. However, ‘a good day for us now seldom gets beyondﬁve shillings … Often we are out all day, and get a mere nuﬃng [sic] ’. In theopen street, Punch showmen now only gathered around threepence per show.23Punch’s increasing bad luck on the streets was reﬂective of a decline in thefortunes of street amusements more generally. In his interviews with other streetentertainers, Mayhew found that their earnings had substantially diminished andthat the number of showmen had decreased. A peep-show exhibitor claimed thathe could make three or four shillings a day before the theatres lowered their19 Charles Molly Westmacott, The English spy (London, 1826), pp. 59–62. See also ‘Stanzas toPunchinello’, New Monthly Magazine, 10 (1824), pp. 441–2. 20 Anon, ‘The puppet show’, p. 156.21 For example, see: Pug’s visit ; or, the disasters of Mr Punch (London, 1806) – a chapbook whichpresents the tale of Judy’s elopement with a monkey and thus her unfaithfulness to her husband Punch.See also Muskau, Regency visitor, pp. 86–7.22 Anon, ‘Punch and Judy’, Fraser’s Magazine, 3 (Apr. 1831), pp. 350–4.23 Henry Mayhew, London labour and the London poor (4 vols., London, 1861–2), III, pp. 45–6.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1067ticket prices, while another performer explained that street reciters had become arare class – only ﬁve could now be found in London.24The decline of Punch and Judy street shows can, in part, be attributed to theextension of authority and the increasing regulation of street life duringthe nineteenth century. The relatively wide powers granted to police by the1839 Metropolitan Police Act have traditionally been held accountable for thetransformation of London’s streets, including the removal of many streetentertainments, from the opening of the Victorian period onwards. RobertStorch argued that the new police oﬃcers were ‘domestic missionaries ’,successfully used by the respectable classes to maintain ‘order and decorum in allpublic spaces ’ and to impose ‘new standards of urban discipline ’.25 Recently,Storch’s conclusions have been challenged by historians who have producedevidence demonstrating the resilience of street life and the survival of variousamusements conducted in this space. Stephen Inwood, for example, has pointedout that street culture proved relatively resistant to police control, and that policerecognized that noise and indecency were a natural part of everyday life, deeplyembedded in working-class culture. Thus, the police force established a practicalcompromise between middle-class ideals and working-class realities, learning ‘ tolive with the popular culture which some of its advocates had expected [it]to destroy ’.26In this case, both change and continuity can be overemphasized. Perhaps it ismore useful to consider the diﬀerences between so-called ‘rough’ and ‘respect-able ’ neighbourhoods in nineteenth-century London. Street culture did persistthroughout the century ; however, it became increasingly conﬁned to single-classdistricts, for example, the East End. And this street culture became largely com-posed of amusements that did not require ﬁnancial outlay, such as games andsports. Street performers needed higher-class patronage in order to survive.Henry Mayhew’s interview with the Punch showman demonstrates just howcrucial it was to attract middle- and upper-class audiences. He explained that,while showmen had largely deserted east London, the West End had become ‘ thegreat resort for all ; for it is there the money lays [sic] ’. Punch showmen began anannual pilgrimage to the more fashionable seaside resorts during the summermonths and, for the rest of the year, continued to erect booths on street corners inthe hope of encouraging paying gentlemen to their windows.2724 Ibid., pp. 88–9 and 151–4.25 Robert D. Storch, ‘The policeman as domestic missionary: urban discipline and popular culturein northern England, 1850–1880’, Journal of Social History, 9 (1975–6), pp. 481–509; Robert D. Storch,‘Introduction’, in Robert D. Storch, ed., Popular culture and custom in nineteenth-century England (London,1982), pp. 1–14; and Robert D. Storch, ‘Police control of street prostitution in Victorian London: astudy in the contexts of police action’, in D. H. Bayley, ed., Police and society (London, 1977), pp. 49–72.26 Stephen Inwood, ‘Policing London’s morals : the Metropolitan Police and popular culture,1829–1850’, London Journal, 15 (1990), pp. 129–46. See also James Winter, London’s teeming streets,1830–1914 (London, 1993), pp. 66–8. 27 Mayhew, London labour and the London poor, III, pp. 46–7.1068 RO S A L I N D C RON EHowever, during the second half of the century this practice becamesubstantially curtailed as ideas about the appropriate use of public space weredramatically transformed. Urbanization and population growth challenged theutility of London’s streets as entertainment venues. In commercial and businessdistricts the sheer volume of people squeezed into the narrow streets and theoverwhelming increase in traﬃc both restricted space formerly available forentertainers and generated large amounts of noise which performers were forcedto compete with. Moreover, in quieter, middle- and upper-class neighbourhoods,notions of respectability shaped new regulations on the use of public space. Punchand Judy shows were excluded from Hyde Park.28 In addition, during the 1860s,a campaign was launched against street musicians, particularly organ grinders,by a number of middle-class men who wished to exclude the unrespectablevagabonds from their streets. New legislation resulting from the campaigngave householders powers to regulate the space outside their front doors.29 WhileMayhew’s showman claimed Punch was exempt from powers outlined in thePolice Act, when asked about interference from the constables, he replied,‘ some’s very good men, and some on’em are tyrants ’.30 Law and authority thusdid have some impact on the fortunes of Punch and Judy. However, equallysigniﬁcant was the rate at which more aﬄuent audiences were abandoning Punchand Judy street shows, despite the tremendous enjoyment these men claimedto experience from watching them.The beginning of the Victorian period witnessed the emergence of a moredomestic culture that was orientated around the family and home.31 Its locationindoors meant that previous outdoor amusements that had beneﬁted fromhigher-class patronage, such as the Punch and Judy shows, began to suﬀer.Moreover, pausing to watch a Punch and Judy show had become a dangerousactivity : while one’s attention was occupied with the pleasures of Punch, onecould easily ﬁnd oneself a victim of crime. Petty street crime was commonduring the ﬁrst half of the century. Isaac Cruikshank’s watercolour, Punch’s puppetshow, illustrates this hazard, as the partner of the Punch showman, while collect-ing money from the audience, picks the pocket of a distracted gentleman (see Fig. 5above). But pickpockets and other criminals were seen as an inevitable part ofmetropolitan life. They were certainly an inconvenience, but also contributed tothe atmosphere of danger and illicit pleasure that informed Regency culture. Bythe middle of the nineteenth century, however, greater concerns were beingexpressed about crime and deviancy. The consequences of watching Punch andJudy shows were frequently catalogued in the police-court reports contained in28 See, for example, editorial in the Times, 6 Oct. 1862, p. 6.29 Brenda Assael, ‘Music in the air : noise, performance and the contest over the streets of the mid-nineteenth century metropolis ’, in TimHitchcock and Heather Shore, eds., The streets of London: from theGreat Fire to the Great Stink (London, 2003), pp. 183–97.30 Mayhew, London labour and the London poor, III, pp. 46–7.31 F. M. L. Thompson, The rise of respectable society : a social history of Victorian Britain (London, 1988),pp. 254, 256–7; and James Walvin, Leisure and society, 1830–1950 (London, 1978), pp. 9–16.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1069the daily newspaper : respectable men found their valuables stolen and others,their attention distracted, were easily duped by sharpers.32Furthermore, the respectable values of the more aﬄuent section of theaudience meant that objections began to be raised about the actual content of thePunch and Judy shows. Despite Regency ease with the graphic portrayal of wife-murder in the show, early Victorians began to express some discomfort withthe Punches’ violent relationship and especially audiences’ enjoyment of thescene. Punch still featured regularly in literature, but his conquests were nowapproached with a sense of embarrassment, especially as the show representedthe disruption of public and moral order, threatening the centrality of the insti-tution of marriage and family to society. Clear attempts were made to emphasizethe working-class character of both the audience and even the puppets asrespectable writers sought to distance themselves from the themes presented.In Picturesque sketches of London (1852), Thomas Miller described the crowd whichderived much pleasure from a Punch show, including a ‘ragged woman holdingup her dirty child. The little rogue claps his tiny hands, and crows again at everyblow Judy receives ; [and the poor mother is] delighted with the pleasurableexpression of her dirty darling’s countenance’. However, Miller also drawsattention to the respectable gentleman watching the performance from the edgeof the crowd, ‘half ashamed of being seen in such a motley assembly’.33Although the respectable attempted to disown him, Punch continued to bequietly celebrated in these circles and it was around the time of Henry Mayhew’sinterview with the Punch showman that Punch was actually invited into the veryinstitution he threatened to destroy : the respectable middle-class family. And, atthe same time, the show was repositioned as an entertainment to pacify children.In 1850, John Leech sketched the puppet show in the new surroundings of amiddle-class drawing room and, by 1895, one showman claimed that he regularlyperformed for the children of the royal household. 34 Punch and Judy street showsdeclined in favour of the steadier income provided by privately commissionedshows in middle-class homes. Mayhew’s Punch showman explained that thegreater part of his income was now derived from commissioned shows performedindoors. Midsummer and Christmas were known as ‘Punch’s season. We do mostat hevening [sic] parties in the holiday time, and if there’s a pin to choose betweenthem, I should say Christmas holidays was best. For attending hevening partiesnow we generally get one pound and our refreshments. ’35 But why were the32 See for example, Times, 10 June 1858, p. 11, 18 Oct. 1859, p. 9, 31 Jan. 1860, p. 11, 4 Dec. 1861,p. 11.33 Thomas Miller, Picturesque sketches of London (London, 1852), p. 256. See also Archibald GrangerBowie, ‘The story of Punch and Judy’, The Theatre : A Monthly Review, n.s. 3 (1 Jan. 1884), p. 18; andCharles Dickens, The old curiosity shop (London, 1841), ch. 26: Dickens parodies this duality ofembarrassment and enjoyment.34 Alfred T. Story, ‘Punch and Judy’, Strand Magazine (Oct. 1895), p. 463.35 Mayhew, London labour and the London poor, III, pp. 45–7, 50.1070 RO S A L I N D C RON Euncouth showmen with their rather un-domestic portrayal of family lifewelcomed into these respectable homes?Robert Leach and Scott Cutler Shershow have both attempted to explain thisprocess of cultural appropriation. While Leach argues that Punch and Judywere adopted by the middle class as part of a culture of conciliation, Shershowviews appropriation as a ‘natural ’ development in the evolution of the show,questioning original lower-class patronage by noting the ease with which Punch’sso-called ‘rebellion ’ moves from street to nursery.36 Yet the adoption of Punchand Judy was much more conscious than either allows. The process of domesti-cation began with the decision of a group of literary men to name their newsatirical journal, ﬁrst published in July 1841 for the bourgeois intelligentsia, Punch.Their ﬁrst issue strongly aligned itself with the ‘morals ’ of Punch’s puppetshow.37 It was a sense of nostalgia that prompted early Victorian middle- andupper-class men to invite Punch into their homes. They had found immense joyin the show during their youth as young ‘men about town’, seeing in the puppeta reﬂection of the pleasurable elements of Regency culture, including hedonismand misogyny. The process of street clearing and the increasing regulation ofpublic space in respectable neighbourhoods helped to fan this sentimentality, asrespectable men feared that Punch and Judy shows were fast becoming a relic ofthe past. Punch’s performances in the drawing room were but a short stepfrom shows set up on street corners by ‘gentlemen’s orders ’ during the Regencyperiod.38 However, in order to be accepted into this new environment, substantialmodiﬁcations were necessary.Henry Mayhew’s showman may have been pessimistic about the future of hisPunch and Judy show, but he was also a shrewd operator. He was fully awareof the changes necessary to make his show appealing to higher-class and morerespectable audiences. For drawing-room audiences, the Punch showman statedthat he adapted his performance according to their tastes. He explained toMayhew that ‘ some families where I performs [sic] will have it mostsentimental … They won’t have no ghost, no coﬃn, and no devil ; and that’s whatI call spilling [sic] the performance entirely. ’39 Despite the showman’s apparentdistaste with this sanitization, throughout the interview he repeatedly emphasizedthe moral value of Punch and Judy to his gentleman interviewer. For example,when describing the Punches’ marriage, he hoped that the representation would‘be a good example to both men and wives, always to be kind and obleeging[sic] to each other … (that’s moral) ’.40 Furthermore, the transcript of his show,when compared to John Payne Collier’s script of 1828, reveals some signiﬁcantchanges : puppets receive beatings from Punch but leave the stage alive and36 Leach, The Punch and Judy show, pp. 76–7, 80, 85, 91 ; Shershow, Puppets and ‘popular ’ culture,pp. 162–70, 173–4; Scott Cutlet Shershow, ‘Punch and Judy and cultural appropriation’, CulturalStudies, 8 (1994), pp. 541–6. 37 ‘The moral of Punch’, Punch, 1 (1841), p. 1.38 For example, that witnessed by Bernard Blackmantle and the Alderman, described above, inWestmacott’s English spy.39 Mayhew, London labour and the London poor, III, p. 43. 40 Ibid., p. 48.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1071Punch’s triumph over the Devil is repositioned as the defeat of evil (some times,the showman substituted the Devil with a topical Russian Bear), rather than thedownfall of Christian morality.41 Thus, like other exhibitors of Punch in London,this showman recognized the ﬁnancial necessity of injecting some respectabilityand morality into his performances.During the middle of the nineteenth century respectability became animportant marketing device for all itinerant showmen. For instance, despite theactive suppression of London’s rowdy pleasure fairs during the ﬁrst half of thenineteenth century, after 1850 fairgrounds located on the outskirts of Londonexperienced a substantial revival. As Hugh Cunningham demonstrates, newpowers granted to law enforcement agencies, including the police, cannot explainthe new, increasing tolerance of the authorities. Instead, the values of theshowmen changed. From the middle of the century, they became ‘respectableand wealthy entrepreneurs of leisure, patronised by royalty ’. As the norms of theshowmen and authorities converged, fairs became tolerated, safe, and eventuallya subject for nostalgia and revival. Thus, late nineteenth-century observers ‘ sawthe fair as a routine and legitimate occasion for leisure rather than as one of those‘‘violent delights ’’ of Londoners ’.42Similarly, after 1850, Punch showmen gradually came to be regarded as morerespectable and appeared with greater frequency in the drawing room. And theygained this respectability through the changes they made to the performance ofthe puppet show, or, in other words, through its bowdlerization. As Mayhew’sshowman explained above, new characters were introduced that replacedsome of the former controversial puppets. In 1895, one writer declared that ‘weare … softening down even this specimen of ‘‘good old ’’ aboriginal humour, andnow it more frequently closes with a ‘‘nigger ’’ song, or something of that nature,than, as formerly, with the death of the Father of Evil ’.43 Men of the middle andupper classes, familiar with Punch from their youth, noticed considerable changewhen they stopped to watch performances in the street. Thomas Miller claimedthat ‘Punch was a diﬀerent performance in our youthful days : then he went out,got drunk, came home and quarrelled with his wife ; … and sorry we are to saythe drunken rascal swore dreadfully. ’44 In 1872, the editor of Punch recalled theinvitation issued to a showman by the gentlemen of the Fielding Club to performfor them. Although ‘the room was crowded with a great company of men whoknew how to laugh, … [the show] was a dead failure : the very dreariest nightI can remember. We couldn’t – and we tried hard – get up the smallest laugh. ’4541 Ibid., pp. 53–60, especially p. 59.42 Hugh Cunningham, ‘Metropolitan fairs ’, in A. P. Donajgrodski, ed., Social control in nineteenth-century Britain (London, 1977), pp. 163–4, 170, 180.43 Story, ‘Punch and Judy’, p. 463. See also Max Beerbohm’s comments in Russell Thorndike andRichard Arkell, The tragedy of Mr Punch: a fantastic play and prologue in one act, with an introductory essay by MaxBeerbohm (London, 1923), p. 7. 44 Miller, Picturesque Sketches of London, p. 255.45 Blanchard Jerrold and Gustave Dore´, London: a pilgrimage (London, 1872), p. 177. See also ‘AModern Frankenstein’, All the Year Round, n.s. 1 (1868–9), p. 202.1072 RO S A L I N D C RON EFurthermore, commercialization accelerated the process of bowdlerizationas well as breathing new life into the puppet show. The development of thePunch and Judy show after 1850 was fuelled by a new middle-class concern withchildren’s entertainment. J. H. Plumb and James Walvin identify a changingattitude towards children from the eighteenth century onwards with the emerg-ence of the concept of ‘childhood’. During the Victorian period, rising wages andthe pressures of commercialization meant that the English toy manufacturingindustry expanded rapidly to meet consumer demand. These manufacturerscapitalized on the popularity of the show: Punch dolls appeared in toy shops, and,with the publication of children’s scripts, large stores such as Hamley’s sold thecast of puppets, priced from ﬁfteen shillings to ﬁve guineas a set, giving childrenthe ability to stage their own performances.46 Moreover, entrepreneurs inthe leisure industry began to view children as a speciﬁc target audience whosesuccessful amusement could provide substantial proﬁts. During the 1860s,Punch and Judy shows became just one genre of amusement oﬀered by largebusinesses that specialized in the provision of children’s entertainment andwhich regularly advertised in that respectable organ of news, The Times. Forexample, Addro’s Magical Repository in Regent Street issued this notice inJanuary 1866:Evening Parties. – Mr Henry Novra continues to provide (in town or country) all thenewest Entertainments in Conjuring, Juggling, Ventriloquism, Marionettes, Punch andJudy, Dissolving Views, etc. Terms moderate. Respectable artists guaranteed.47Commercial entrepreneurs also began to take advantage of crucial techno-logical advances and increasing literacy rates. Improvements in printing andillustration led to an upsurge in colourful picture books.48 In this industry, too,the popular characters of Punch and Judy were rapidly exploited. The Punchessoon appeared as popular characters in picture books and, in this nursery litera-ture, Punch and Judy’s marital relationship was altered almost beyond recog-nition. In examining the emotional standards for boys and girls during thenineteenth century, Peter Stearns identiﬁes, particularly in boys ’ literature, aconcern with outbursts of anger and the control of temper.49 The violence ofPunch’s puppet show presented an ideal opportunity to teach children these46 Speaight, Punch and Judy, p. 119.47 Times, 13 Jan. 1866, p. 1, my emphasis. See also: 14 Dec. 1864, p. 1, 30 Dec. 1864, p. 1, 28 Jan.1865, p. 1, 13 Jan. 1866, p. 1, 24 Jan. 1866, p. 1.48 J. H. Plumb, ‘The new world of children’, in J. H. Plumb, et al., The birth of a consumer society : thecommercialization of eighteenth-century England (London, 1982), pp. 305–11; James Walvin, A child’s world : asocial history of English childhood, 1800–1914 (Harmondsworth, 1984), pp. 98–9.49 Peter Stearns, ‘Men, boys and anger in American society, 1860–1940’, in J. A. Mangan andJames Walvin, eds., Manliness and morality : middle-class masculinity in Britain and America, 1800–1940(Mancester, 1987), pp. 77–82; and Peter Stearns, ‘Girls, boys and emotions: redeﬁnitions and historicalchange’, Journal of American History, 80 (1993), pp. 36–74. See also Elizabeth Foyster, ‘Boys will be boys?Manhood and aggression, 1660–1800’, in TimHitchcock andMichele Cohen, eds., English masculinities,1660–1800 (London, 1999), pp. 151–66.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1073valuable lessons and such themes are, to some extent, reﬂected in nursery talesabout the adventures of Punch.50 However, the over-riding theme is that ofdomesticity. Nursery literature demonstrates authors’ desire to portray the familylife of the central characters, Punch and Judy. Happy family portraits featureas colourful covers or as frontispieces and writers describe, at great length, thelife of the Punches outside the show (see Fig. 7). As the characters of Punch andJudy were extracted from their original context and placed within the nursery,their conjugal life became a moral tale, designed to promote the ideals of com-panionate marriage and prepare boys and girls for their future roles as menand women.Although the ideology of companionate marriage and its accompanyingdeﬁnitions of femininity and masculinity were not entirely ‘new’ to the nineteenthcentury, during the Victorian period these concepts achieved special importanceand interest. As domesticity became integral to respectability, concern aboutFig. 7. The Punch family portrait used for the frontispiece of F. E. Weatherly, Punch and Judy and someof their friends, 1885. By permission of the British Library (12811.f.2).50 See for example, The Punch and Judy alphabet (London, 1880) ; and Punch and Judy and their little dogToby (London, 1861).1074 RO S A L I N D C RON Emarital behaviour, especially conﬂict, became widespread. Furthermore, centralto companionate ideology during the nineteenth century was the notion ofseparate spheres : in order to secure matrimonial harmony, men and womenwere aﬀorded distinct, but complementary, roles. While the husband made hisway in the harsh world of work, his wife was conﬁned to the domestic and privatehome. These ideals oﬀered a division of tasks and a rhetoric of compassionwithin the home which would ease tension and prevent conﬂict. Constructions offemininity and masculinity also acquired greater signiﬁcance and became moreinﬂexible as speciﬁc patterns of conjugal behaviour were expected. A woman’sabilities as a homemaker and moral guide became fundamental to her role asa passive wife. Moreover, more benevolent and peaceable standards of maritalconduct became increasingly central to deﬁnitions of manliness.51 Despite this,husbands and wives were never intended to be equal companions and wiveswere instructed to submit to their husbands’ natural authority.52 The ideology ofcompanionate marriage thus became enshrined in diﬀerent genres of literature aswriters advised men and women, as well as children, on the prevention of maritalconﬂict through the adoption of these important qualities.F. E. Weatherly’s Punch and Judy and some of their friends (1887) demonstrates howauthors of nursery literature remoulded the Punches’ marriage to reﬂect theseideals and expectations. It opens with a seemingly incongruous statement : ‘ Inspite of what some people say, and in spite of what many more believe, Punchand Judy lived a very happy and peaceable life. ’53 As violence persisted inperformances of the puppet show, Weatherly swiftly sought to marginalize thisaspect of the relationship:Sometimes, it must be admitted, in circumstances over which he had no control, Mr Punchhad ﬂung [the baby] out of the window; had knocked Judy on the head when sheremonstrated; and had killed the Doctor when he had called to see what he could do formother and child … However, these exciting scenes did not last very long, and, as nobodybore any malice, they did not much matter. (p. 6)51 Leonore Davidoﬀ and Catherine Hall, Family fortunes : men and women of the English middle class (rev.edn, London, 2002), especially ch. 3; Susan Moller Okin, ‘Women and the making of the sentimentalfamily’, Philosophy and Public Aﬀairs, 11 (1982), pp. 65–88; A. James Hammerton, ‘Victorian marriageand the law of matrimonial cruelty’, Victorian Studies, 32 (1990), pp. 281 and 291–2; Amanda Vickery,‘Golden age to separate spheres? A review of the categories and chronology of English women’shistory’, Historical Journal, 36 (1993), pp. 383–414. See the following marital advice literature publishedduring the nineteenth century: Mrs Sarah Ellis, The women of England, their social duties and domestic habits(6th edn, London, 1839) ; Mrs Sarah Ellis, The wives of England, their relative duties, domestic inﬂuence and socialobligations (London, 1843) ; Timothy Titcomb, Letters to young people, single and married (London, 187?) ;Anon.,Woman: as she is, and as she should be (2 vols., London, 1835) ; William Cobbett, Advice to young men,and (incidentally) to young women, in the middle and higher ranks of life (London, 1830) ; Anon., The etiquette of love,courtship and marriage (London, 1847) ; Margaret Brewster, Sunbeams in cottages, or, what women may do. Anarrative chieﬂy addressed to the working classes (London, 1856) ; Anon., Marriage and Home (London, 1870).52 Ibid., p. 31 ; Cobbett, Advice to young men, p. 178; Anon., Etiquette of Love, p. 87 ; Anon.,Woman: as sheis and as she should be, I, p. 262.53 F. E. Weatherly, Punch and Judy and some of their friends (London, 1887), p. 5.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1075Instead, the cast of puppets lived happily together in a semi-detached box,rented out by the showman, with the Punch family in one and the Constable,Doctor, and Mr Ketch in the second (p. 7).On the particular day described in the story, the showman gave his puppets‘notice to move’, and they all set out to perform in the neighbouring village. Theperformance was a great success and the showman collected a tidy sum of money.During the show, however, an incident occurred of which the puppets werenot aware. Nelly, a young girl in the audience, greatly disapproved of Punch’streatment of his family (in Weatherly’s words, ‘ it made her blood run cold ’, p. 15).When Punch threw his baby from the stage it landed in Nelly’s basket and,believing that it was not wanted by its cruel father, Nelly took the baby home.When Punch and Judy later discovered the loss of their child, they were greatlydistressed and climbed out of their box to return to town to ﬁnd the baby (p. 19).Eventually, they ﬁnd the baby in Nelly’s home and, when Nelly sees how muchPunch loves his child, she happily returns it to him. Weatherly’s story is cleverlyconstructed. He takes care to depict the beatings inﬂicted by Punch on his familyas humorous. His use of the character Nelly is vital to this, as Nelly representsstrong, respectable Victorian morals. When the baby is found, Punch sings his‘Roo-ti-too’ song, which is ironic and clever : this is usually sung by the puppetwhen he murders his antagonists in the show. The violence is thus displaced.Nursery books used Punch and Judy to promote new features in deﬁnitionsof masculinity and femininity. Explaining how these characters managed theirdisagreements (even violent ones), writers sought to demonstrate how thesequalities could ensure a successful, companionate marriage. First, Punch’smanhood is called into question. In Advice to young men (1830), William Cobbettdeclares that ‘Being fond of little children argues no eﬀeminacy in a man, but, asfar as my observation has gone, the contrary. ’54 Punch becomes the caring fatherand committed husband. In Mr Punch and his tricks (1893), the author states that‘Mr Punch is a good father, and plays ‘‘peep-bo’’ with his baby. ’55 Similarthemes are evident in Weatherly’s book: ‘Mr Punch worshipped the Baby, for hedeclared that in its little face he could plainly trace the features of his darlingJudy. ’ When the child goes missing, Punch expresses great sorrow, and when it isfound, his joy is almost inexhaustible. We are told that, when hearing the babywas safe, ‘Punch was moved, and his voice quavered as he began to sing again,for he was an aﬀectionate father, in spite of his odd ways. ’56Judy’s behaviour also comes under scrutiny. While violence may remain underthe bright lights of the stage, at home with Punch Judy is transformed into aloving wife who easily manages his temper. The author of Punch and Judy and theirlittle dog Toby (1861) describes Judy as a good, faithful wife at the opening of the54 Cobbett, Advice to young men, p. 175.55 Mr Punch and his tricks (1893), quoted in Leach, The Punch and Judy show, p. 87.56 Weatherly, Punch and Judy and some of their friends, pp. 5, 41. See also Punch and Judy. In eight acts(London, 1886), and The Punch and Judy picture book (London, 1873).1076 RO S A L I N D C RON Ebook, adding the hope that Punch ‘will well behave himself today’. However,when the couple appears on the stage, their ‘ fondness ’ soon changes to ‘wrath ’.Illustrated by moveable ﬁgures which both dance and ﬁght on the reader’scommand, the stage relationship is cleverly described as knock-about fun on thepart of Punch:Look here – a quarrel has begun:See how they wield their sticks,And cruel Punch kills Judy dead,Ah, Punch! what naughty tricks !57In The marriage oﬀering (1847), one Victorian author advised wives to ‘ lenientlyregard all [your husband’s] imperfections ; and this will produce in him a corre-sponding disposition to overlook your failings … this reciprocity of charitableconsideration is essential to the continuance of wedded happiness ’.58 Oﬀ thestage, Judy seems to follow this advice, dealing with her husband’s temper and‘naughtiness ’ with understanding and patience. Weatherly’s Judy, for example,becomes a tamed shrew, especially as Weatherly attempts to play down themarital violence. In their semi-detached house (a sine qua non of Victorianrespectability), she does not berate her husband for his behaviour, but overlookshis failings in order to promote marital harmony. After the show they performtogether, Judy ‘ found herself once more in the box with her husband. She didnot bear any malice for the blows. In fact, she had not felt them, and that is agreat matter when you have to be beaten continually. ’59The bowdlerization of the Punches’ relationship in these texts, and even tosome extent in performances of the show, is important. In addition, this processreﬂects what we know about the Victorians from other sources, for example, thatthey regularly sanitized older dramas for sentimental and moral purposes.However, more signiﬁcant were the continuities that persisted in the show, notleast the maintenance of violence. As one showman explained ‘the dolls, yousee, get so much knocking about that they only last about six months ’.60 Theserespectable Victorians adopted a violent entertainment for their children’senjoyment and moral instruction, but when they set about to transform the show,they retained much of the violence, especially in the depiction of marital relationsbetween the two central characters, Punch and Judy. Even though this violencehad been slightly subdued for juvenile audiences, beatings administered by Punchto his wife continued to form the purpose and humour of this scene. Furthermore,these beatings were surrounded by yet more violent encounters in the show,as Punch continued to oppose vehemently those who came to share his stage.57 Punch and Judy and their little dog Toby (London, 1861).58 The marriage oﬀering ; or, a series of letters addressed to a young married lady ; embodying hints on the performanceof household duties, and on the management of children, by a widow (Rotherham, 1847), p. 6.59 Weatherly, Punch and Judy and some of their friends, p. 18. See also Lothar Meggendorfer, The greatpunch theatre. An amusing picture book of six plays acted by Mr Punch (London, 1897), Act 5, and Punch and Judyin eight acts, particularly Acts 1, 6, and 7. 60 Story, ‘Punch and Judy’, p. 463.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1077And, from the comments of some contemporaries, this presentation of violencewas to have a lasting impact on childhood memories.61Therefore, given these two, seemingly contradictory, processes, in thecommissioning of private drawing-room performances during the second halfof the century, Punch and Judy shows became quite sophisticated in terms ofﬁnancial agency and the commercial processes involved. On one level, showswere put on for the purpose of amusing children: thus, the children had to beentertained. And young audiences found the slapstick and knock-about violenceappealing. As one journalist pondered in 1872, ‘Why children should be fond ofsuch an undomestic drama as portrayed in the representation of Mr Punch’sadventures can only be accounted for by that love of the horrible so innateeven in infantile nature. ’62 Perhaps ‘even’ should be replaced with ‘especially ’.Studies in psychoanalysis and child psychology have revealed the particularlyviolent, anxious, destructive, and even sadistic character of a child’s imagination.Their irrationality and the frequency with which dark and murderous thoughtspervade their minds do go some way towards explaining children’s fascinationwith gruesome and graphically violent tales.63On another level, however, were the adults who provided payment for theperformance. And here we see the almost paradoxical operation of commer-cialization. First, parents exerted some inﬂuence over the style of the performanceand, as noted above, showmen seeking private commissions were required tomake some modiﬁcations in the interests of respectability. But, at the same time,these paying adults also wanted to be amused. Punch and Judy shows were,therefore, family entertainment, designed to appeal to both children and adults.In this way, commercialization also assisted in the maintenance of violence :this process ensured the continued portrayal of graphic violence in the Punches’turbulent relationship and even allowed its encasement in the language ofrespectability.During the second half of the nineteenth century, the characters of Punch andJudy came to embody the contradictions and confusion at the heart of maritalideals and expectations. As Jim Hammerton has demonstrated, patriarchaland companionate models of marriage ‘were never stark opposites ’. Instead,‘ theoretical questions of husbands ’ authority and wives ’ challenges to it, con-tinued to operate within a framework that re-emphasized the value of patriarchalstructures ’. While the old paradigm of religiously sanctioned patriarchy wasweakening, elements of this old paradigm persisted in the ‘newer ideal ofegalitarian and companionate partnership ’.64 Companionate marriage with itsaccompanying ideology of separate spheres was intended to provide a solutionto marital conﬂict. However, crucial ﬂaws and inherent inequality contained in61 Edmund Gosse, Father and son : a study of two temperaments (London, 1907), pp. 59–60.62 Harper’s Weekly, 6 Jan. 1872, p. 5.63 Bruno Bettelheim, The uses of enchantment : the meaning and importance of fairy tales (Harmondsworth,1975), pp. 120–2. 64 Hammerton, Cruelty and companionship, pp. 2, 7, and 33.1078 RO S A L I N D C RON Ethe ideal meant that it often caused disputes. This problem was furtherexacerbated in lower-class marriages, as men and women struggled to come toterms with an ideal that was, in reality, too diﬃcult to achieve.65 This signiﬁcantuncertainty and ambivalence meant that the violent and potentially dangerousfemale was never erased from the cultural imagination. And, in spite of thegrowing power of behavioural expectations, the male who triumphed over thischaracter continued to be celebrated.When Henry Mayhew located a Punch showman for his volume on Londonstreet entertainments, he transcribed a performance that was very much in atransitionary period. Although elements of backsliding are apparent in this show,also evident are emergent patterns that would shape Punch and Judy shows forthe remainder of the century. The showman toned down the violence of thePunches’ relationship for respectable audiences (for example, in this script Punchdoes not actually kill his spouse). However, the continued depiction of roughbeatings inﬂicted on Judy both demonstrates how violence became intertwinedwith the show’s new didactic function and the extent to which the puppetsreﬂected contemporary anxieties about marriage. In the script, Judy neglectsand mocks her wifely duties in her rejection of Punch’s aﬀectionate gestures.Judy also remains the instigator of conﬂict and at the centre of the violentstruggles.66 Moreover, while the showman, in his accompanying commentary,superﬁcially condemns Punch’s treatment of his wife, responsibility for theviolence is redistributed when he describes the characters individually. Punch didnot intend to beat his wife ; instead, Judy ‘ irritated ’ him so much that he wasdriven to it. And ﬁnally, the showman adds, ‘Judy, you see, is very ugly … a headlike that there wouldn’t please most people. ’67 Furthermore, in the transcriptionsof the interview and show, Mayhew used the cockney dialect of the showman tohighlight the working-class origins of Punch and Judy, a practice that was alsoadopted in later scripts and descriptions. For respectable observers, Punchand Judy oﬀered a convenient opportunity to displace violence on to lower-classculture.In 1854, Robert Brough published the ﬁrst script for children who wished toperform their own show, entitled The wonderful drama of Punch and Judy. In his boldpreface, Brough assured purchasers that, through a careful study of the dialogueand instructions, young gentlemen would ‘acquire such a proﬁciency in the artof performing Punch, as to render an apprenticeship to a regular professor (towhich parents, on its proposal, would be found to object) wholly unnecessary’.68The script proved so popular with children that it was later reprinted in variouschildren’s books, including Every boy’s book, Every little boy’s book, and Boy’s treasury.6965 Ibid., Clark, The struggle for the breeches, pp. 87, 248, 260–3.66 Mayhew, London labour and the London poor, III, pp. 54–5. 67 Ibid., pp. 48 and 50–1.68 Papernose Woodensconce Esq. [i.e. Robert Brough], The wonderful drama of Punch and Judy withillustrations by ‘The Owl ’ (London, 1854), preface.69 Interestingly, one script that appeared in the 1860s combined the structure and dialogue ofCollier’s transcript and Woodensconce’s version. The crude illustrations surrounding the text,M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1079Throughout, the morality of the violence is repeatedly emphasized and cockneyslang is again used to highlight the working-class character of the show andpuppets. Brough’s script was clearly modiﬁed for juvenile audiences – the Devil,for example, has been replaced by the Bogeyman – yet Punch’s encounters withhis adversaries are still quite brutal. The dialogue itself, however, is childish and attimes nonsensical and, using this to frame the violence, Punch’s actions becomenaughty rather than evil.The scene between Punch and his wife opens the performance. Theirrelationship swings from one extreme to another, as the puppets are aﬀectionatethen violent towards each other. Punch strikes the ﬁrst blow in their argumentand is promptly challenged by the showman, to whom Punch replies, ‘Haven’tI a right to do what I like with my own?’ Any sympathy for Judy rapidly evap-orates as she begins to beat Punch savagely. After Punch ‘ innocently ’ throwshis baby out the window, another ﬁght begins during which Punch kills Judyat one blow.70 The violence in this performance is so grossly exaggerated thatthe scene becomes almost too brutal and, when surrounded by the childishdialogue, the audience becomes easily detached from the action. Punch andJudy seem rather ridiculous, and humour allows for the subtle enforcement ofstereotypes. At the scene’s conclusion the showman declares, ‘Mr Punch you ’avecommitted a barbarous and cruel murder, and you must hanswer [sic] for it to thelaws of your country. ’71 However, we do not want to see Punch punished for hisplayful and entertaining naughtiness and it is easy to feel relieved when Punchknocks the arresting constable dead. Moreover, Punch’s ﬁnal triumph over theBogeyman (in which the Bogeyman is tricked rather than violently expelled) notonly demonstrates the extent of Victorian bowdlerization (the removal of religioussuggestions), but, more crucially, suggests the level of delight children wouldhave felt. Punch’s heroism is sealed as he conquers the shadow that cloudschildren’s nightmares.72Two further scripts were published before the close of the century, both ofwhich demonstrate further modiﬁcations but also the centrality of violence in thePunches’ marriage. Professor Hoﬀman’s script in his Drawing room amusements andevening party entertainments (1883) emphasizes the role of Punch and Judy as familyentertainment. While Hoﬀman suggests a number of changes for a comfortableshift from street corner to drawing room, he reassures readers that the ‘hunch-backed hero still ﬂings his oﬀspring out of the window; still playfully murdershis spouse ’ and thus will not ‘be found a whit less popular ’ with admiringaudiences.73 In Mr Mowbray’s script, published a short time later in the Pall MallGazette (1887), violence between Punch and Judy is again exaggerated, as are otherespecially with their lack of colour, hint that this publication may have been aimed at adults ratherthan children. See Punch and Judy. A serio-comical tragedy in three acts (London, 1863).70 Brough, The wonderful drama of Punch and Judy, scenes 2, 3, and 4.71 Ibid., scenes 4 and 5. 72 Ibid., scene 23.73 Professor Hoﬀman, Drawing room amusements and evening party entertainments (London, 1883),pp. 190–210, especially pp. 190–1 and 198–201.1080 RO S A L I N D C RON Efeatures of the scene, such as the over-use of sentimental language, including‘kissy, kissy, kissy ’, and ‘walky, walky, walky’. Judy’s shrewish character isestablished by her treatment of her child. During her battle with Punch, Judyuses her baby as a weapon against her husband before ﬁnally carelessly discardingit.74While their children were being subtly instructed in their future roles as menand women, the characterization of Punch and Judy struck a wider resonance forthe chuckling adults at the back of the room. First, the very use of the name Judyfor Punch’s wife holds particular signiﬁcance for Victorian culture. That thename of Punch’s wife was changed from her eighteenth-century appellation,Joan, to Judy during the opening decades of the nineteenth century is symbolic.At the same time, the name Judy came to hold negative connotations, usedmainly by the lower classes as a label to describe ‘ tarts ’, unruly females, andunmarried women cohabiting with men. 75 During the Victorian period, the termJudy became even more culturally loaded. First, its biblical roots came underclose scrutiny. During the siege of Bethulia described in the Old Testament, theheroine Judith saved the Jewish people from the armies of Nebuchadnezzar byslaying his commander-in-chief, Holofernes. This tale clashed with passive idealsof femininity. 76 Furthermore, the colloquialism ‘Judy’ gradually began to be usedin literature, extending its application and understanding through the respectableclasses. Various plays of the period used phrases such as ‘ to make a Judy ofyourself ’ and the label ‘ Judy’ when referring to women who behaved in a dis-orderly manner. The term also featured in famous novels, such as Scenes fromclerical life (1858) and The mill on the ﬂoss (1860) by George Eliot.77 In these culturalsurroundings the name given to Punch’s wife was particularly pertinent. Thepuppet became a crucial visual reference for the colloquialism and, even morethan this, Judy Punch and the term ‘Judy’ became mutually constitutive.Moreover, the Punches were not isolated ﬁgures in the Victorian culturalimagination. Douglas Jerrold’s ‘Mrs Caudle’s curtain lectures ’, published inPunch during the 1840s, continued the humorous tradition of depicting naggingwives, Mr and Mrs Caudle’s home forming a comic opposite of domestic74 ‘The Punch and Judy men of England’, Pall Mall Gazette, 45 (15 June 1887), pp. 1–2.75 Ibid. ; Speaight, Punch and Judy, p. 85. See also report from police courts in the Times, 14 Nov.1850, p. 7 : ‘Southwark. – Peter Bent, alias Lewis, a well-dressed man, and Emma Barber, nicknamed‘‘Judy’’, a woman of the town with who he cohabits, were placed at the bar before Mr A’Beckett,charged with stealing a hat, pocketbook, knife and snuﬀ-box, from William Arnold, in the EquestrianCoﬀee-house, near the Surrey Theatre. Both prisoners were committed’. During the eighteenth cen-tury, Punch’s wife had been known as Joan. Antiquarians place the change of name to Judy for theglove-puppet around 1820, once the show became more violent and Judy’s character further devel-oped. See Speaight, Punch and Judy, p. 85.76 Margarita Stocker, Judith, sexual warrior : women and power in western culture (New Haven, 1998),pp. 1–2, 135, 137–42.77 George Eliot, Scenes from clerical life (London, 1858), ch. 1 ; George Eliot, The mill on the ﬂoss (London,1860), ch. 6; George Colman, The review; or, the wags of Windsor (London, 1801), Act 1, scene 2; Joseph P.Pirsson, The discarded daughter ; a comedy in ﬁve acts (New York, 1832), Act 1, scene 4.M R A N D MR S P U N CH 1081bliss. The series was immensely popular and reprinted in various collectionsthroughout the Victorian period. Like Judy, Mrs Caudle was an unbearablebattle-axe, delivering nightly lectures to her husband on a range of trivial topicsthat challenged his authority.78 The character of Mr Caudle, however, forms animportant contrast to Mr Punch. As the hen-pecked husband, Mr Caudle enlistsour sympathy. He is also ‘manly ’ in the sense that he does not attempt to sternlydiscipline his wife. Yet his inaction leads readers to ridicule and even despise himfor his failure to control his wife. Caudle’s masculinity is thus called into question.Punch, on the other hand, is remembered as a wife-beater. Like Caudle, theconstruction of his masculinity is comic. Punch’s manliness is mocked repeatedly,not least by his squeaky, falsetto voice. However, the puppet becomes a hero ashe manages to overcome challenges to his masculinity, foremost those posed byhis shrewish wife.Despite this, Punch’s violent taming of his wife did not necessarily condonewife-beating. Instead, the meaning of violence in the show was much morecomplex. The promise of wedded happiness enshrined in the ideal of com-panionate marriage was, in reality, so diﬃcult to realize, especially as this idealwas fraught with contradictions. Punch and Judy, with their violent domesticquarrels, were used by respectable audiences to confront the realities of maritalbreakdown. They became important icons in a society in which marriage could,for many, degenerate into a farce or tragedy, as marital partnerships were sohard, legally and socially, to dissolve. Furthermore, Punch and Judy’s relationshipcannot be taken so literally. As violence in performance was so extreme, thecharacters so distorted, and strong elements of satire and humour remainedpredominant, this relationship was certainly diﬃcult to identify with. For adultsespecially, Punch and Judy fulﬁlled important psychological functions. First,notions of politeness and civility adhered to by the respectable middle classnot only led to the displacement of violence on to the working class, but, moresigniﬁcantly, determined how violence was viewed within their own class.79Elements of satire and humour in the Punches ’ marriage were used to accom-modate issues of domestic violence which respectable Victorians founduncomfortable, but were forced to confront. Finally, we can only imagine thelevel of satisfaction some middle-class families would have experienced fromthis portrayal of violence. After all, this was, in a sense, behaviour in which therespectable were no longer allowed to participate.78 Douglas Jerrold, ‘Mrs Caudle’s curtain lectures ’, Punch, 8 and 9 (1845) ; Richard Kelly, ‘MrsCaudle, a Victorian curtain lecturer ’, University of Toronto Quarterly, 38 (1969), pp. 296–309.79 For example, see Elizabeth Foyster, ‘Creating a veil of silence? Politeness and marital violence inthe English household’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 12 (2002), pp. 395–415; Margaret Hunt,‘Wife-beating, domesticity and women’s independence in eighteenth-century London’, Gender andHistory, 4 (1992), pp. 10–33.1082 RO S A L I N D C RON E