ABSTRACT: 
British imperial writers in Burma regularly moaned about milk. They complained about the difficulties they faced acquiring it in the colony. They were self-conscious about how their consumption of it might be viewed by the Burmese population, who predominantly did not drink cow’s milk. And they worried about the quality of the supply provided by itinerant Indian dairymen, who they viewed as being neglectful and insanitary. Through these concerns the absence of milk became a marker of the colony’s difference from the rest of the Raj. At the same time, the colonial government came to recognise the importance of locally-bred working cattle for Burmese agriculture. In their attempts to protect these valuable nonhuman labourers, Indian dairy herds were represented as a problem breed that threatened the indigenous stock. The threat from foreign cattle coalesced around epizootic disease and uncontrolled crossbreeding. These concerns were coterminous with official and nationalist anxieties about the Indian human population in the colony. Building on recent scholarship uncovering more-than-human geographies, this article reveals how colonial policies designed to improve the dairy industry and protect Burmese cattle contributed to the material and imaginative territorialisation of Burma, and its eventual separation from British India. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this article examines the interplay between the imaginative and materialprocesses through which cow's milk contributed to the productionof Burma's agricultural border . 
 it reveals how colonial policies designed to improve the dairy industry and protectBurmese cattle contributed to the material and imaginative territorialisation of Burma , and its eventualseparation from British India . 
 it focuseson the colonial state's attempts to order and police space. The perceived threats from Indian-owneddairy herds to the quality of milk and the health of cattle resultedin these lively commodities becoming subjects in Burma'scontentious political geography as it became imagined apart from the Indian 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 lable at ScienceDirectJournal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e12Contents lists avaiJournal of Historical Geographyjournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/ jhgMilk to Mandalay: dairy consumption, animal history and the politicalgeography of colonial BurmaJonathan SahaUniversity of Leeds, School of History, Leeds LS2 9JT, UKa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 5 November 2015Received in revised form14 May 2016Accepted 25 May 2016Keywords:AnimalsColonial BurmaDairyCattleBordersPolitical geographyE-mail address: j.saha@leeds.ac.uk.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhg.2016.05.0160305-7488/© 2016 The Author. Published by Elseviera b s t r a c tBritish imperial writers in Burma regularly moaned about milk. They complained about the difficultiesthey faced acquiring it in the colony. They were selfconscious about how their consumption of it might beviewed by the Burmese population, who predominantly did not drink cow's milk. And they worriedabout the quality of the supply provided by itinerant Indian dairymen, who they viewed as beingneglectful and insanitary. Through these concerns the absence of milk became a marker of the colony'sdifference from the rest of the Raj. At the same time, the colonial government came to recognise theimportance of locally-bred working cattle for Burmese agriculture. In their attempts to protect thesevaluable nonhuman labourers, Indian dairy herds were represented as a problem breed that threatenedthe indigenous stock. The threat from foreign cattle coalesced around epizootic disease and uncontrolledcrossbreeding. These concerns were coterminous with official and nationalist anxieties about the Indianhuman population in the colony. Building on recent scholarship uncovering more-than-human geog-raphies, this article reveals how colonial policies designed to improve the dairy industry and protectBurmese cattle contributed to the material and imaginative territorialisation of Burma, and its eventualseparation from British India.© 2016 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 C.M. Enriquez, A Burmese Loneliness: A Tale of Travel in Burma, the Southern ShanStates and Keng Tung, Calcutta, 1918, 245.2 R.W. Winston, Four Years in Upper Burma, London, 1892, 182; G.W. Bird, Wan-Writing at the end of the First World War, Colin Metcalfe Enriquez,a colonial official who served in Burma's borderworlds, outlined thedifficulties of meeting visiting dignitaries' dietary expectationswhen in remote parts of the colony. He recalled some of the tediousculinary preparations for one particular viceregal arrival:Take, for instance, the case of milk. Nothing is so necessary toState Visits as good, foamy milk, full of cream and so on. Therewas a large file relating to the particular quart I have in mind. Itwas to be delivered several months hence at a little river-sidevillage where the steamer would touch at tea-time. Some saythe correspondence started before the cow was born. But shewas a placid old beast, and didn't mind that a bit, until themilkman put on his apron. Then she shied, and kicked thebucket over. The whole credit of the apron belongs to the San-itary Commissioner, who had made a special study of the art ofmilking. But apparently he did not know this old cow, and howirreconcilable the apron made her. Her panic only increasedwith rehearsals. There were sterilisers, and boilers, and strainerstoo, including a bit of an old shirt. But these were kept beyondreach of her apprehensive glances. At the last moment, whenLtd. This is an open access articleeverything was ready, a frantic order came to buy the milkmanrubber gloves. Rubber gloves in a Burmese river-side village!!They were simply not to be had e not for all th[e] wealth ofThibaw [the last king of Burma], if he ever had any.1As it transpired, the viceroy's ship did not even land at thevillage. It steamed past oblivious to all the fuss. The carefullyorchestrated efforts, frenetic correspondence and the cow's distresshad been for nothing.As Enriquez's passage attests, the British found it hard to get cow'smilk in Burma. Despite legislation that required village headmen toprovide provisions for officials and other Europeans touring the col-ony, freshmilkoftenproveddifficult to acquire.2 Thiswas in largepartbecause, in contrast to the rest of British India, there was not a largelocal market for dairy products. The experience of imperialism didlittle to change this situation. Although during colonial rule thederings in Burma, London, 1897, 43; F.W.T. Pollok and W.S. Thom, Wild Sports ofBurma and Assam, London, 1900, 201; G.E. Mitton, A Bachelor Girl in Burma, London,1907, 131; Anon., A Dog's Life in Burma, Told by the Dog, London, 1909, 36, 68, 86.under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e122consumption of milk certainly became more prevalent, it remainedcomparatively unpopular throughout the period. By the time of theJapanese occupation, an estimated 1.8 fluid ounces of milk per capitawere drunk daily in the colony. This compared to 6.6 fluid ouncesacross the border in India, and to roughly forty fluid ounces inDenmark and the United Kingdom. Of the milk consumed in Burma,almost a third was imported and eighty-nine per cent of this wastinned condensed milk.3 Deborah Valenze has characterised theglobal history of cow's milk as the triumphant emergence of aculturallymalleable, universal commodity. Sheargues that ithasbeena story ‘of [the] conquest of space, energy, and dietary preferences’.4 Itwould seem that the example of colonial Burma reveals some of thelimits to this campaign of conquest.Whilst Valenze's narrative of conquest and resistance deploysterms associated with imperialism, in what follows I consider thehistory of milk not in terms of the ‘conquest of space’, but instead interms of the ‘production of space’.5 This is because the history ofmilk was imbricated in the drawing of what has been called the‘embryonic border’ between Burma and the rest of British India,which eventually led to the colony's succession from the Raj in1937.6Milkwas caught up in the geopolitical territorialisation of thecolony, rather than simply being a conquering colonial commodity.Milk was part of this production of colonial space both figurativelyand materially. In the imperial imagination the lack of cow's milkwas believed to be the result of the religious mores of BurmeseBuddhists. At the same time, the introduction of dairying wasassociated with the encroachment of Indians into Burmese life.Colonial officials viewed it as an alien and potentially damagingintrusion. Inextricably linked to these imperial representations,were material obstacles to the introduction of large-scale dairyproduction in the colony.Milk offers another demonstration that, asFelix Driver and others have long argued, material encounters andimaginative representations were inseparable in the making ofimperial geographies. In addition, as a definitively mammalianproduct for nourishing warm-blooded creatures, milk points to theimportance of animals within the production of colonial space.7Building on the insights of more-than-human geography, thisarticle attempts to keep animals within its analytical framework.Over the last fifteen years animal geographers have been arguingthat nonhumans are central to the production of spaces. Intro-ducing their ground-breaking early collection on the subject, ChrisPhilo and Chris Wilbert called attention to how humans haveattempted to confine other species in ‘animal spaces’, both ma-terial and imagined: the zoo, the farm, the wild. But they also wentfurther and urged geographers to take into account the ways thatanimals transgressed these confinements, producing their own‘beastly places’ in the process.8 This has pushed geographers toconsider how animals might be brought into their scholarship, as3 Report on the Marketing of Milk in India and Burma (Abridged Version), Delhi andSimla, 1941, 8e11.4 D. Valenze, Milk: A Local and Global History, New Haven, 2011, 4e7.5 H. Lefebvre, The Production of Space, translated by D Nicholson-Smith, Oxford,1991.6 N. Osada, An embryonic border: racial discourses and compulsory vaccinationfor Indian immigrants at ports in colonial Burma, 1870e1937, Moussons 17 (2011)n.p.7 F. Driver, Imagining the tropics: views and visions of the tropical world,Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 25 (2004) 1e17; and for a study that arguesfor the material importance of animals, see J. Lorimer and S. Whatmore, After the‘King of Beasts’: Samuel Baker and the embodied historical geographies of elephanthunting in mid-nineteenth-century Ceylon, Journal of Historical Geography 35(2009) 668e689.8 C. Philo and C. Wilbert, Animal spaces, beastly places: an introduction, in: C.Philo and C. Wilbert (Eds), Animal Spaces, Beastly Places: New Geographies of Human-Animal Relations, London, 2000, 1e36.well as how animals might force changes within scholarship itself.Certainly, the once axiomatic centrality of human-animals in hu-man geography has been questioned. The privileged role of agentascribed to humans has been much critiqued through anti-humanist post-structuralism and a re-conceptualisation ofagency as relational, dispersed and contingent.9 As Henry Bullerhas tracked in his recent surveys of this expanding field, this hasled to considerable methodological innovation. Ethnographicmethods along with observational and participatory forms ofmulti-species research have enabled geographers to provide spacein their work for nonhuman creatures as subjects for themselves,as opposed to mirrors for humanity.10 For those of us working onthe past, some of these methods are challenging to deploy withoutthe risk of anachronism. Nevertheless, the recognition of theimportance of embodied experiences and materiality, the disso-lution of the nature-culture binary, and the attention being paid tohow social contexts are produced, which underpin these newmethods, are developments that historical geographers can buildon to uncover how animals have been imbricated in imperialgeographies.Within these discipline trends, this article picks up particularlyon Kersty Hobson's call for animals to be conceived of as subjectswithin political geography.11 In this case, the article argues that thepolitics of Burma's contentious separation from British India wasinformed by cattle. This does not mean attempting to represent thesubjective experience of the animals involved in this history;although at appropriate moments e and when the sources allow ethis is brought into the discussion. Rather, it means conceptualisingcattle as ‘lively commodities’. The term captures the tension in hownonhumans were recognised as subjects with particular capacitiesand characteristics, whilst simultaneously attending to the ways inwhich they were rendered as objects representing human desiresand exchange values.12 The implication of this when studying milk(or other animal-derived human food stuffs) is that historiansshould not neglect the living, flesh and blood means of productioninvolved. In order to bring animals into the historical political ge-ography of colonial Burma as subjects, the new relationships withcattle engendered by the commodification of their bodies and inthe consumption of their milk need to be put at the centre of thestudy.Drinking cow's milk was an act of ‘interspecies intimacy’. It wasa material and imaginative encounter with another mammal thatinvolved consuming a liquid usually expressed to feed that crea-ture's young. Brett Walker makes a similar point in his study ofmoments when humans have been attacked by carnivorous,predatory animals. He argues that these events demonstrate theunnerving human-animal intimacy of encounters in which a hu-man is reduced to being another creature's source of protein.13 The9 E. Fudge, A left-handed blow: writing the history of animals, in: N. Rothfels(Ed.), Representing Animals, Bloomington, 2003, 3e18; L. Nash, The agency of natureor the nature of agency? Environmental History 10 (2005) 67e69; D. Haraway, TheCompanion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness, Chicago, 2003.10 H. Buller, Animal geographies I, Progress in Human Geography 38 (2013)308e318; H. Buller, Animal geographies II: methods, Human Geography 39 (2014)374e384.11 K. Hobson, Political animals? On animals as subjects in an enlarged politicalgeography, Political Geography 26 (2007) 250e267; although, as has been recentlynoted, the impact of this on the sub-field of political geography has only been slight,see K. Srinivasan, Towards a political animal geography? Political Geography, inpress.12 R-C. Collard and J. Dempsey, Life for sale? The politics of lively commodities,Environment and Planning A 45 (2013) 2682e2699; N. Shukin, Animal Capital:Rendering Life in Biopolitical Times, Minnesota, 2009.13 B.L. Walker, Animals and the intimacy of history, History and Theory 42 (2013)45e67.19 V.L. Rafael, The cultures of area studies in the United States, Social Text 41 (1994)91e111; W. van Schendel, R. Cribb, J.D. Sidaway and T. Than, Southeast Asia: an ideawhose time is past? Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia168 (2012) 497e510.20 M. Baud and W. van Schendel, Toward a comparative history of borderlands,Journal of World History 8 (1997) 211e242; W. van Schendel, Geographies ofknowing, geographies of ignorance: jumping scale in Southeast Asia, Environmentand Planning D: Society and Space 20 (2002) 647e668; J.C. Scott, The Art of Not BeingGoverned: An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia, New Haven, 2009; M.W.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e12 3consumption of milk is perhaps a more optimistic example ofinterspecies intimacy; although modern, intensive commercialdairy farming would suggest otherwise.14 In Burma this intimacywas bound up with the making of boundaries between the colo-niser and the colonised. As with taboos on cannibalism and eatingcertain animals, perceptions of milk drinking reinforced imperialmappings of cultural difference.15 In addition, in order to facilitatemilk consumption the colonial state in Burma was drawn intoimproving its production and distribution. To achieve this they hadtomarshal competing uses of cattle andmaintain the welfare of thecolony's ox population. In other words, the colonial state devisedand enacted policies tomake space for cattle based on their readingof the animals' needs. The perceived threats from Indian-owneddairy herds to the quality of milk and the health of cattle resultedin these lively commodities becoming subjects in Burma'scontentious political geography as it became imagined apart fromthe Indian empire.To explore the interplay between the imaginative and materialprocesses through which cow's milk contributed to the productionof Burma's ‘embryonic border’with India, the article is divided intothree sections. The first section reveals how the potentially trans-gressive intimacy of dairy was negotiated when British imperialactors found themselves in a culture that did not routinely consumedairy products.16 It shows how the consumption of cow's milk fedinto the production of a particular imaginative geography, describedby Stephen Keck as the ‘Burmascape’.17 The second section exploresthe material arrangements put in place to create a network fordistributingmilk to allay colonial concerns over sanitation. It focuseson the colonial state's attempts to order and police space. The thirdsection uncovers the perceived problem of herds of Indian milchcattle breedingwith Burmese plough cattle. It explores howcolonialpolicies tomonitor and restrict Indian cattlewere coterminouswithpolicies to monitor and restrict Indian humans.This is not the first study to historicise milk consumption and itsabsence in southern Asia. In 1970 the cultural anthropologistFrederick J. Simoons examined the history of the ‘milk-line’ that hasbeen said by scholars since the nineteenth century to bisect theregion. His work was highly sophisticated and deployed a complexinteraction of factors to explain milk drinking and its absence:cultural, ecological, psychological and biological. He alsoacknowledged the presence of comparable milking practicesexisting on either side of the line. Nevertheless, his article rein-forced the line's analytical utility (see Fig.1). Beginning at the Bay ofBengal, the line was said to run from ‘somewhere southeast ofChittagong, roughly on the border between the Moslem Bengaliand Buddhist Arakanese’, it then ‘runs inland, to turn northwardalong the western edge of the Chittagong Hill Tracts, where itseparates Bengali from animistic hill tribes’.18 In other words, themilk-line roughly maps onto the contentious geopolitical bordersbetween contemporary Myanmar, Bangladesh and northeast India.14 G. Gaard, Toward a feminist postcolonial milk studies, American Quarterly 65(2013) 595e618.15 J. Bourke, What It Means to Be Human: Reflections from 1791 to the Present,London, 2011, 265e330; S-W. Poon, Dogs and British colonialism: the contested banon eating dogs in colonial Hong Kong, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth Studies42 (2014) 308e328.16 Indeed, the very history of the scientific designation ‘mammal’ reveals theambivalent and gendered place that natural historians gave humans within theanimal kingdom. See L. Schiebinger, Why mammals are called mammals: genderpolitics in eighteenth-century natural history, American Historical Review 98 (1993)382e411.17 S.L. Keck, British Burma in the New Century, 1895e1919, Basingstoke, 2015,28e43.18 F.J. Simoons, The traditional limits of milking and milk use in southern Asia,Anthropos 65 (1970) 555.It also reinscribed the Area Studies division between South andSoutheast Asia, now considered a heuristic separation with its or-igins in Cold War geopolitics.19 Recent developments in borderstudies have exposed the superficiality of these divisions, insteadconceptualising this region as one criss-crossed with dynamic so-cial, cultural and economic networks between various mutableethnic identities.20 For Simoons, though, the line had culturalmeaning. The existence of predominantly non-milking societies onthe east side of the line were ‘survivals’ of ancient Hindu ahimsabeliefs introduced to Southeast Asia from India. They were ‘rem-nants’ of older cultural mores.21 As sophisticated as Simoons' workwas in many respects, he relied heavily on imperial writings, oftentaking their observations at face value. Through this, his studyreified and naturalised what remains a contentious division be-tween South and Southeast Asia along the western borders ofMyanmar. This article denaturalises this border by uncovering thecolonial history of how milk became entangled in the immanentpolitical geography of British Burma.Drinking milk in the ‘Burmascape’Critiquing the discursive ‘othering’ through which social andconceptual hierarchies are maintained is a central concern sharedby both animal studies and postcolonial studies.22 However,because of an understandable sensitivity to how imperial au-thorities made accusations of animality to dehumanise colonisedpopulations in the past, until quite recently ‘species’ has not beenmuch discussed in postcolonial deconstructions of race, gender,sexuality and class.23 Nevertheless, it is evident that underlyingconceptual shifts in imperial thought shaped how differencesbetween humans and other animals, as well as differences be-tween ‘types’ of humans, have been defined and explained. Thesedifferentiations were inextricably entangled and often mutuallyreinforcing.24 In addition, material interactions with animals wereviewed as markers of difference between the colonisers and thecolonised. Imperial observers in Burma cited examples of tactileand sentimental relationships Burmese people were said to haveCharney, Literary culture on the BurmaeManipur frontier in the eighteenth andnineteenth centuries, The Medieval History Journal 14 (2011) 159e181; M. Sadan,Being and Becoming Kachin: Histories beyond the State in the Borderworlds of Burma,Oxford, 2013.21 Simoons, The traditional limits of milking and milk use in southern Asia,547e593.22 G. Bankoff and S. Swart, Breeds of empire and the ‘invention’ of the horse, in: G.Bankoff and S. Swart (Eds), Breeds of Empire: The 'Invention' of the Horse in SoutheastAsia and Southern Africa, 1500e1950, Copenhagen, 2007, 6e10.23 P. Armstrong, The postcolonial animal, Society & Animals 10 (2002) 413e419.Also see the discussion in the introduction to S. Rajamannar, Reading the Animal inthe Literature of the British Raj, New York, 2012.24 M. Radhakrishna, Of apes and ancestors: evolutionary science and colonialethnography, Indian Historical Review 33 (2006) 1e23; J. Vetter, Wallace's otherline: human biogeography and field practice in the eastern colonial tropics, Journalof the History of Biology 39 (2006) 89e123; S. Sivasundaram, Imperial trans-gressions: the animal and human in the idea of race, Comparative Studies of SouthAsia, Africa and the Middle East 35 (2015) 156e172.Fig. 1. The milk-line in southern Asia, detail from Map 3 in F.J. Simoons, The traditional limits of milking and milk use in southern Asia, Anthropos 65 (1970) 547e593. The shadedarea is ‘Milking predominant’, the unshaded area is ‘Nonmilking predominant’.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e124with certain animals to represent the colony as in need of Britishrule.25 Milk consumption, as a contested form of human-animalintimacy, was bound up in this politics of colonial sensibilities.As part of imperial writings on the distinctiveness of the colony'scultural landscape, milk informed the imaginative geography of25 For a fuller discussion, see J. Saha, Among the beasts of Burma: animals and thepolitics of colonial sensibilities, c.1840e1950, Journal of Social History 48 (2015)933e955.Burma as a place distinct from India. Stephen Keck has argued thatthe turn-of-the-century writings of colonial scholar officials andtravel-writers sympathetic to Burmese culture generated aparticular imaginative geography that he calls the ‘Burmascape’.These authors rendered Burma a ‘unique geographic entity’ thatcould be objectively observed.26 The absence of milk drinking was26 Keck, British Burma in the New Century, 30e33.32 Anon., A Dog's Life in Burma, 68.33 I. Sen, Woman and Empire: Representations in the Writings of British India,1858e1900, London, 2002.34 Saha, Among the beasts of Burma; W. Anderson, The trespass speaks: whiteJ. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e12 5simultaneously a sign of the colony's distinctiveness (particularlyfrom India) and a measure of its (unfavourable) difference toEurope.Being unable to acquire milk whilst travelling Burma was afrequent gripe in imperial writings. In this it stood in contrast to therest of British India. Where fresh cow's milk was drunk in the col-ony it was associated with Indian populations, such as Sikhsemployed in the military. Their consumption of milk was seen asevidence of their ‘pastoral Aryan’ instincts.27 British authors' ex-planations for the absence of milk drinking among the Burmese inBurma often rested upon wider imperial representations of thepopulation, and particularly of Buddhism. It was argued that asBuddhists the Burmese objected to the consumption of milk out ofan exaggerated e from the British point of view e sympathy withanimal life. As the travelling artist and author, Robert Talbot Kelly,wrote in 1905, in a typical passage, ‘Forbidden by their religion totake life, meat seldom forms part of their diet, and to such anextreme is this principle carried that they sometimes even declineto milk their cows, who become dry in consequence’.28 Thisdepiction of Buddhist morality in Burma was an inaccurate exag-geration. Vegetarianism was not widespread in the late nineteenthcentury or early twentieth century, instead emerging as a responseto the perceived threats of colonialism to Buddhist learning and ofbeef eating to local ecologies.29 As we shall see in the followingsections, there were other uses to which cattle in Burma were put,particularly in agricultural labour. These uses had a higher prioritythan milk production. By emphasising a religiously-motivatedveganism as an explanation for the alleged Burmese abstinencefrom dairy products, British writers were implicitly claiming anormative status for their own consumption habits.Despite this essentialising explanation, the scarcity of milk andthe novelty of drinking it among the Burmesemade it an evenmoreconspicuous commodity for the British. In some respects, milkdrinking was made a strange experience. Ventriloquizing Burmesewitnesses, the travel writer Geraldine Mitton claimed in 1907 thatlocals found the British habit of drinking cow's milk ‘disgusting’.30More than representing any actual Burmese perceptions, thiscomment demonstrates that Britons in Burma had a heightenedawareness of the animal intimacy of their milk-drinking habits andwere troubled by how they may have been perceived because ofthem. Other writers made milk drinking appear strange in thiscolonial context through detailing extreme examples of acquiring itfrom creatures whose milk was not commonly consumed. Forinstance, in 1900 the imperial hunters Fitz William Pollok and W.Thom recounted killing a rhinoceros cow and its calf. Because of thedifficulty in getting milk they milked the dead mother, getting twobottles' worth for their trip. Apparently the taste was ‘very weakand very sweet’.31More unsettling for imperial sensibilities was an episode in ashort anonymous piece of travel writing published in 1909, pur-portedly written by a Burmese dog who had been adopted by anEnglish family holidaying in the colony.27 V.C.S. O'Connor, The Silken East: A Record of Life and Travel in Burma, Volume 1,London, 1904, 288.28 R.T. Kelly, Burma, Painted and Described, London, 1905, 248. For more on Kelly,and on imperial travel writing on Burma more widely, see S.L. Keck, PicturesqueBurma: British travel writing 1890e1914, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35(2004) 387e414.29 A. Turner, Saving Buddhism: The Impermanence of Religion in Colonial Burma,Honolulu, 2014, 91e93; M.W. Charney, Demographic growth, agricultural expan-sion, and livestock in the lower Chindwin in the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-turies, in: G. Bankoff and P. Boomgaard (Eds), A History of Natural Resources in Asia:The Wealth of Nature, Basingstoke, 2007, 227e244.30 Mitton, A Bachelor Girl in Burma, 131.31 Pollok and Thom, Wild Sports of Burma and Assam, 470e473.The Headman brought us in some boiling hot tea and some‘jaggery’ (blocks of coarse sugar) to sweeten it with. The MemSahib drank one cup and then felt so much better that she beganto grumble because there was not any milk. When the Headmanlearnt what was wanted, he went and had a womanwith a babybrought in, and told her. She was so kind that she emptied somemilk out of her chest into the tea! Even then the Mem Sahib wasnot pleased, but the Colonel Sahib said it was a kindly act and a‘work of merit,’ and she must not be ungrateful and he took thecup from her, and later I saw it was empty. I don't know whodrank it, anyhow I didn't get the chance.32There is a lot going on in this passage. It presents the Burmeseheadman and female villager as lacking in Edwardian-era, Britishsensibilities and a related sense of shame, locating them in the ruralbackwaters of the colony. At the same time, it contributed to awider portrayal of married English women in the Indian Empire asdemanding, prudish and prissy.33 Yet, the implication that ‘ColonelSahib’ had in fact drunk the human breast milk gave a transgressiveundertone to the otherwise ‘gentle’ humour. It was transgressivebecause it was an adult drinking mother's milk, but it was alsotransgressive because he was drinking breast milk from a Burmesewoman. Other male imperial writers in Burma sexualised breast-feeding when they described witnessing it in public. It was a way ofcircuitously acknowledging their own feelings of sexual desire.These were descriptions of shameful, barely suppressed desires forthe racialised, eroticised ‘other’, brought on by the common tropicalthreats to white masculinity of loneliness, over-exhaustion andclimate.34 The oblique way in which the colonel's consumption ofthe tea is hinted at perhaps speaks to this wider ambivalence ofimperial curiosity and repulsion.35 Given that drinking mother'smilk was transgressive, the mistake of their Burmese host inassuming the equivalence of cow's milk with human breast milkhints at imperial anxieties about dairy consumption. It implied aconcern that in Burmese eyes drinking cow's milk amounted to thesame thing as an adult drinking mother's milk.Despite these accounts of the defamiliarisation of drinkingcow's milk, it was noted by some imperial writers that occasionallymilk was consumed by the Burmese. This was explained e as somany aspects of colonised peoples' behaviour were when theyappear to encroach on imperial habits e as a form of imperfectmimicry.36 As yet another British travel writer, Grattan Geary, put itas early as 1886: milk was drunk ‘only in imitation of Europeanselfishness’. Geary was using milk to illustrate the creepingmodernisation of Burma, a portrayal that fitted with his widermasculinity and colonial breakdown, American Historical Review 102 (1997)1343e1370. The politics of cross-racial breastfeeding might also be considered aspart of the context for understanding this transgression. It was a common practiceto employ Indianwet-nurses for British children in the Raj. However, using RudyardKipling's Jungle Book stories, it has been argued that literary portrayals of receivingmilk represented Oedipal desires for the absent and forbidden wet-nurse motherfigure, see J. Hotchkiss, The jungle of Eden: Kipling, wolf boys, and the colonialimagination, Victorian Literature and Culture 29 (2001) 435e449.35 I am not suggesting that these were innate desires, but rather endorse AnnLaura Stoler's argument that colonialism engenders these taboos that requirepolicing, see A.L. Stoler, Race and the Education of Desire: Foucault's History ofSexuality and the Colonial Order of Things, Durham, N.C, 1995.36 H.K. Bhabha, Of mimicry and man: the ambivalence of colonial discourse,October 28 (1984) 125e133. For a discussion of this discursive strategy in colonialBurma, see P. Edwards, Half-cast: staging race in British Burma, Postcolonial Studies5 (2002) 279e295.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e126project of representing the colony as ripe for commercial exploi-tation.37 In this vein, drinking milk was often read as a measure ofBurma's increasing engagement with the world market. Mostly, itwas the consumption of tinned condensed milk that was noted byimperial observers.38 Writers usually recorded the northern Euro-pean origin of tinned milk in their descriptions. This detail wasmentioned to suggest the cosmopolitanism of milk drinking and soto deploy tinned milk as evidence of the changes to Burmese waysof life. It also reflected the dominance of Dutch, British and Swisscompanies as importers of tinned milk during the first half of thetwentieth century.39 Emphasising it as a consumption habit exog-enous to Burma, tinned milk was also associated with the popu-lation of Chinese merchants who had migrated to the colony to sellimported goods.40 These portrayals fitted with the widely-heldnotion that the Burmascape was in decline; that the ‘real’ Burmawas disappearing in the wake of modernity.41Drinking cow's milk took on additional meanings for imperialwriters in the context of colonial Burma. The perception that it wasnot consumed out of a religious concern for animals served toperpetuate an essentialising elision between the population ofBurma and Burmese Buddhists. Buddhism had a central place indefining the colony for the British.42 In imperial writings Indianmilk drinkers, such as the Sikh soldiery, might be in Burma but theywere not of Burma. British writers' reported experiences of strug-gling to acquire milk were not banal observations. They can besituated alongside their retelling of numerous apocryphal stories ofBurmese women breastfeeding orphaned animals.43 Through theover-determined role of Buddhism in defining the Burmascape,both were used to demonstrate that the Burmese were too close toanimals. In contrast to Indian populations, who were representedas cruel to animals, the Burmese were viewed as being overlysympathetic.44 Where milk drinking was observed, it was under-stood to be a form of consumerist mimicry that was part of theerosion of ‘traditional’ Burma. All of these strands contributed tothe British imaginative geography of the colony. Imperial writingson dairy consumption e or, rather, the lack of it e in Burma reifiedthis geography as a given entity, implicitly relying upon it to frametheir writings. Burma was where you could not get milk in BritishIndia.Disciplining dairy geographiesImperial explanations for the lack of milk drinking were entangledwith the material difficulties of producing cow's milk for humanconsumption faced in the colony. The historical experiences of thecolony's cattle was one barrier to milk production. The logistics ofdistribution was a further problem. In addition to these there wereofficial concerns over the hygiene of the milch cattle that wereavailable, as well as the insanitary conditions in which milk wasprepared for human consumption. The proposed solutions to theseissues involved a rearrangement of space to allow for the37 G. Geary, Burma, After the Conquest, Viewed in Its Political, Social, and CommercialAspects, from Mandalay, London, 1886, 18e19.38 O'Connor, The Silken East, 183, 666.39 British Library, India Office Records [hereafter IOR], V/25/500/268: F.D. Odell,Market Surveys of Burma Crops: An Introductory Note, Bulletin No. 32 of 1936,Rangoon, 1936, 10.40 A.M.R. Hart, Picturesque Burma: Past & Present, London, 1897, 253.41 Keck, British Burma in the New Century, 71e93.42 See, for instance, J.G. Scott, The Burman: His Life and Notions, third edition,London, 1910; H. Fielding-Hall, The Soul of a People, third edition, London, 1899.43 For further details, see Saha, Among the beasts of Burma, 918e919.44 P. Chakrabarti, Beasts of burden: animals and laboratory research in colonialIndia, History of Science 48 (2010) 125e152.monitoring and regulation of human-cattle interactions, particu-larly in urban contexts. Within the discussions over these logisticalchallenges, the cattle were rendered subjects through their statusas ‘lively commodities’e commodities valued for their capacities asliving entities.45 Milk production necessitated fostering relation-ships with cows that attempted to take into account their needsand preferences, however skewed interpretations of those mayhave been. But the difficulty of milk did not end with the cow. Onceproduced, the milk itself was liable to adulteration and infectionnecessitating state and scientific intervention.46 Limiting themobility of dairy cattle and removing them from urban areasthrough policies designed to order and police space were central tocolonial schemes for improving milk production and distribution.Colin Metcalfe Enriquez's tongue-in-cheek account of the trib-ulations involved in arranging for a cow to be milked, with which Iopened this paper, picks up on an important point: the relativenovelty of milk drinking meant that both people and cattle wereunused to the production process. Muriel Bowden, wife of a timberfirm employee working in Burma in the interwar years, wrote ofthese problems in a letter to her mother in 1923, ‘There are hun-dreds of cows all skin and bone but no one ever dreams of [milking]them’. Shewent on, ‘Wewere trying to buy one for our own use.Wedid have one and the first morning the man brought half a cup fulland said the cow kicked him and he wouldn't do it anymore!’ Twoweeks later she reported that they had managed to purchase a cowwho would ‘consent’ to be milked.47 As the animal historian EricaFudge has shown using the findings of current animal welfarescience, cows unused to being milked, or that have been put understress by unfamiliar places or people, were less likely to produce agood quantity or quality of milk.48 Enriquez and Bowden may nothave been making fanciful anthropomorphic projections whenthey suggested that these cows were disinclined to be milked. Itwas a practice they lacked experience of and it would have beenperformed by the untrained hands of British colonials' servants,with or without rubber gloves. It was likely that in these circum-stances the cows would become anxious and upset, and that thiswould make milking them even more difficult.Whilst most of the cattle herds seen by Muriel Bowden andother imperial observers would have been employed in agriculturallabour, there were a number of small scale Burmese dairy opera-tions in central Burma.49 The details of one dairy were reported onin 1911. It was a small and highly specialised industry located nearAva, one of the pre-colonial courtly capitals. The dairy had beenestablished before colonial rule. Here the calves were allowed tosuckle from their mothers until the evenings, at which point thelactating cows would be milked by humans. Since the cattle wereneither bred especially for milk production nor wholly separatedfrom their young, the yields were low, as they were for cattle acrossthe colony.50 They were milked in purpose-built bamboo sheds,presumably to put the animals at ease. However, the dairy did notproduce liquid milk but ghi (clarified butter). This was a luxuryproduct that was occasionally used in cooking across the colony, as45 Collard and Dempsey, Life for sale; D. Haraway, When Species Meet, Minneap-olis, 2008, 45e67.46 P. Atkins, Liquid Materialities: A History of Milk, Science and the Law, Farnham,2010.47 IOR MSS EUR/F575: A. Bowden and I. Adams (Eds), Ever Your Loving Mully:Letters from Burma of Muriel Bowden to Her Mother Alice Britten in England, 1922-24,2008, 1 July 1923, 15 July 1923.48 E. Fudge, Milking other men's beasts, History and Theory 52 (2013) 13e28.49 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee Burma 1917, Rangoon,1918, 51.50 IOR V/27/540/20: G.H. Evans, Monograph on the Cattle and Buffaloes of BurmaCalcutta,, 1905, 18.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e12 7was the cottage cheese produced as a by-product of the process.51The Burmese name for this local ghi was tawbat (tho pat’).52 Thisword was, and continues to be, used more generally to refer toEuropean butter. Reflecting on the previous section, it seems thatimperial consumption practices were understood through a pre-existing food culture, rather than being seen as unfamiliar, alien,irreligious or even repulsive, as British writers assumed. These localproducers may have later adapted their production to meet thenew demand for condensed milk, since it was reported in 1940 thatcondensed milk originating from around this regionwas being soldin Mandalay.53 Evidently there was an older, pre-colonial geogra-phy of dairy production centred on the political and culturalheartland of the Konbaung Dynasty.This cottage industry notwithstanding, cattle were not widelyused for dairy production. This absence was not viewed negativelyby all British officials. According to some imperial writers the factthat the calves received most of their mothers' milk explained theirlater strength when fully-grown beasts of burden.54 As the colony'sforemost veterinary official, George H. Evans, noted in his 1905monograph on Burma's buffaloes and cattle, ‘[t]his is by nature'smethod…. The calves therefore obtain the full benefit of the wholeof their natural nourishment’.55 The emphasis on ‘natural’ in-teractions underscored Evans' views of Burmese relations withtheir cattle. He thought them the best cared for cattle in the East.Although the colonial state did establish an experimental farm nearMandalay in an attempt to increase milk yields in Burmese oxen, itwas of little consequence.56 Evans went on in his report to askwhether attempts to increase milk yields were necessary at all.Using cattle for dairies was viewed as being in tension with theiruse as labourers in agriculture, an issue explored in the followingsection. Depriving the calves of their mothers' milk might add valueto lactating cows, but it was believed to reduce the future labourpower of the calves themselves.By the twentieth century most of the dairy production in thecolony was conducted by Indians who had migrated to Burma withtheir own cattle. Indeed, the presence of cattle on ships from thesubcontinent was a significant contributing factor in the unpleasantand unhealthy conditions migrants experienced during thisjourney.57 These herds were predominantly located in urban spacesand at railway towns. This was to meet the mostly urban demandfor milk, since substantial European and Indian populations lived inthe colony's towns and cities.58 Evans was less than complimentaryabout Burma's Indian population and their cattle. He viewed theseanimals as neglected and unhealthy, and believed their milk to havebeen adulterated through their owners' unclean habits. He arguedthat given the ‘dire maladies’ associated with milk produced byIndian milkmen it would be better to advise the milk-drinkingforeign population in Burma to mimic the Burmese in abstainingfrom dairy. He, like many British imperial writers, viewed themuscular physique of Burmese men as evidence that the lack of51 IOR V/25/500/264: A. McKerral, Sagaing District, Department of Agriculture,Burma, Agricultural Surveys No. 2 Rangoon, 1911, 27e28.52 Transliterated according to J. Okell, with U Saw Tun and Daw Khin Mya Swe,Burmese (Myanmar): An Introduction to the Script, DeKalb, 1994, Appendix 3,Transliteration: the alphabet with transliteration equivalents.53 Report on the Marketing of Milk, 26.54 H. Yule, A Narrative of the Mission Sent by the Governor-General of India to theCourt of Ava in 1855, with Notices of the Country, Government, and People, London,1858, 2; Mitton, A Bachelor Girl in Burma, 131.55 IOR V/27/540/20: Evans, Monograph on the Cattle, 15.56 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 57.57 Report of the Committee Appointed to Enquire into the Allegation of Inconvenienceand Hardship Suffered by Deck Passengers Travelling between Burma and India,Rangoon, 1918.58 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 37.milk appeared to have little in the way of a detrimental effect ontheir bodies.59 Whilst concern about adulteration was a commonone back in Britain at the time, Evans' writing suggests that inempire this concern was refracted through notions of race.60 It wasindirect contact with the bodies of Indians, through their animals,that was identified as the primary problem with the milk supply.Indian dairymen were potential vectors of disease. Drinking milk,he worried, might bring the British into proximity with ‘uncleanly’Indian bodies.61It was not only human health that was a concern. The regularoutbreaks of rinderpest in the colony could result in large deathtolls for oxen employed as plough cattle. In one outbreak thatoccurred in the year 1895 in Akyab district, on the border withBengal, 1,563 cattle were registered as having died from the diseasein under three months. The report into this particularly devastatingepizootic was circulated among officials to learn from the lax atti-tude taken to monitoring the health of cattle. Foot-and-mouth wasalso a perennial threat, and the government issued descriptions ofthe disease and its treatment to the population in English andBurmese. The importance of the health of cattle was reflected in theBurmese term chosen by the British as a translation of ‘veterinarymedicine’ in their public notices, which translated directly as‘buffalo-oxen-animal healing knowledge’ (kvai nva: tịrcchan’ kụsamhu chuiṅ’ ra pa~na).62 Despite its importance, officials struggled toidentify the causes for particular outbreaks, including the Akyabepisode. Nonetheless, the condition of Indian cattle and the neglectby their owners was identified as the primary disease pathway.They were said to move in large, uncontrolled herds, eating fromgrazing lands indiscriminately, drinking from agriculturalists'bunds until they were dry and befouling them, trespassing andtrampling crops, and, when diseased, left to die in paddy fieldsspreading illnesses to the plough cattle.63 In 1909 Evans, now headof the civil veterinary department, continued to raise concernsabout Indian dairy herds spreading disease, particularly foot-and-mouth and rinderpest, because of their disregard for rules ontrespassing. He argued that these herds were ‘a great strain on theeffectiveness of the operations for checking disease and on theobedience of the Burman cultivator to rules which he sees brokenwith impunity by natives of India’.64 In the same year he also voicedconcern about tuberculosis being spread from dairy cattle tohumans through their milk. He encouraged the government toincentivise inoculations for dairy cows, but anticipated difficultieswith Hindu owners, who constituted the majority of dairymen,because of their religious sensibilities.65To deal with the threat colonial officials proposed schemes thatcoalesced around restricting the mobility of Indian cattle andregulating the milk supply in urban spaces. To restrict the mobilityof dairy herds the 1871 Cattle-Trespass Act was increasingly used,although, as Evans lamented, often with little success. This59 IOR V/27/540/20: Evans, Monograph on the Cattle, 32.60 P.J. Atkins, Sophistication detected: or, the adulteration of the milk supply,1850e1914, Social History 16 (1991) 317e339.61 IOR V/27/540/20: Evans, Monograph on the Cattle, 32. This may have been partof the 'affective wall' that Anglo-Indians erected between themselves and Indianenvironments, see E.M. Collingham, Imperial Bodies: The Physical Experience of theRaj, c.1800e1947, Cambridge, 2001.62 National Archives of Myanmar, Yangon [hereafter NAM], 1/15(E) 13842, 1894File No. 1V-1: 27 February 1894. This was in contrast to the rest of British Indiawhere militarily useful animals such as horses and camels were the priority, see S.Mishra, Beasts, murrains, and the British Raj: reassessing colonial medicine in Indiafrom the veterinary perspective, 1860e1900, Bulletin of the History of Medicine 85(2011) 587e619.63 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 38.64 NAM 1/15(E) 3200, 1909 File No. 2C-5: 27 October 1909.65 NAM 1/15(E) 3198, 1909 File No. 2C-3: 25 August 1909.74 See Report on the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum, for the year 1884, Rangoon, 1885, andsubsequent years. Although it is not stated in the reports the numbers by the 1920smust have been higher than fifty, since sixty-four animals were sold between 1919J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e128legislation enabled municipal authorities to seize and impoundwandering, out-of-place or unclaimed cattle.66 Officials also usedwider legislative powers, such as those in the Village Act empow-ering them to remove people from towns and villages, to deal withIndian cattle. One deputy commissioner recalled in correspondencefrom 1915 that he had once used these powers to have an entirecommunity of Indian cattle owners ejected from a town becausethey had ‘made the place thoroughly insanitary’.67 To find ways ofbetter regulating the urban milk supply, F.J. Wrath, the official whoran the government's experimental dairy farm, investigated themilk supply to Mandalay in 1917. He noted that due to the lack ofadequate transport infrastructure most dairy came from cattleowned by Indians who resided in the city. On the basis of hisanalysis of the quality of milk in the colony, he noted that the milkof urban cows contained less fat than that of rural cows and on thisbasis deemed it less healthy. He also criticised what he saw as theinsanitary conditions of city-dwelling cows. His proposed solutionwas to establish urban depots so that milk brought in from thecountryside could be speedily distributed throughout the city. Thescheme would offer, it was hoped, a more regulated and reliablesupply of milk and thus increase consumption.68No such scheme was put in place and in 1941 a report into thedairy industry across British India and Burma e now a separatecolony, but still investigated within the same report e came upwith almost identical proposals as a way of improving andgrowing the market.69 The desire to remove cows from the citywas part of wider developments in colonial governance that sawsome animals pushed out of urban spaces for reasons of publichealth, itself a manifestation of shifts in the geography of citiesthat saw some nonhumans excluded.70 In addition to this, it mayhave been part of a change in imperial sensibilities that desiredanimals to be separated from the edible products that came fromtheir bodies by moving sites for the production of meat to lessvisible places.71 The milk depot may have been serving the samefunction, in this regard, as the abattoir: to hide the animal mate-riality of food production. One attempted scheme to improve theinsanitary milk supply and remove cattle from the streets was toset up dairies in already existing imperial institutions, such asprisons, hospitals and asylums. These institutions were ready-made visible, urban signs of colonial authority whose internalregimes were nonetheless hidden from view.72 They were alsoenclaves of colonial medical practice.73 For instance, the RangoonLunatic Asylum housed a dairy herd of at least fifty animals by1920, despite being perpetually and acutely overcrowded withhumans. It provided the inmates with milk, which was deemed tobe an essential foodstuff for the maintenance of their health andmade possible the asylum's regime of forced feeding. In addition,66 IOR V/27/540/18, 1910: The Cattle Trespass Act Manual [with correction slips],Rangoon, 1910.67 NAM 1/15(E) 7594, 1915 File No. 2C-3: 18 November 1915.68 IOR V/25/500/267: F.J. Warth, The Mandalay Milk Supply, Department of Agri-culture, Burma, Bulletin No. 15 Rangoon, 1916, 1e3, 6, 8e11, 14e16.69 Report on the Marketing of Milk.70 D. Arnold, Pollution, toxicity and public health in metropolitan India,1850e1939, Journal of Historical Geography 42 (2013) 124e133; C. Philo, Animals,geography, and the city: notes on inclusions and exclusions, Environment andPlanning D: Society and Space 13 (1995) 655e681.71 R.J.H. Woods, From colonial animal to imperial edible: building an empire ofsheep in New Zealand, ca. 1880e1900, Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa andthe Middle East 35 (2015) 117e136.72 D. Arnold and C. Anderson, Envisioning the colonial prison, in: F. Dikotter and I.Brown (Eds), Cultures of Confinement: A History of the Prison in Africa, Asia and LatinAmerica, Ithaca, 2007, 304e331.73 D. Arnold, Colonizing the Body: State Medicine and Epidemic Disease inNineteenth-Century India, Berkeley, 1993.the asylum's dairy sold milk to consumers in Rangoon where itcould fetch a higher price from European purchasers than thatcommanded by Indian dairymen in the city.74Although cow's milk was widely lauded for its natural andhealth-giving characteristics in official circles, making and selling itwas not left to occur ‘naturally’ in Burma.75 Concerned with thehealth of human and cattle populations, officials devised numerousschemes for intervening in its production and distribution. Withthe opening of a medical laboratory in Rangoon in 1926, scientificexaminations of the composition of milk in the colony became aroutine procedure. Milk from across the colony was sent there fortesting.76 A dedicated research project into the quality of milk in theearly 1930s determined that there were particular problems inBurma. The colony's dairy herds produced milk with low levels offat and high quantities of non-milk solids. More sophisticatedadulteration techniquesmade identifyingmalfeasance difficult. Thescientists undertaking the research proposed additional criteriathat supplemented the newly enacted legislation for monitoringthe content of foods and drugs sold in the colony.77 The variousattempts to discipline the dairy industry discussed in this sectioninspired policies seeking to order and police space. In the process,they reified the political geography of Burma. The specificity of theproblems of milk production reinforced the notion of Burma as aplace apart from the rest of British India. Furthermore, the framingof ‘Indian’ cattle as a problem naturalised this geography byembodying it in animals.Breeding racial tensionsThe rendering of cattle as lively commodities in the milk industrywas seen to be in tension with their commodification in a differenteconomic sector, the rice industry. This was overwhelmingly themost important part of Burma's colonial economy. The late nine-teenth century saw a rapid expansion of the deltaic rice frontier. Bythe opening decades of following century the Burma delta hadbecome the largest rice producing region in the world.78 Theimportance of plough cattle was reflected in their market value,which doubled between the end of World War One and 1930. As aresult of their cost and necessity, the loss of cattle was often acontributing cause of indebtedness among agriculturalists.79Whilst labouring cattle were essential to rice cultivation theywere also vulnerable actors. Mortality rates were high for workingand 1923 without being replaced and milk was still being produced, see Report onthe Lunatic Asylums of Burma, for the triennium 1921e1923, Rangoon, 1924. For moreon the management of the asylum, see J. Saha, Madness and the making of acolonial order in Burma, Modern Asian Studies 47 (2013) 406e435.75 For instance, it is referred to as the ‘most perfect single food known to mankind’and its status as a ‘natural’ product that cannot be artificially reproduced is praisedin Report on the Marketing of Milk, ii, 9, 36.76 See Second Annual Report of the Harcourt Butler Institute of Public Health, Ran-goon, For the Year 1927, Rangoon, 1928, and following reports.77 E.H. Bunce, Investigations on milk standards under the Burma Food and DrugsAct, 1928, Analyst 57 (1932) 449e453; Anon., Report on the Burma Food and DrugsActs, 1928 with recommendations for food standards, Analyst 58 (1933) 759e761.78 M. Adas, The Burma Delta: Economic Development and Social Change on an AsianRice Frontier, 1852e1941, Madison, 1974; I. Brown, A Colonial Economy in Crisis:Burma's Rice Delta and the World Depression of the 1930s, London, 2005. However, itmust be recognised that this expansion had pre-colonial roots, see: M. Adas,Imperialist rhetoric and modern historiography: the case of Lower Burma beforeand after conquest, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 3 (1972) 175e192; P.A.Coclanis, Southeast Asia's incorporation into the world rice market: a revisionistview, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 24 (1993) 251e267.79 C. Siok-Hwa, The Rice Industry of Burma, 1852e1940, Kuala Lumpur, 1968, 45e48.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e12 9cattle, particularly during themonsoonmonths. As a result, colonialofficials were concerned about the supply of plough cattle. Inparticular, theyworried that the bloodlines of the Burmese breed ofoxen, apparently favoured by cultivators, were at risk. As withconcerns about the spread of epizootic disease discussed in theprevious section, Indian milch cattle were considered a particularthreat. This imperial imperative to protect a so-called ‘Burmese’breed of ox reified and naturalised Burma as a geographic entity,with Indian cattle figured as invasive.80 These concerns wereentangled with colonial policies regarding the human Indian pop-ulation in the colony and with emergent Burmese nationalism.There is not a trans-historically applicable definition of whatmakes a ‘breed’, and tracing their historical emergence is chal-lenging. Ecological and genetic factors physically shaped animals inways that were beyond human control, even guiding human ac-tion.81 According to the dominant mode of thinking about breedingin the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, a breed wasconceived of as a population that corresponded to a particularancestry.82 In this vein, breeding dairy livestock in Europe duringthis period relied upon inbreeding and selection on the basis ofpedigree to achieve a purity of type. The aim was to raise consis-tently aesthetically-pleasing, and thus commercially recognisable,types of cow. Caution was aired about selecting purely for milkyields for fear of increasing susceptibility to disease.83 In Burma, thepredominant domesticated species of ox was Bos indicus, a speciesthat was distinct from the European Bos taurus. Buffaloes were notwidely used for dairy and became increasingly less favoured foragricultural work during the earlytwentieth century, falling as aproportion of labouring animals even further from their position in1903, when they were already outnumbered by working oxennearly five to one.84 It was within the species Bos indicus that dis-tinctions on the basis of breed were made.Bos indicus was the same species as the oxen commonly foundon the Indian subcontinent. British observers distinguished theBurmese oxen from the wider species group by defining them as adistinct breed. This was not a straightforward distinction for im-perial natural historians to make. During the nineteenth centurywriters used different taxonomical labels for bovines and, atdifferent times, used the terms bison, buffalo and ox in over-lapping ways.85 This confusion notwithstanding, the local ecolog-ical pressures and a long pre-colonial history of domesticationwould have been responsible for producing physical differencesbetween oxen in India and Burma. The latter were described as80 For histories of how breeding animals reified colonial cultures, see G. Bankoff, Aquestion of breeding: zootechny and colonial attitudes toward the tropical envi-ronment in the late nineteenth-century Philippines, The Journal of Asian Studies 60(2001) 413e437; S. Cheang, Women, pets, and imperialism: the British Pekingesedog and nostalgia for old China, Journal of British Studies 45 (2006) 359e387; A.Skabelund, Breeding racism: the imperial battlefields of the ‘German’ shepherd dog,Society & Animals 16 (2008) 354e371.81 S. White, From globalized pig breeds to capitalist pigs: a study in animal cul-tures and evolutionary history, Environmental History 16 (2011) 94e120; Woods,From colonial animal to imperial edible.82 Bankoff and Swart, Breeds of empire and the ‘invention’ of the horse, 11.83 B. Theunissen, Breeding without Mendelism: theory and practice of dairy cattlebreeding in the Netherlands 1900e1950, Journal of the History of Biology 41 (2008)637e676.84 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 45.85 J. Crawfurd, Quadrupeds and other animals of Burma (1827); M.W. Charney(Eds), SOAS Bulletin of Burma Research 3 (2005) 530e533; Rev. F. Mason, The NaturalProductions of Burmah, or Notes on the Fauna, Flora, and Minerals of the TenasserimProvince and Burman Empire, Maulmain, 1850, 247e250; E. Blyth, Catalogue ofMammals and Birds of Burma, Hertford, 1875, 47e49.stockier and more powerful.86 By the twentieth century thisindigenous variety was viewed by British officials as being underthreat from the importation of Indian oxen, predominantly usedfor producing milk, that ‘promiscuously’ mated in the colony.87 So,whilst differences existed between Indian and Burmese oxen,these differences were ossified in an imperial taxonomic frame-work organised by the idea of the breed. Based on this, imperialpolicy sought to protect the hereditary features that they deemedtypical to the Burmese ‘purebred’; defined in colonial stockbreeding reports as having no more than an eighth of exotic bloodin them.88The colonial state had not always been concerned with pro-tecting indigenous cattle from mixing with Indian stock. In the1850s there were attempts made to improve the breed byimporting Nellore bulls from India to sire cattle for beef, since it hadproved very difficult for the military to acquire enough localslaughter cattle to meet the demands of European troops in thenewly annexed portions of Lower Burma. These experiments wereslow to produce results, but were not deemed to have been a totalfailure. Despite this, they do not appear to have been carried on intothe 1860s.89 This period represents the high point of imperialconfidence in being able to improve the stock of domesticatedanimals in the colony. The government also attempted to establisha sheep farm at Thayetmyo, a town on the border of British Burmaand still independent Upper Burma, but the scheme resulted indisastrously high mortality rates before it was abandoned in1860.90 After gleaning information on elephant breeding practicesin the borderlands between Burma and Siam, the establishment ofan elephant farm was even mooted in 1868, although the sugges-tion was not taken up.91By the turn of the century the state was less inclined to embarkon experiments in animal breeding. Instead, to improve the localbreed of oxen, officials were encouraged to organise agriculturalshows with prizes for the best specimens. These shows appear tohave been entirely ineffectual, and in 1895 the deputy commis-sioner in charge of organising one show held in the delta actuallyforgot to turn up himself.92 The only attempt to ‘improve’ Burmeseoxen was at F.J. Wrath's small-scale experimental farm near Man-dalay that sought to increase milk yields using indigenous animals.Based on the results of some experiments conducted in India thatexamined the effects of early castration, the farm attempted toencourage Burmese cattle owners to perform early castration toprotect bloodlines.93 The state's attitude towards Burmese oxenhad reversed from wanting to improve the breed through cross-breeding in the 1850s, to attempting to protect its purity in the1900s. By 1917, a colonial report resolved to protect ‘purebred’86 Existing domestication was noted by British imperial writers, see Mason, TheNatural Productions of Burmah, 248; and it was deemed a mark of 'civilization' bysome, see J. Crawfurd, On the relation of the domesticated animals to civilization,Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London 2 (1863) 387e468. For more onimperial views on domestication, see D. Brantz, The domestication of Empire:human-animal relations at the intersection of civilization, evolution, and acclima-tization in the nineteenth century, in: K. Kete (Ed.), A Cultural History of Animals inthe Age of Empire, Oxford, 2007, 74e94.87 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 37e38; The Supply ofPlough Cattle in Burma, Agricultural Survey No.7 of 1928 Rangoon, 1929, 5, 31, 38,53.88 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 37.89 NAM 1/1(A) 244, 1856 File No. 66; NAM, 1/1(A) 246, 1856 File No. 68; 1/1(A)309, 1857 File No. 38.90 NAM 1/1(A) 116, 1854 File No. 60; NAM, 1/1(A) 342, 1858 File No. 15; NAM, 1/1(A) 479, 1859 File No. 81; NAM, 1/1(A) 510, 1860 File No. 10.91 NAM 1/1(A) 1400, 1868 File No. 508: 18 May 1868; 4 April 1868.92 NAM 1/1(E) 13895, 1895 File No. 5A-1: 5 June 1895.93 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 57.100 Anderson, Legible Bodies.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e1210draught cattle by restricting exotic and crossbred oxen to ‘specialareas’ away from local breeding grounds.94This shift in attitude to the Burmese breed was brought aboutby a growing recognition of the importance of cattle to the pro-duction of rice in the Burma delta. Along with good, regularmonsoons, healthy cattle were vital to agricultural production inthe colony.95 The stocky, strong Burmese ox, often bred in theShan States and other northern parts of the colony, was thought tobe especially suited to labour in paddy fields, particularly incomparison to the Indian variety. Through reports into breedingand the use of cattle, Burma was imagined as being constituted ofupland areas where cattle were bred and the southern deltaicregion where they were worked, often heavily in trying condi-tions.96 This was an animal geography that was transgressed bymobile herds of milking cattle imported from India residing alongthe sides of waterways and in the railway towns that ran throughthe spine of the colony linking the southern districts to crucialnodes in the north and on the borders. Male calves were sold byIndian dairymen to supplement their incomes, encouragingfurther ‘crossbreeding’, alongside that instigated by the oxenthemselves.97 Following the colony's transportation network,migrant Indian cattle penetrated the spaces of both local animalbreeding and animal labour.To many officials, by the start of World War One the existingmeasures for protecting Burmese plough cattle from the ‘evils’ ofIndian milch cattle were deemed inadequate. The push for greatercontrols began in 1915 with an agricultural and cooperative con-ference held in Mandalay. Although the extensive measures thatwere pushed for did not materialise, at least up until 1930, theyreveal how colonial officials came to frame Indian cattle as aproblem breed. The conference was attended by over nine hundredpeople from across Burma, including representatives of agricul-turalists and state officials. It unanimously agreed that action had tobe taken to protect indigenous cattle from Indian cattle. Theirsuggested course of action was three-pronged: taxation, prohibi-tion and segregation. They argued that owners of milch cattle im-ported from India should be taxed per head of cattle, that theyshould be prohibited from importing and owning more than alimited number of cattle, and that they should be required to keeptheir animals segregated from Burmese cattle to preventcrossbreeding.98The dangers highlighted at this conference, of Indian cattlecrossbreeding, trespassing and spreading diseases, were furtherreinforced in the 1917 official report into stock breeding in thecolony. This report also echoed the conference's call for imme-diate remedial action to be taken, along the same lines as thoseadvocated by the delegates.99 Although no such action was taken,the concern did not go away. Ten years later the 1928 report intothe supply of plough cattle lamented that the recommendationsof the 1917 report had not been acted upon. This report wasparticularly concerned with crossbreeding, using photographs toillustrate the ‘evil effects’ of this mixture (see Figs. 2 and 3). Thefirst image shows a ‘purebred’ Burmese bull which has aconsistent colour, prominent hump and stocky build. The ‘cross-bred’ cow in the second image, in contrast, has patchy94 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 37.95 This was true for much of British India, see S. Mishra, Cattle, dearth, and thecolonial state: famines and livestock in colonial India, 1896e1900, Journal of SocialHistory 46 (2013) 989e1012.96 For the pre-colonial roots of one of these breeding sites, see Charney, Livestockin the lower Chindwin.97 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 38, 50, 56.98 NAM 1/15(E) 7594, 1915 File No. 2C-3: 3 September 1915.99 IOR V/26/540/1: Report of the Stock Breeding Committee, 35e57.colouration, a smaller hump and is a skinnier animal. Throughthese images the author intended to identify and reify distinctivetraits that defined the Burmese breed, using the photographs tohelp fix bodily difference.100 Their recommendations again drewon those made in 1915 and 1917, but added that there should be acompulsory census of Indian breeders and forced castration of‘undesirable’ animals.101Attitudes to Indian cattle in the colony were conterminous withattitudes to Indian people. The interventions listed above can beconsidered as part of a wider range of state controls placed on In-dian migrants to Burma. The timing of these committees wassynchronous with inquiries into the sanitary conditions that Indianworkers travelled and lived in, and into their role in the spread ofsmallpox. At the same time that these measures were taken tomonitor and regulate Indian breeds of cattle, the state introducedcompulsory medical checks and vaccinations on human arrivalsfrom the subcontinent.102 In addition, the concerns expressed byofficials contributing to these reports on cattle in Burma wereindicative of British officialdom's paternalistic attitude towards theBurmese people, viewing their role as protecting the Burmese fromthe Indian and Chinese populations.103 The administrative view ofthe colony, which by the turn of the century held it to be culturallydistinct from India, was increasingly imagining it as a separate geo-political entity. Officials began planning for it to be separated fromBritish India.During the interwar years anti-Indian sentiments gainedground within Burmese nationalism. Burma's initial omission fromthe 1919 Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, that introduced dyarchy toBritish India, sparked nationalist protests. Thereafter, the rela-tionship with India was a hotly contested issue within nationalistpolitics. Politicians were divided between those against separation,fearing that governed separately the colony would not receive thebenefits of reforms being negotiated for India, and those agitatingfor separation, railing against the perceived problems of uncon-trolled immigration.104 During this time, concern about mixed-race marriages between Indian men and Burmese womenbecame prevalent. Indian migrants were figured by some as athreat to the Bama race and to Buddhism, fostering a xenophobicand misogynistic political climate.105 There were a number of anti-Indian riots in the 1930s in which Indian casualties heavily out-weighed Burmese. At the same time further immigration controlswere passed. The 1935 Government of India Act was enacted in1937 separating Burma from India and granting the colony its ownconstitutional arrangements for limited self-government. Whilstconcerns about Indian dairymen and their cattle were not aspressing or acrimonious as those surrounding Indian creditors andlow-skilled labourers, they nestled within the same political faultlines.The colonial framing of the problems of dairy productioninformed nationalistic writing. A leading article in the Burmese-language daily, The Sun, addressed the issue of dairy farming in101 Supply of Plough Cattle in Burma, 5.102 A. Kaur, Indian labour, labour standards, and workers' health in Burma andMalaya, 1900e1940, Modern Asian Studies 40 (2006) 425e475; Osada, An embry-onic border.103 This attitude is apparent in imperial writings throughout the early twentiethcentury. See, for instance, H.T. White, A Civil Servant in Burma, London, 1913; M.Collis, Trials in Burma, London, 2008.104 For a comprehensive overview, see R. Taylor, The State in Myanmar, London,2008, 175e218.105 C. Ikeya, Refiguring Women, Colonialism, and Modernity in Burma, Honolulu,2011.Fig. 2. Young Burmese Bull e pure bred, The Supply of Plough Cattle in Burma, agricultural survey No.7 of 1928, Rangoon, 1929.Fig. 3. Evil effects of crossing e cross-bred cow, The Supply of Plough Cattle in Burma, agricultural survey No.7 of 1928, Rangoon, 1929.J. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e12 11110 See, for a clear example of this, E. Fraz~ao, B. Meade and R. Anita, ConvergingJ. Saha / Journal of Historical Geography 54 (2016) 1e1212October 1915. The author attempted to encourage Burmesepeople to learn more about breeding dairy herds and to take it upfor the sake of the country's prosperity, noting that the produc-tion of dairy was mostly in the hands of Indians with littleknowledge. This meant looking after the breeding of cattle,something that was deemed at the time to be ‘imperfect’ (maphra~n’ jụ). However, the writer also acknowledged that for manythis work was thought to be of a bad sort (dụraciwa).106 The lackof milk production was figured as a developmental lag, with In-dians viewed as a barrier to Burma overcoming its dependenceon foreign dairy products. An earlier article had made the sameobservations about cattle breeding in the colony, noting thatBurmese people were missing out on an economic opportunitysince husbandry was predominantly done by Indians.107 Anarticle published that same year reported on a state-led confer-ence into the milk supply in much the same vein. Echoingcolonial concerns, the paper drew attention to the problem ofIndian dairymen, referring to them as Kalar, a term that couldhold derogatory connotations. The article warned of strategiesthat these Indian dairymen could deploy to avoid being caughtadulterating milk with dirty water and unclean utensils. Thearticle also warned that the milk could be poisoned (achip’) bythem and no one would be able to find out.108The articles published in The Sun show a close engagementwith imperial policy and reports. Building on the problems raisedofficially, Burmese journalists translated them into economic andsocial concerns for the nation's development. Moving into theinterwar years, it is worth noting that official complaints aboutcrossbreeding were being voiced at the same time as anxietiesover relationships between Indian men and Burmese womenwere becoming increasingly prominent. Although I have no evi-dence of the two being explicitly connected, there was a repre-sentational link made between human strength and the health ofcattle through the use of the ox to represent the Burmesepeasantry in nationalist iconography; powerful but in need ofleadership.109 The extent of the overlap between human andanimal concerns in Burmese nationalist thought deserves greaterstudy.ConclusionThe construction of herds of Indian dairy cattle as an epizooticand genetic threat to the Burmese ox was entangled with therealisation of the ‘embryonic border’ between India and Burma.Within the intertwined discussions of dairy consumption andproduction, as well as the welfare of oxen, Burma was implicitlyreified as a geopolitical unit. Imperial imaginings of BurmeseBuddhism offered an essentialising explanation for the relativeabsence of milk drinking in the colony. Indian dairy herds werefigured as invasive entities, naturalising a political geographyembodied in the Burmese breed of oxen. Uncovering the role ofcattle as lively commodities in this history draws attention to thecompeting ways that their value as living creatures could berealised. Dairy herds were pitted against plough cattle in a106 The Sun (Surịya), 16 October 1915, 11.107 The Sun (Surịya), 1 April 1915, 12.108 The Sun (Surịya), 1 June 1915, 13.109 See, for instance, the cover of the nationalist newspaper, New Burma, 23February 1938.limited political ecology, particularly in the vast rice-producingdelta. All this shows that in investigating the emergence ofmilk as a commodity in colonial Burma it is necessary beattentive to how space was produced. Burma was not a frontier inmilk's otherwise inexorable ‘conquest of space’, as Valenze'snarrative might suggest. Instead, the history of milk was entan-gled in the immanent geography of British Burma.As well as shedding light on the more-than-human aspects ofcolonial Burma's political geography, the article is awarning againsthistorical narratives about food that take the globe to be an un-problematic, ready-made space across which consumption habitshave spread.110 Discussions of the globalization of consumptionpreferences that are inattentive to theorisations of space riskreifying political geographic frameworks. The anthropologist ofmilk, Andrea Wiley, has emphasised that long local histories havebeen pivotal in how milk has become increasingly globalized,making insightful comparisons between China, India and theUSA.111 Her work is a sophisticated response to some of the moreblithe commentary on the globalisation of milk, but her work stilltakes these national units for granted. In addition, whilst she opensspace for researching at different scales, her approach does notdeconstruct how the scalar levels of local and global have beenproduced over time. She does not attempt to excavate the history ofimperialism in the making of these scales. However, as this articlehas shown, the material and imaginative work involved in making,selling and consuming milk was not innocent of the spatial politicsof colonial rule. As such, it encourages greater recognition that thegeographic entities used to track and trace milk, and other com-modities, across the planet have their own histories, historiesshaped by the asymmetries and territorialisations of imperialpower.112AcknowledgementsI am very grateful to the Arts and Humanities Research Council forproviding the funding for this research (AH/L014939/1). Thanks toStephen Legg, Rachel Johnson, William Gould, Natasha Pairaudeauand Erich DeWald for their feedback on drafts of this paper. I alsoreceived invaluable comments on earlier versions as part of the‘History of Milk in Asia’ panels at the Asian Dynamics Initiative'sconference, hosted by the University of Copenhagen, and at theresearch seminar of the Department of History at the University ofAberystwyth. The comments of the editor and the three anonymousreviewers have been exceptionally helpful in improving the article.Jonathan Saha is a historian at the University of Leeds specialising in the history ofcolonial Burma. His research to-date has been into corruption within the colonial state,exploring how the state was experienced and imagined in everyday life. He has alsopublished on crime, medicine and ‘madness’ in colonial Burma. More recently hehas commenced a new project on the history of animals, particularly the ways in whichthey shaped, and were shaped by, the colonisation of Burma.patterns in global food consumption and food delivery systems, Amber Waves 6(2008) 22e29; for historical approaches that raise the issue of Eurocentrism andconsider global interconnectivity, but do not historicise global space, see theintroductory essays to R. Grew, Food in Global History, London, 2008, and J-L.Flandrin and M. Monatanari, Food: A Culinary History, New York, 2013.111 A.S. Wiley, Transforming milk in a global economy, American Anthropologist 109(2007) 666e677; A.S. Wiley, Milk for ‘growth’: global and local meanings of milkconsumption in China, India, and the United States, Food and Foodways 19 (2011)11e33.112 A. Burton, Not even remotely global? Method and scale in world history, HistoryWorkshop Journal 64 (2007) 323e328; S. Hodges, The global menace, Social Historyof Medicine 25 (2012) 719e728; J.D. Sidaway, C.Y. Woon and J.M. Jacobs, Planetarypostcolonialism, Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 35 (2014) 4e21.