ABSTRACT: 
In this article, I trace the politics of shame in the context of the problematization of women’s bodies as markers of sexual immorality in modern Ireland. I argue that the post-Independence project of national identity formation established women as bearers of virtue and purity and that sexual transgression threatening this new identity came to be severely punished. By hiding women, children, and all those deemed to be dangerous to national self-representations of purity, the Irish state, supported by Catholic moral values and teaching, physically removed its embodied instances of national shame through a system of mass institutionalization. Just as shame entails the covering of one’s blemishes, so the shaming of women deemed to be deviant by church and state involved their covering via incarceration in Magdalen laundries, among other institutions. By assessing recent events highlighted by inquiries into Irish institutions—Magdalen laundries, reformatory and industrial schools, and soon mother and baby homes—in terms of the politics of shame, this article aims to shed light on the pervasiveness of institutionalization in Ireland and the complex relationship between said institutions, gender, sexuality, and nation building in the early decades of the Irish state. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''  
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Clara Fischer Gender, nation, and the politics of shame: Magdalen laundries and the institutionalization of feminine transgression in modern Ireland Article (Published version) (Refereed) Original citation: Fischer, Clara (2016) Gender, nation, and the politics of shame: Magdalen laundries and the institutionalization of feminine transgression in modern Ireland. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 41 (4). pp. 821-843. ISSN 0097-974 DOI: 10.1086/685117 © 2016 The University of Chicago This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/67545/ Available in LSE Research Online: August 2016 LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE Research Online website. Gender, Nation, and the Politics of Shame: MagdalenLaundries and the Institutionalization of FeminineTransgression in Modern IrelandAll of us know that Irish women are the most virtuous in the world.—Arthur Griffith, founder of Sinn Fe´in, 19031The future of the country is bound up with the dignity and purity of thewomen of Ireland.—Dr. Gilmartin, Archbishop of Tuam, 19262There is a danger of losing the name which the chivalrous honour of Irishboys and the Christian reserve of Irish maidens has won for Ireland. If ourpeople part with the character that gave rise to the name, we lose with itmuch of our national strength. . . . Purity is strength and purity and faith gotogether. Both virtues are in danger these times, but purity is more directlyassailed than faith.—Statement of Irish Bishops, Maynooth, 19253W hat is the relationship between the nation and moral purity? How haswomen’s virtue become entangled in ideas of nationhood and na-tional identity? The history of Ireland’s transition from British ruleto partitioned sovereignty in the new Irish Free State (1922) provides fer-tile ground for addressing such questions and for assessing the gender andsexual politics of Ireland past and present.4 The period in question wasone of intense upheaval, witnessing an insurgent uprising in 1916, a Warof Independence from 1919 to 1921, and a civil war from 1922 to 1923.1 Cited in Ferriter (2012, 13).2 Irish Independent (1925); see also Luddy (2007b, 80).3 Cork Examiner (1925); see also Valiulis (1995a, 172).4 Under the Anglo-Irish Treaty, the Irish Free State was a dominion of the BritishCommonwealth of Nations until Ireland became a republic in 1937.This article is dedicated to the survivors of Magdalen laundries and to the many advocateswho have shone a light on Ireland’s problematic past and present. For reading and com-menting on early drafts of this work, I want to thank Clare Hemmings, Mary Evans, DiannaTaylor, and Mary McAuliffe. The article also benefited from generous comments by audi-ences at a public LSE research seminar and at the Class and Culture in Twentieth-CenturyIreland conference in 2015. Thanks are due to the reviewers for their extremely detailedfeedback and to the British Academy for funding this research.[Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 2016, vol. 41, no. 4]© 2016 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0097-9740/2016/4104-0005$10.00C l a r a F i s c h e rThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Underpinning the construction of Ireland’s newly emergent nation-statewas a national imaginary that needed to clearly differentiate Irish identityfrom British identity, a task undertaken through recourse to the themes ofpurity, chastity, and virtue. The corollary of each of these, impurity, licen-tiousness, and vice, were attributed to the morally corrupt former colonizer,allowing the distinctness and superiority of Irish identity to be secured withparticular reference to moral purity, bolstered by Catholic social teaching.Indeed, it has been argued that church and state, in a bid to produce andenforce a new national identity premised on moral purity, colluded to im-pose strict Catholic social mores and values, thereby instituting a regime ofinward-looking repressiveness (Smith 2004).5 Notably, the moral purity atstake in the project of Irish identity formation was essentially a sexual purityenacted and problematized through women’s bodies.Women were saddled with the task of being guardians and upholders ofvirtue in the home—a sphere deemed more appropriately their domain—while serving as symbols of the fledgling nation. As Maryann Valiulis(1995b) has argued, the emphasis on women’s sexual purity as a means offorging a new national identity, itself understood as a recapturing of tra-ditional Gaelic nationhood, went hand in hand with calls for women’sreturn to the home. While many women had been active in nationalist,feminist, and other liberatory movements, and were promised equal citi-zenship in an independent Ireland in the 1916 Proclamation, the rheto-ric of church and state increasingly deemed the home as more befittingof them. Given the strong normative ascription of motherhood to Irishwomen, where being a wife and mother was the utmost and, where pos-sible, sole achievement of Irish womanhood, women were now recast astreacherous to their virtuous tradition. In 1924 the Irish Independent thusnoted that there were mothers “who shirked or neglected their duty totheir children . . . there were mothers who preferred the fashionable andcrowded thoroughfare to their own quiet home: there were mothers whopreferred talking on a platform or in a council chamber to chatting withtheir children in the nursery” (in Valiulis 1995a, 173).While women’s occupation of public space came to be seen as a dere-liction of their domestic duty and potentially subversive of their symboliccache´ as virtuous and pure bearers of the nation, women’s bodies weredeemed problematic more generally, given their capacity to be harbingersof a failure to live up to the new national identity. In other words, women’spotential impurity formed a substantial threat to the project of national5 Diarmaid Ferriter (2012) warns of overstating this collusion.822 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).identity formation, which required women’s purity and virtue as the es-sential and differentiating features of Irish nationhood.Increasingly, then, measures ostensibly aimed at promoting Irish wom-en’s virtue and purity were introduced, and vices, often presented as En-glish in origin, were countered through evermore punitive means. Giventhe ubiquitous threat posed to the national imaginary by nonadherence tonational (read: Catholic) moral norms, women’s sexuality and social be-havior were subjected to intense scrutiny, as visible transgressions of pu-rity, especially, were met with opprobrium and punishment. Unmarriedmothers and their “illegitimate” children thus constituted a growing con-cern, as discourses of the need for vigilance in the face of deteriorating stan-dards of morality abounded. Hence, while it was widely held that womensomehow determined “the future of the country” with their “dignity andpurity,” as Archbishop Gilmartin claimed, these virtues were at the sametime thought to be “in danger,” thereby threatening the vision of an Irelandmarked by the “chivalrous honor of Irish boys and the Christian reserveof Irish maidens” (Irish Independent 1925).Not onlywas the new Ireland increasingly engaged in the production andpolicing of sexual mores, in enacting regressive legislation that restrictedwomen’s role in the public sphere and prescribed their place in the home,and in curtailing “foreign” corrupting influences through censorship, thenew Ireland also punished and hid transgressors as threats to the moral,sexual purity that was taken to be the foundation of the nation.6 If, indeed,Ireland and its people were not exceptional in their chastity and virtue, thenthe new national identity had to at least be preserved by maintaining theperception that they were. Cue the ensuing culture of denial, secrecy, andhiding that marked much of church and state practice, particularly withregard to social policy and the treatment of women, children, and all thosedeemed to be deviant or threatening to the forging of a distinct nationalidentity.7 It is this culture that Iwish to interrogate in this article, as I explore6 For a useful table of reports and legislation regulating sexuality in the Irish Free State, seeCrowley and Kitchin (2008, 356).7 While I think that any analysis of gender, moral purity, and national identity must belocal and attend to specific historical and geographical contexts, there are parallels that can bedrawn with other countries. Thus, my broad questions at the beginning of this essay shouldnot be understood in universalist terms but are meant to prompt thinking about what thosesimilarities across contexts might be. For instance, in Namibia much of the same rhetoricabout gender and moral purity can be found in a postcolonial context where sexual immo-rality is ascribed to the former colonizer and to Western influences (Currier 2012). AnneMcClintock’s (1993) account of Afrikaner nationalism captures the moral burden placed onwomen who are, as in Irish nationalism, “keepers of tradition and the volk’s moral andS I G N S Summer 2016 y 823This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).responses to the implicit threat that all women posed to the project of na-tional identity formation. I focus particularly on the corollary to Irish wom-en’s purity, that is, their assumed shame, and the way this was addressedby hiding and physically containing women in institutions during thetwentieth century. I draw on source material from recent inquiries into saidinstitutions, as well as on research collated by advocates, survivor testimony,and historical research.This article outlines the role shame played in pathologizing and in-stitutionalizing women in the context of national identity formation inthe early decades of the Irish state. I argue that shame was mobilized in thepursuit of a postcolonial national identity, which centrally hinged on themoral purity of women, on the one hand, but was promoted and main-tained alongside constructions of women and women’s potential sexualtransgressions as continuous threats to that identity, on the other. Thisideological instability (socially, politically, legislatively) entrenched concep-tions of women, and women’s bodies (as markers of visible transgression),steeped in shame—the shame those of us raised in the Catholic tradition areintimately familiar with: shame of the body, of sexuality, and particularlyof women’s sexual bodies.8 In order to preserve the illusion of a morallypure nation, premised primarily on women’s moral purity, a vast system ofincreasingly punitive institutions functioned to hide women as the shamedothers of the nation. Thus shame, and the hiding it ordinarily entails, op-erated as a disciplinary device in the project of Irish nation building as thenation covered its shame by institutionalizing women and other deviantswho posed risks to a national self-understanding based on virtue and moralpurity. Only in recent years have the impact and legacy of the systematicinstitutionalization of perceived transgressors been examined, as survivors,advocates, and government inquiries have revealed events and ideologiesthat gave rise to and maintained people’s mass incarceration.In what follows, I hope to productively add to the ongoing process ofassessment and reflection on Ireland’s past by proffering a reading of theinstitutionalization of women that is framed in terms of a politics of shame. I8 That is not to assert that shame concerning gender, the body, and sexuality is solely aCatholic preserve. However, the particularly punitive response to transgression in the form ofsin (which all humans are assumed to be born with) imprints sin, via shame, on us “as thoughit were imprinted in one’s own flesh” (Hanson 1997, 37).spiritual mission” (71). The nation’s virtue and (sexual) morality are thus bestowed uponwomen across different contexts, and transgressions of gender roles proscribed in the nationalimaginary are punished and deemed aberrant and disloyal of the nation. It would be inter-esting to see whether and how shame is employed to punish said transgression and to trace thesimilarities or dissimilarities in comparative work.824 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).believe that an analysis centered on the emotional drivers of genderedconceptions of nationhood and national identity is essential if we are tofully grasp the proliferation and functioning of institutions and their rolein post-Independence Ireland. While shame has always lurked in discus-sions on Irish institutions—women consigned to Magdalen laundries were,after all, commonly referred to as “fallen women”—there is, to date, no ex-plicit intellectual treatment and theorizing of shame in relation to gender,nation building, and the institutionalization of others in modern Ireland.This article will redress this analytical lacuna by making critical connectionsbetween Ireland’s history, gender, and the politics of emotion and willcontribute to the long-standing feminist body of work on emotion and,more recently, work done in the affective frame.9 I uniquely analyze thepolitics of shame with regard to gender and the mass institutionalizationof women in twentieth-century Ireland in recognition of the feminist andqueer theoretical insight that analyses built around affect and emotion canproduce new knowledges concerning political processes, structures, andideas (Jaggar 1992; Najafi, Serlin, and Berlant 2008).10Institutionalization: The Irish solution to an Irish problemRecent years have witnessed a growing interest in the gender and sexualhistory of Ireland, as social and feminist historians have tried to reconstructwomen’s and children’s experiences, which had so often been excludedfrom official accounts and source documents (McAuliffe 2009). Moreover,there were growing suspicions, subsequently supported by governmentinquiries, that something was amiss with the way in which the Irish stateand the religious orders (until recently in charge of running most social9 Some feminist theorists speak of the “turn to affect,” announced in the mid-1990s,while others understand a concern with affect and emotion as a continuous subject of feministthought. For more on this, see Hemmings (2005), Clough (2007), and Gregg and Seigworth(2010).10 There is some important existing work on women institutionalized in Magdalenlaundries, which this article draws on, such as Smith (2007a, 2007b). However, such workdoes not draw out and explicitly theorize the politics of shame in the context of women’sinstitutionalization and the project of Irish nation building. The politics of shame is de-veloped in the work of Sally Munt (2008), who theorizes shame in terms of what she calls“queer attachments” across a variety of contexts, including Irish contexts. She does not fo-cus, though, on shame as it functioned in relation to the institutionalization of women intwentieth-century Ireland. Joseph Valente’s (2005) work explores the connections betweenracialized and queer shame in Ireland under colonial rule but, while insightful in its ownright, does not cover the ground of postcolonial institutionalization.S I G N S Summer 2016 y 825This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).services in Ireland) treated those in their care. Survivors’ accounts of beingsubjected to physical, psychological, and sexual abuse in Irish institutionswere mounting and were brought to the attention of national and inter-national audiences through documentaries and mainstream films, such asPeter Mullan’s The Magdalene Sisters (2002) and Stephen Frears’s Philo-mena (2013). High-profile activists, such as Christine Buckley, formedadvocacy groups, lobbied for inquiries, and gave evidence on institutionalabuse, thus incontrovertibly making the case for widespread and endemicabuse in religious-run institutions that was often known to the state butignored in a moral and legal abrogation of its responsibilities.The Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse, set up to investigateabuses at industrial and reformatory schools and similar institutions forchildren from 1936 onward, found in its report (the Ryan Report) that the“deferential and submissive attitude of the Department of Educationtowards the Congregations compromised its ability to carry out its stat-utory duty of inspection and monitoring of the schools”; that the de-partment knew that “violence and beatings were endemic within the sys-tem itself”; that it “dealt inadequately with complaints about sexualabuse,” which “were generally dismissed or ignored”; and that “officialswere aware that abuse occurred in the Schools and they knew the edu-cation was inadequate and the industrial training was outdated” (Ryan2009).11 Similarly, the report of the Inter-Departmental Committee toEstablish the Facts of State Involvement with the Magdalen Laundries(the McAleese Report 2013) found that these institutions were not pri-vate institutions, as hitherto maintained by officials, and that the statetherefore had a responsibility toward people maintained in Magdalen in-stitutions. This report, though refraining from tackling the question ofabuse (“the committee does not make findings on this issue” [vii]), ulti-mately prompted a state apology from the Taoiseach (Irish prime minster)and resulted in a redress scheme for survivors.While the McAleese inquiry has been critiqued by the survivor advocacygroup Justice for Magdalenes for ignoring their submitted testimony onphysical abuse and for getting the length of women’s confinement wrong(based on names recorded on the electoral register; see McGettrick 2014,2015), and the UN Committee on Torture has pointed to a lack of “manyelements of a prompt, independent, and thorough investigation” (O´ Fa´-tharta 2013), both the McAleese Report and the Ryan Report, amongothers, highlight the state’s willingness to wash its hands of institution-11 Other investigations into child abuse were carried out on specific dioceses, resulting inMurphy, Buckley, and Joyce (2005) and Murphy (2010a, 2010b).826 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).alized women and children throughout the twentieth century. This hasbeen confirmed even more recently by revelations concerning high mor-tality rates at a mother and baby home in Tuam, which has led to calls for ageneral investigation into this type of institution, with terms of referencepublished by the government in January 2015 (Irish Government 2015).12For each of these sets of institutions, then—industrial and reformatoryschools, Magdalen asylums, and mother and baby homes—there is evi-dence of harsh, if not extremely abusive, treatment of those kept in reli-gious congregations’ “care” and of state denial or indifference to same.Much of the state’s dereliction of statutory duty toward institutionalizedindividuals stems, on the one hand, from the readiness of Catholic con-gregations to provide services the state otherwise would have had toprovide (Cox 2009) and from the financial implications of such serviceprovision while, on the other hand, I think, the state’s indifference to thoseconfined to institutions can be traced to dominant contemporaneous dis-courses of their deserving nature.Insofar as Ireland’s national identity was premised on moral purity andvirtue, women and girls who constituted threats to this identity wereconstructed as bringing shame onto themselves, their families, and theirnation, and were therefore deemed to be deserving of punishment andconfinement. The steadfast desire to preserve the myth of Irish purity,particularly the idea, as expressed by Arthur Griffith, that “Irish womenare the most virtuous in the world,” necessitated the hiding of visibleimpurity in particular. This was borne out by evidence given in the earlyyears of the Irish Free State to the Carrigan Committee, set up to inquireinto the Criminal Law Amendment Acts 1880–85 and into Juvenile Pros-titution, which resulted in a damning report undermining appeals to Irishsexual purity.13 The Carrigan Committee witnesses pointed to increases inthe births of “illegitimate” children; to high instances of sexual crime, in-cluding pedophilia and incest (with correspondingly low numbers of pros-ecutions and inconsistencies in sentencing); and to a general moral de-generation attributed, especially by the cleric witnesses, to corrupting films,dances, and the prevalence of motorcars (which were thought to afford op-portunity for sexual dalliances but also sexual assaults—as Maria Luddy12 In 2014, work by local historian Catherine Corless was revealed in the media, whichdocumented the deaths of nearly eight hundred babies, thought to be buried in an unmarkedgrave at the Tuammother and baby home in the west of Ireland. The Bon Secours Sisters ranthe institution from 1925–61. See RTE´ One (2015).13 For in-depth accounts of the Carrigan Committee’s work, see Smith (2004) and Fer-riter (2012).S I G N S Summer 2016 y 827This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).[2007a, 198] wryly observes, “‘joy-riding’ had a very different connotationin that period than it does now”).The testimony of women’s organizations, such as the Irish Women’sWorkers’ Union and the Irish Women Doctors’ Committee, tended toemphasize preventative rather than punitive measures to redress theseeming crisis in sexual mores, and in the end, the Carrigan Report madeseveral recommendations, including that the age of consent be raised toeighteen, that the sale of contraceptives be forbidden (their advertising hadalready been banned), that the defense of “reasonably believing” a minorto be of the age of consent be prohibited, and, controversially, that somecrimes be punished with public flogging and blacklisting (Smith 2004,214). Significantly, the report had already excised testimony that includedunfavorable comparisons with Britain (Eoin O’Duffy, commissioner of thepolice force, noted that “children of the poorer classes are less protected thanin Great Britain”; see Smith 2004, 223; Ferriter 2012, 139), and since itconstituted a record of seemingly grave moral, national failings, successivegovernments decided, with agreement from the Catholic Church, not topublish the report, as “the obvious conclusion to be drawn is that the or-dinary feelings of decency and the influence of religion have failed in thiscountry and that the only remedy is by way of police action. It is clearlyundesirable that such a view of conditions in the Saorstat should be givenwide circulation.”14 Thus, the Carrigan Committee’s investigation, the re-port, and the subsequent handling of the report are indicative of the in-tense secrecy required and imposed by church and state to maintain theveneer of Irish moral purity in a bid to protect the national identity.Moreover, as James Smith notes, “the political reception of the CarriganReport—first the suppression of the report, then a legislative response[consisting of the Criminal Law Amendment Act (1935) and the DanceHall Act (1935)]—established a precedent for church-state management ofsociosexual controversies, proscribing visible manifestations of ‘sexual im-morality’ while failing to address—or choosing to ignore—the social re-alities attending them” (2004, 211).1514 National Archives of Ireland/Department of Justice, Department of Justice Memo-randum, October 28, 1932, cited in Smith (2004, 215). Interestingly, under the new gov-ernment elected in 1932, theMinister for Justice, James Geoghegan, was advised by membersof the clergy not to publish the report, with one cleric noting that it would “rejoice ourenemies” (217).15 Smith describes the legislative response as a “watered-down version of what the Car-rigan Report initially proposed, but one that substantially incorporated the [Catholic] hier-archy’s concerns,” eventually resulting in the raising of the age of consent to seventeen(church authorities had proposed eighteen); a complete ban on contraceptives; maintaining828 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).This emphasis on the visibility of immorality, then, drove church andstate responses to perceived sexual transgressions and required the hidingand excising of those deemed deviant and counter to the project of nationbuilding marked by purity and virtue. In practice, this resulted not just inrepressive legislation and the curtailment of so-called vices but involvedthe concealment and containment of deviant others in a system of massinstitutionalization. Institutionalization thus became a means of main-taining “the belief that there were no [moral] lapses . . . in Ireland,” as the“Irish solution” to the problem posed by such lapses was, in the words ofhistorian Diarmaid Ferriter, “to hide and deny those who had ‘lapsed’”(2012, 6). The Irish solution to the Irish problem of sexual immorality,and its attendant risk of exposing a national Irish identity spuriously pre-mised on purity, was thus to be found in an increasingly powerful networkof institutions.16Institutions, shame, and contagionThe rise of institutions, or what Michel Foucault called the “great con-finement” (2001, 35), was of course not unique to Ireland. Indeed, thephenomenon can be charted in Europe across the centuries, with Foucaultlocating its beginning in the seventeenth-century founding of the Hoˆ-pital ge´ne´ral in Paris.17 Nor is the intense relationship between church andstate in the aftermath of World War I unusual, as parallels can be drawnwith Italy in the context of a more general gendered European conserva-tism (Valiulis 1995a, 177) and with the Netherlands, where “both CatholicandOrthodox Calvinist groups wielded significant political power” (Ferriter2012, 192). In Ireland, though, the particular confluence of postcolonialnation building, the lack of a significant secular political Left (Ferriter 2012,107), and ecclesiastical control (particularly of social services) ushered in asystem of institutionalization that was especially punitive, pervasive, andpersistent. Even as institutionalization was being reformed or abandonedelsewhere, Irish institutions boasted growing numbers of inmates, reaching16 The term “an Irish solution to an Irish problem” is frequently invoked with regard tothe Irish state’s stance on abortion, which legally prohibits women from accessing termina-tions (other than when their lives are at risk) but permits travel to the United Kingdom, wherewomen can access same. See Bacik (2015) for more on this.17 For more on the merits or demerits of drawing on Foucault for analyses of sexualityin Ireland, especially with regard to the much later intensification of institutionalization inIreland, see Inglis (1997) and Ferriter (2012).unlawful carnal knowledge of girls aged seventeen and younger as a misdemeanor rather thana felony; and a separate provision for the licensing of dance halls in the Dance Halls Act; seeSmith (2004, 218).S I G N S Summer 2016 y 829This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).a high point in the 1950s with 1 in 100 per capita being confined (O’Sul-livan and O’Donnell 2012).18 Between reformatory and industrial schools,mother and baby homes, a borstal (for young male offenders), prisons,psychiatric institutions, andMagdalen asylums, a staggering 1 percent of thepopulation was institutionalized, despite significant emigration rates.19 Thispercentage was higher than the peak of penal confinement in the UnitedStates and in the Soviet Union at the time and highlights not just theinterlocking nature of Irish institutions but also their longevity. Indeed, in1966, the number of involuntary patients in Irish mental hospitals wasdescribed as “appear[ing] to be the highest in the world” (Henchy [1966]2012).Institutions also served specific functions, with different classes of de-viants, and different threats to national moral purity, being confinedaccordingly. For instance, it was widely believed that hardened sinnerswould corrupt the still salvageable, as immorality, particularly the sexualimmorality of women and girls, was understood through the prism ofcontagion.20 Thus, under the new Free State, a debate ensued on whetherthose who found themselves pregnant and unmarried for the first timeshould be placed alongside repeat offenders. Clerics, supposedly celibateand personally unacquainted with family life and reproductive processes,saw no irony in passing judgment and thrashing out the pros and cons oftreating pregnant women as irredeemable sinners or salvageable victims,with arguments and counterarguments put forth in publications such asthe Irish Ecclesiastical Record: “The ‘unmarried mother’ problem,” as itwas termed, came to be framed by the notion of a hierarchy of sinners,where “girls who ‘get into trouble’ . . . through weakness, credulity, orfolly” are contrasted with those who do so “habitually or by way of liveli-hood” (Sagart [1922] 2012, 45). While this debate sometimes acknowl-edged the stigma attached to institutionalization, especially in terms of awoman’s marriage prospects—“a young man sometimes has difficulty inmarrying a girl whom he knows to have been ‘more sinned against thansinning,’ [but] he will have the greatest repugnance to taking for his wife agirl who has been an inmate in a rescue home” (47)—a greater probing18 See Conclusion 4 in Ryan (2009).19 For more on this, see Reidy (2009).20 The idea of sinfulness and sexual immorality being contagious, and therefore in need ofcontrol and containment, should also be understood in the context of the response tovenereal disease, as the nineteenth-century Contagious Diseases Acts treated women as thesource of venereal disease, especially women providing sexual services to soldiers (prostitutionwas often presented as an English problem, presumed to fade away after colonial rule). SeeLuddy (2007a).830 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).of such stigma did not take place, with pregnancy and the visibility ofmoral, sexual transgression via women’s bodies taken to be unquestionablyshameful.Thus, the act of hiding the blemish of pregnancy out of wedlock wasseen as a service to, in the first instance, wronged or foolish first-timeoffenders, who wished to cover their transgression. These redeemablevictims of seducers or naive country girls, “Catholic girls who fall morethrough folly than vice,” deserved a “helping hand” (Sagart [1922] 2012,47), so the argument went, not least given their potential flight to Englandand the danger this posed through “probable moral ruin and loss of faith”(46). The introduction of mother and baby homes, then, rested on aconstruction of femininity that was hierarchically ordered via perceivedlevel of sinfulness, and at least partly prompted by a belief in the contagionof impurity and a fear of women’s conversion to Protestantism if forcedto flee to England or to make use of the services of “proselytizing bod-ies” at home (Garrett 2000, 330). Generally, first-time “offenders” wereplaced in mother and baby homes, while women and girls who had expe-rienced more than one pregnancy were consigned to Magdalen laundriesand the former workhouses, the county homes. Their children were usually“boarded out” to foster parents, sent to industrial schools, or adopted byCatholic families, particularly in the United States (possibly with financialgain for the religious orders).21Throughout the debates on how to deal with unmarried mothers, thenaturalness of feeling shame at one’s transgression (itself made visiblethrough women’s bodies and the bodies of “illegitimate” children) andthe need to cover said shame was assumed. A 1927 government report onpoverty noted that “the illegitimate child, being the proof of the mother’sshame is, in most cases, sought to be hidden at all costs” (Irish Govern-ment [1927] 2012, 72) while a 1938 infanticide case heard that “theshame . . . brought upon householders by the birth of an illegitimate child”was “a natural thing to try and avoid,” just as it was “a natural thing to tryand hide the birth of an illegitimate child” (in Ferriter 2012, 124). Naturewas thus invoked to confirm gendered shame’s normativity and to justify21 It is hoped that the planned mother and baby home inquiry will shed further light onthis. With regard to the shaming of pregnant unmarried women, it should be noted thatstigma also attached to women in other countries. For instance, in England, “respectability”mandated certain norms around pregnancy and wedlock at the time. And yet, Ireland differedwith regard to the project of national identity formation in the postcolonial context, thestrong promotion of Catholic values and social teaching, and the total absence of a secularLeft, which resulted in a particularly punitive, gendered, religious conservatism. For more onwomen and “illegitimacy” in England, see Thane and Evans (2012).S I G N S Summer 2016 y 831This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).women’s punishment and sometimes lengthy confinement in institutions.Moreover, the work of (middle-class) lay philanthropists and, overwhelm-ingly, the religious orders—whose task it was to hide the embodied shameof women and children while preserving the Catholic faith and workingtoward the salvation of their souls—was presented as providing servicesshamed women naturally required.22 Hence, in a call for “ladies” doingphilanthropic work for rescue societies, a Dominican priest noted in 1925that “on their death beds, it will be a consolation to them to think of thepoor girls whom they have helped to save from a life of shame in this worldand from eternal ruin in the next” (MacInerny [1925] 2012, 62).Shame and the Magdalen laundriesThe politics of shame in early twentieth-century Ireland functionedthrough the construction of deviant others who were presented as threatsto a new national identity of purity and moral virtue. Others’ potentialsullying of this identity through sexual impurity was dealt with by takingcontrol of bodies—the most immediate markers and visible evidence ofmoral transgression—and confining them to institutions in accordancewith a hierarchy of sinfulness and impurity. Just as shame, as an emotion,involves the seemingly natural desire to hide one’s perceived inadequacy,so the fledgling Irish nation-state required the hiding of those bringingnational shame through sexual immorality in a system of mass incarcera-tion.23 Indeed, the emotion of shame is usually presented as a nakedness, anexposure of what one would prefer not to have others, even imagined oth-ers, see and therefore involves concealment. When contrasted with guilt,it is often described as a blemish on one’s character, an all-encompassingfeeling of personal inadequacy. Guilt, on the other hand, is a more localizedexperience pertaining to specific actions we might feel bad about but canmake amends for, through apology and other actions to set a situation thatwe made a mess of right.2422 For a critical analysis of the relationship between religious and lay Catholic philan-thropic work and the development of convents in the nineteenth century, see Luddy (1995).23 What I refer to here as “national shame” is simply shame that manifests itself in thenational imaginary, where women were thought to bring shame onto the nation through aninherent potential for sexual and moral transgression. While such anxieties foreground anintrinsic link between sexuality and shame (and women’s bodies), such linking is not uniqueto Catholic social teaching. For example, queer activist and theorist Michael Warner (1999)takes shame to be a natural part of sexuality. The difficulty, for Warner, arises when suchshame is displaced onto others to create distance between purer and less pure (sexual) agents.24 For the distinction between guilt and shame, see Nussbaum (2004), Locke (2007), andWilliams (2008).832 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Guilt, then, entails constructive exit strategies from self-opprobrium,while shame does not—our sole response consists of concealment ratherthan assessment and redressing the underlying blemish. Shame, in thissense, is postremedial. We have already accepted that there is somethingdeeply wrong with us, something that is in some sense intrinsic to us andtherefore cannot be fixed. This something, if exposed, would forever alterour relationships with others—how we are viewed by them but also howwe view ourselves. Hence, shame’s only response lies in hiding our inad-equacy, a hiding that is often played out across our bodies in a physical andseemingly immediate manner. AsMartha Nussbaum notes, “sometimes . . .our ‘abnormal’ weaknesses are uncovered . . . and then we blush, we coverourselves, we turn away our eyes. Shame . . . brands the face with its un-mistakable signs” (2004, 173).Parallels can be drawn here with the shame Ireland’s sexual transgres-sors were deemed to induce in the national imaginary. Deviant others wereconstructed as intrinsically blemished and beyond repair and therefore inneed of concealment behind the tall walls of institutions. Although someemphasis was placed on reform, particularly on the salvation of soulsthrough prayer, work, and repentance, there are indications that someinstitutions hiding shamed others became increasingly punitive in the earlydecades of the Irish state.25 Of course, this gradual shift in the operationof such institutions was also refracted through the classification and gra-dation of sinners, with those viewed as particularly transgressive and threat-ening also deemed most deserving of punishment. Instructive, in this con-text, is the change Magdalen asylums underwent from when they were firstestablished by lay women philanthropists in the eighteenth century. Namedafter Mary Magdalen and set up in response to the seeming escalation ofvisible prostitution on the streets of Dublin, in particular, such asylumswere to provide relief to women and to teach skills, for example, in laundrywork, lace making, and needlework.26The Magdalen laundries formed part of a more general “rescue move-ment” throughout the nineteenth century and, according to Luddy, wererelatively flexible during this time, as “women entered and left them on aregular basis and the institutions offered respite when few other welfareorganizations would care for prostitutes” (2007a, 13). As the running ofMagdalen asylums was entirely taken over by religious orders, often be-25 James Smith writes that the Magdalen asylums were “institutions founded with a phil-anthropic mission” but “became, by the close of the nineteenth century, more carceral thanrehabilitative in nature” (2007a, 25).26 For in-depth accounts of the Magdalen asylums, see Finnegan (2004), Luddy (2007a),Smith (2007a), and McCarthy (2010).S I G N S Summer 2016 y 833This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).cause laypeople could no longer manage them, there are suggestions that,in the context of a national discourse of moral purity that deemed wom-en’s sexuality generally suspicious, the asylums became more punitive andinflexible.27 Indeed, as Luddy notes, in a climate where women’s placein the public sphere was questioned and curtailed, “the problems associ-ated with prostitution and unmarried motherhood, and the discussionsaround these issues, saw the sexuality of all women as suspect and in needof restraint” (2007a, 239). Given the potential threat women posed toIrish purity, especially by constituting embodied instances of shame, allwomen were treated as dangerous, with an inherent capacity for sexualimmorality.The assumption that all women were potential sexual transgressorsshifted the burden of proof away from members of the clergy, social work-ers, police, and family members to facilitate, with relative ease, the incar-ceration and sometimes reincarceration of unwanted women and girls.Thus, women “inmates” or “penitents,” as they were called in Magdalenasylums, were confined via several routes, based on various grounds, someof which are officially recorded but others, especially in the case of familyplacements, will never be known. Some women or girls were homeless,some had mental or physical disabilities, some were orphans, some werevictims of abuse, some were on probation or remand for criminal offenses,some were rejected by foster parents when payments ceased, and some weretransferred through the industrial school system (McAleese 2013, ii–iii).There is also evidence of the hierarchical ordering of deviant otherswithin institutions. Thus, Luddy notes that “within these homes, peni-tents were categorized in three groups, the ordinary penitents, Children ofMary, and the ‘consecrated,’ the latter also being called the ‘class of per-severance’” (2007a, 108). Through hard work and piety, inmates couldrise through the ranks of these categories, with the class of perseveranceforming the step below the nuns themselves. Members of this class wouldtake a religious vow, wear a habit, and commit to spending their lives in theasylum. However, although “the nuns’ own ideal of austerity and holinesswas offered as the ideal for the rescued penitents . . . they could neverbecome ‘real’ nuns . . . although treated as children these women couldnever be full members of a religious family” (108). Thus, the innate blemishof shame that marked them as penitents—regardless of what class—wasassumed to be lasting and in some sense irremovable. Prayer, discipline, and27 The McAleese report (2013, 45) disputes this, however, basing its conclusions on thelength of women’s confinement on records provided by the religious orders. See Justice forMagdalenes’ critique noted on page 826 of this article.834 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).work were only capable of going so far in ensuring salvation and seeminglynever quite enough to restore moral purity, certainly not on a par with thenuns’.This manifestation of shame in terms of hierarchy is a fundamental partof its materialization, for, as Michael Warner (1999) argues, shame betraysa proclivity for seeking distance between a shamed subject and an other,onto whom shame becomes projected. A ranking of shamed others thuscreates a chain along which shame travels to establish more or less deviantsubjects. This produces competition, envy, and a jostling for positionamong those willing and able to compete for a higher place in the hier-archy. Of course it also affords the opportunity for manipulation by thosein top position, as the reward of upward progression can be used as cur-rency. In Magdalen laundries, though, achieving the highest ranking wasnever a possibility, since penitents’ shameful, blemished nature necessarilyhad to stand in relief to the untainted nature of the nuns.The type of work mandated by the religious orders running these asy-lums also has symbolic significance with regard to the supposedly stained,shameful souls in their charge. The alleged sins committed by women andgirls confined in Magdalen laundries were read as stains upon their verycharacters and bodies, stains that could be removed (though never quite)through repentance and the backbreaking work of washing away stainsfrom dirty laundry. The unsullied, holy, and morally intact nature of nunswas often compared with penitents’, who were thought of as “soiled”pollutants (Luddy 2007a, 110). Hidden from public view, these pollut-ants, the nation’s shamed, tried to redeem their souls by purifying not justlaundry but also themselves. Ireland’s politics of shame thus operated bydisciplining bodies directly through confinement and enforced dangerous,exhausting work but also psychosocially, through the intense surveillancewomen were subject to in institutions, as well as more generally, given thethreat they posed as deviant others to the dominant narrative of nationalself-representation. Thus, Luddy points out, the “Good Shepherd nunswho worked directly with the women were called ‘surveillantes’” (2007a,99) and were instructed never to leave penitents out of their sight. Thewomen and girls were watched constantly, for if the nuns were to “leavethem to themselves,” they might be “the cause of the loss of their souls”(98).There probably was a considerable amount of self-surveillance as well,given the threat posed by Ireland’s punitive system of institutionalizationand the ease with which others were shamed and ostracized. Certainly, wehave ample accounts of the deleterious effects of the continuous discourseof sinfulness and shame, where inmates recount their internalization ofS I G N S Summer 2016 y 835This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).shame, often with debilitating consequences. While giving evidence dur-ing the McAleese inquiry, a survivor who had been placed in a Magdalenlaundry by a priest at the behest of her father said, “I could’ve got out afterthree months—my father came for me. But I was too ashamed to go home.I was put in there and it had a bad name and I’d have a bad name then too”(McAleese 2013, 957). Many women expressed this sentiment of havingto hide, upon leaving, the shame of having been in a Magdalen asylum,and some traveled to other countries to begin new lives. While the politicsof shame thus hid Ireland’s national shame of assumed sexual transgres-sion, it induced a fear of exposure, a sometimes lifelong need to hide one’sshame of having been a penitent in a Magdalen laundry. Thus, the sham-ing of women by state, church, and family begot further shame that re-quired concealment.Resisting shameThe control of women’s bodies in the early decades of the Irish stateinvolved, according to Una Crowley and Rob Kitchin, a “disciplinary re-gime that . . . was highly gendered, focusing almost exclusively on theregulation and self-regulation of women,” forming “a dense specializedgrid . . . seeking to produce ‘decent’ women inhabiting virtuous spaces bylimiting access to work and public spaces, confining women to an unsullied(marital) home, with the ever-present threat of new sites of reformation”(2008, 367).Indeed, with the regulation of women’s physical presence in the spheresof home, work, and politics, and, increasingly, in institutions, womenwould be confined to their appropriate place—both metaphorically andcorporeally. Thus, the politics of shame, which required mass institu-tionalization as a means of preserving a desired national identity of moralpurity, is worth assessing in terms of place and women’s physical occu-pation of space. This occupation became increasingly problematized in theIrish Free State, with debates—concerning how to restrict women’s pres-ence in the public sphere, where to place unmarried mothers, how toconfine repeat offenders away from physical proximity to salvageable souls—posing seemingly vital questions of national interest. And since the nationalinterest was taken to be so closely bound with women’s sexuality, and sincewomen’s embodied moral impurity posed a fundamental threat to theproject of national identity formation, a restriction of their physical presencein accordance with moral classification prevailed. In response to the bodilycontainment of women in Magdalen asylums and other institutions—itselfa means of covering and hiding the bodies of Ireland’s assumed corporeal836 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).shame—some survivors emigrated when they could, and the constant sham-ing and threat of institutionalization may have prompted other women toleave (mainly for the United States or the United Kingdom).28In her insightful study on emigration in the 1930s, Louise Ryan tracesIrish women’s migration patterns in the early twentieth century and as-sesses how the Irish press constructed women’s flight from Ireland at thetime. Interestingly, women already made up a majority of emigrants dur-ing the nineteenth century, and this gender ratio became even more am-plified during the interwar years (2002, 54). While concerns aired in thepress related to a fear of rural depopulation, a loss of the Catholic faith, andthe immoral temptations of life in England, feminist historians have at-tributed the departure of young, mainly rural women setting out on a lifeof service to more than just economic concerns, arguing that these womenleft behind the inordinate strictures of Irish patriarchy (Ryan 2002, 52,57).29 Moreover, referencing Kerby Miller (1990), Ryan notes that underBritish colonial rule, discourses of the “myth of exile” were promoted bynationalists citing British mismanagement of the Irish economy as thedriver of Irish people into exile. Post-Independence, this myth becamedisplaced by the “myth of holy Ireland,” where Ireland’s pious identity wascontrasted with the sinfulness of the former colonizer (2002, 55). Emi-gration was not stemmed, though, by the Irish Free State administration,and in a bid to rationalize the perceived treacherousness of the flight toEngland, those leaving had to be demonized and undermined. Thus,emigrants were said not to be “leaving Ireland because they had to, theywere not involuntary exiles, but instead were choosing to go in search ofthe ‘sinful’ pleasures of life in foreign cities” (55).This presentation of emigrants’ sinful motivations can be read asfeeding into assumptions of “real” Irishness, as the national identity ofpurity was denied to those seen as traitorous for deserting Ireland in favorof the former colonial power. Indeed, the denial of complete Irish identityto emigrants is indicative of how nationalisms create subjectivities basedon us and them, insider and outsider, as identities are forged in oppositionto others. As Sally Munt describes it, nationalism “depends upon a homog-enizing, idealizing process that tells a proud story of origins dependentupon selective denial, or repression” (2008, 59). For the other of nation-28 For further work on women’s migration and tensions around class, sexual, and eco-nomic freedom, and perceived disloyalty to the nation, see Howes (2002) and Redmond(2008).29 That is not to claim that Irish women emigrants were not also subject to patriarchalnorms and strictures when abroad nor that they were able to entirely escape the Irish versionthereof. See work on repatriation by Paul Michael Garrett (2000).S I G N S Summer 2016 y 837This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).alism is always already within: women—though taking pride of place innarratives of birthing the nation (as the etymology of “nation” alreadybetrays) and of the nation’s sexual violation from outside—are constructednot as the ultimate beneficiaries of the homogenizing processes of nation-alism but are seen in terms of difference. Thus, Anne McClintock explainsthat “despite nationalism’s ideological investment in the idea of popularunity, nations have historically amounted to the sanctioned institutionali-zation of gender difference” (1993, 61), meaning that women are never theequal bearers of rights, political power, and resources in any nation-state.As sexualized symbols of the nation, women’s flight from Ireland, theirphysical withdrawal, entailed, I think, a recognition of this difference, andtoday this history presents us with evidence of women’s resistance todominant gender norms that were premised on sexual purity and enactedvia containment and control of their bodies. As the other within Irish na-tionalism, women of course would have exercised whatever agency theycould in the face of Ireland’s politics of shame, whether that meant emi-grating, escaping an institution, or simply following their desires with-out taking on the yoke of sinfulness and shame.30 There are stories ofresourcefulness and perseverance—such as the account of a woman com-mitted to two Magdalen laundries who screamed all night at both untilshe was released, or the stories of women running away in the laundry van(McAleese 2013, 958)—stories that betray a continuous wrestling withthe dominant norms of femininity maintained in a postcolonial, patriar-chal society. Indeed, the women survivors giving testimony at inquiries,revealing their experiences in the media, coming together to advocate forand on behalf of each other in recent years exhibit a defiance of a systemicchurch- and state-sponsored shaming that was accepted, if not endorsed,by Irish society for far too long.Despite shame’s inducement to hide, these women came out of hidingto name and seek redress for the injustices they endured. In this sense,shame, and their shared experiences of being shamed, perhaps constituteda point of connection, involving a shared understanding of circumstances,places, and histories that are similarly felt. This would bear out SallyMunt’s (2008) and Elspeth Probyn’s (2005) conception of shame as aforce that unites us, might even provide glimpses into our common hu-manity, and entails agency. Givenwhat I have said previously about shame’spostremediality, wherein covering forms the sole response to one’s exposedinadequacy, shared feeling per se is likely to entail recognition and to be a30 Ferriter (2012) provides some personal accounts of passion in Ireland that run counterto the dominant story of repression and misery.838 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).driver, among others, for action by groups of people who are shamed.Probyn (2005, xiii)makes the case for a constructive role for shame, arguingthat “shame compels an involuntary and immediate reassessment of our-selves: Why am I ashamed? Why did I say or do that? Can I rectify the ac-tions that have either brought shame uponmyself or caused someone else’sshame?” It seems to me that the value to be found in such self-assessmentlies not in the experience of shame itself but rather in the questioning ofone’s emotional responses. Such questioning—particularly by those rou-tinely shamed in our societies by virtue of their gender, race, or class, forinstance—need not be immediate, and may not necessarily take place at all,as shame becomes internalized, forming part of gendered, racialized, andclassed subjectivities.31 The extent and variety of women’s resistance to shameas a disciplining device are therefore all the more remarkable in a contextwhere women were ubiquitously constructed as bearers of the nation’smoral purity, and as constant threats to that purity and thereby to the na-tional identity itself.In 2013, activism by survivors and advocates ultimately resulted in theMcAleese inquiry, a redress scheme, and a state apology. In an acknowl-edgment of the shame borne by the Magdalen survivors, the Taoiseachdeclared in his speech: “What we address today is how you took thiscountry’s terrible ‘secret’ and made it your own. Burying it, carrying it inyour hearts here at home, or with you to England and to Canada, Americaand Australia on behalf of Ireland and the Irish people. But from thismoment on you need carry it no more, because today, we take it back.Today we acknowledge the role of the state in your ordeal” (in IrishExaminer 2013).This apology is a welcome and long fought-for recognition of the harmsdone, a public acknowledgment of injustices committed by the state,which, in a remarkable turnaround, describes the Magdalen survivors’experiences as “a national shame.” These women have thus gone fromconstituting instances of national shame to being survivors of an unjustand repressive state and society that allowed a system of national shameto “stereotyp[e]” and “fai[l]” them. Sadly, the Taoiseach’s speech runsafoul of the classic demarcations of a shameful past, where a morallydubious, problematic history becomes displaced by an enlightened, vir-tuous present.32 In light of the Taoiseach’s own assertion that “it would beeasy to explain away all that happened” (Irish Examiner 2013), it is31 Calls for the inversion of shame with pride may therefore risk a hollow “denial of shamethat confirms and consolidates its invidious power” (Valente 2005, 80).32 This phenomenon is vividly traced by Sara Ahmed (2004) in the Australian context.S I G N S Summer 2016 y 839This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).incumbent upon feminists to ensure that such explaining away does not gounremarked and that the shaming of gendered others continues to be metwith resistance in the Ireland of today.33Gender InstituteLondon School of Economics and Political ScienceReferencesAhmed, Sara. 2004. The Cultural Politics of Emotion. Edinburgh: EdinburghUniversity Press.Bacik, Ivana. 2015. “A Feminist Review of the Law on Abortion.” In Irish Fem-inisms: Past, Present and Future, ed. Clara Fischer andMaryMcAuliffe, 147–68.Dublin: Arlen House.Clough, Patricia Ticineto, ed. 2007. The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social.Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Cork Examiner. 1925. “Statement of Irish Bishops’ Meeting.” Cork Examiner,November 30.Cox, Catherine. 2009. “Institutionalisation in Irish History and Society.” InPalgrave Advances in Irish History, ed. Mary McAuliffe, Katherine O’Donnell,and Leeann Lane, 169–90. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Crowley, Una, and Rob Kitchin. 2008. “Producing ‘Decent Girls’: Govern-mentality and the Moral Geographies of Sexual Conduct in Ireland.” Gender,Place and Culture: A Journal of Feminist Geography 15(4):355–72.Currier, Ashley. 2012. “The Aftermath of Decolonization: Gender and SexualDissidence in Postindependence Namibia.” Signs: Journal of Women in Cultureand Society 37(2):441–67.Ferriter, Diarmaid. 2012. Occasions of Sin: Sex and Society in Modern Ireland.London: Profile.Finnegan, Frances. 2004. Do Penance or Perish: Magdalen Asylums in Ireland.Oxford: Oxford University Press.Foucault, Michel. 2001.Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Ageof Reason. Translated by Richard Howard. Abingdon: Routledge.33 Currently the Irish state is, for instance, overseeing a system of “direct provision” whereasylum seekers are held, often for years, in reception centers that have been roundly critiquedby human rights bodies, civil society organizations, and, most recently, the Health Infor-mation and Quality Authority (see HIQA 2015). The culture of containment and shamingcontinues. With regard to the specific shaming of women, there has been an extraordinaryblindness to the legacy of normative assumptions around parenting and family structure.Under the banner of “austerity,” the government has enacted a series of cuts to state sup-ports for lone parent family households, the vast majority of which are headed by women,with the result that lone parent households’ deprivation levels have increased to a staggering63 percent (Murphy 2015).840 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Garrett, Paul Michael. 2000. “The Abnormal Flight: The Migration and Repa-triation of Irish Unmarried Mothers.” Social History 25(3):330–43.Gregg, Melissa, and Gregory J. Seigworth, eds. 2010. The Affect Theory Reader.Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Hanson, Ellis. 1997. Decadence and Catholicism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-versity Press.Hemmings, Clare. 2005. “Invoking Affect: Cultural Theory and the OntologicalTurn.” Cultural Studies 19(5):548–67.Henchy, Seamus. (1966) 2012. “Commission of Inquiry on Mental Illness.” InO’Sullivan and O’Donnell 2012, 92–97.HIQA (Health Information and Quality Authority). 2015. “Findings of HIQAInspection of the Child Protection and Welfare Services Provided to ChildrenLiving in Direct Provision Raises Serious Concerns.” Press release, May 25.http://www.hiqa.ie/press-release/2015-05-25-findings-hiqa-inspection-child-protection-and-welfare-services-provided-chi.Howes, Marjorie. 2002. “Tradition, Gender, andMigration in ‘The Dead,’ or: HowManyPeopleHasGrettaConroyKilled?”Yale Journal ofCriticism15(1):149–71.Inglis, Tom. 1997. “Foucault, Bourdieu and the Field of Irish Sexuality.” IrishJournal of Sociology, no. 7: 5–28.Irish Examiner. 2013. “Full Text of Enda Kenny’s Apology to the MagdaleneLaundries Survivors.” Irish Examiner, February 19. http://www.irishexaminer.com/breakingnews/ireland/full-text-of-enda-kennys-apology-to-the-magdalene-laundries-survivors-585372.html.Irish Independent. 1925. “Sermon by Archbishop Gilmartin.” Irish Independent,May 12.Irish Government. (1927) 2012. “Commission on the Relief of the Sick and theDestitute Poor, including the Insane Poor, 1927.” InO’Sullivan andO’Donnell2012, 63–73.———. 2015. “Commission of Investigation (Mother and Baby Homes and Cer-tain RelatedMatters).” http://www.dcya.gov.ie/documents/Mother_and_Baby_Homes/20150109DraftOrderCommofInvestigation.pdf.Jaggar, Alison M. 1992. “Love and Knowledge: Emotion in Feminist Epistemol-ogy.” In Women and Reason, ed. Elizabeth D. Harvey and Kathleen Okruhlik,115–42. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.Locke, Jill. 2007. “Shame and the Future of Feminism.” Hypatia 22(4):146–62.Luddy,Maria. 1995.Women and Philanthropy inNineteenth-Century Ireland. Cam-bridge: Cambridge University Press.———. 2007a. Prostitution and Irish Society, 1800–1940. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.———. 2007b. “Sex and the Single Girl in 1920s and 1930s Ireland.” Irish Review35 (Summer): 79–91.MacInerny, Humbert. (1925) 2012. “A Plea for Social Service: The Irish Rosary.”In O’Sullivan and O’Donnell 2012, 59–62.S I G N S Summer 2016 y 841This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).The Magdalene Sisters. 2002. Directed by Peter Mullan. Dublin: A PFP FilmsProduction in association with Temple Films.McAleese, Martin. 2013. “Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee to Estab-lish the Facts of State Involvement with the Magdalen Laundries (The Mc-Aleese Report).” http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/MagdalenRpt2013.McAuliffe, Mary. 2009. “Irish Histories: Gender, Women and Sexualities.” InPalgrave Advances in Irish History, ed. Mary McAuliffe, Katherine O’Donnell,and Leeann Lane, 191–221. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.McCarthy, Rebecca Lea. 2010. Origins of the Magdalen Laundries: An AnalyticalHistory. London: McFarland.McClintock, Anne. 1993. “Family Feuds: Gender, Nationalism and the Family.”Feminist Review, no. 44: 61–80.McGettrick, Claire. 2014. “Magdalene Survivors Are Still Seeking Justice.” IrishExaminer, July 14. http://www.irishexaminer.com/viewpoints/analysis/magdalene-survivors-are-still-seeking-justice-275291.html.———. 2015. “Death, Institutionalisation and Duration of Stay: A Critique ofChapter 16 of the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee to Establishthe Facts of State Involvement with the Magdalen Laundries and Related Is-sues.” Report, JFM Research. http://www.magdalenelaundries.com/JFMR_Critique_190215.pdf.Miller, Kerby. 1990. “Emigration, Capitalism and Ideology in Post-Famine Ire-land.” InMigrations: The Irish at Home and Abroad, ed. Richard Kearney, 91–108. Dublin: Wolfhound.Munt, Sally R. 2008. Queer Attachments: The Cultural Politics of Shame. Alder-shot: Ashgate.Murphy, Francis, Helen Buckley, and Larain Joyce. 2005. The Ferns Report. Dublin.http://www.bishop-accountability.org/reports/2005_10_Ferns/Complete_Ferns_Report_SO.pdf.Murphy, Mary. 2015. “Lone Parents Want to Work.” Village, May 20. http://www.villagemagazine.ie/index.php/2015/05/lone-parents-want-to-work/.Murphy, Yvonne. 2010a. Commission of Investigation, Report into the CatholicArchdiocese of Dublin (the Murphy [Dublin] Report). http://www.bishop-accountability.org/reports/2009_11_26_Murphy_Report/#report.———. 2010b. “Commission of Investigation, Report into the Catholic Diocese ofCloyne” (the Cloyne Report). http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/Cloyne_Rpt.Najafi, Sina, David Serlin, and Lauren Berlant. 2008. “The Broken Circuit: AnInterview with Lauren Berlant.” Cabinet, no. 31. http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/31/najafi_serlin.php.Nussbaum, Martha C. 2004. Hiding from Humanity: Disgust, Shame, and theLaw. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.O´ Fa´tharta, Conall. 2013. “UN Anti-torture Body Criticises Magdalenes Re-port.” Irish Examiner, June 1. http://www.irishexaminer.com/ireland/un-anti-torture-body-criticises-magdalenes-report-233047.html.842 y FischerThis content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).O’Sullivan, Eoin, and Ian O’Donnell, eds. 2012. Coercive Confinement in Ireland:Patients, Prisoners and Penitents. Manchester: Manchester University Press.Philomena. 2013. Directed by Stephen Frears. A coproduction of BBC Films, BabyCow Productions, BFI, Magnolia Mae Films, and Pathe´.Probyn, Elspeth. 2005. Blush: Faces of Shame. Minneapolis: University of Minne-sota Press.Redmond, Jennifer. 2008. “‘Sinful Singleness’? Exploring the Discourses on IrishSingleWomen’s Emigration to England, 1922–1948.”Women’s History Review17(3):455–76.Reidy, Conor. 2009. Ireland’s “Moral Hospital”: The Irish Borstal System, 1906–1956. Dublin: Irish Academic Press.RTE´ One. 2015. “The Tuam Babies.” Would You Believe?, April 12. http://www.rte.ie/tv/wouldyoubelieve/av_index.html.Ryan, Louise. 2002. “Sexualising Emigration: Discourses of Irish Female Emi-gration in the 1930s.” Women’s Studies International Forum 25(1):51–65.Ryan, Sean. 2009. “Report of the Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse” (theRyan Report). http://www.childabusecommission.ie/publications/index.html.Sagart [Priest]. (1922) 2012. “How to Deal with the Unmarried Mother.” InO’Sullivan and O’Donnell 2012, 45–51.Smith, James M. 2004. “The Politics of Sexual Knowledge: The Origins of Ire-land’s Containment Culture and the Carrigan Report (1931).” Journal of theHistory of Sexuality 13(2):208–33.———. 2007a. Ireland’s Magdalen Laundries and the Nation’s Architecture ofContainment. Manchester: Manchester University Press.———. 2007b. “The Magdalene Sisters : Evidence, Testimony . . . Action?” Signs32(2):431–58.Thane, Pat, and Tanya Evans. 2012. Sinners? Scroungers? Saints? UnmarriedMotherhood in Twentieth-Century England. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Valente, Joseph. 2005. “Race/Sex/Shame: The Queer Nationalism of At SwimTwo Boys.” E´ire-Ireland 40(3–4):58–84.Valiulis, Maryann. 1995a. “Neither Feminist nor Flapper: The Ecclesiastical Con-struction of the Ideal Irish Woman.” In Chattel, Servant or Citizen, ed. MaryO’Dowd and SabineWichert, 168–78. Belfast: Institute of Irish Studies, QueensUniversity of Belfast.———. 1995b. “Power, Gender, and Identity in the Irish Free State.” Journal ofWomen’s History 6(4):117–36.Warner, Michael. 1999. The Trouble with Normal: Sex, Politics, and the Ethics ofQueer Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Williams, Bernard. 2008. Shame and Necessity. Berkeley: University of CaliforniaPress.S I G N S Summer 2016 y 843This content downloaded from 158.143.197.038 on August 30, 2016 07:56:26 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).