ABSTRACT: 
This research explores the networks of technological knowledge that influenced changes in the iron production practices of western Uganda in the second half of the second millennium AD. Temporal and spatial variability in technological processes were observed within the research area, in terms of the style and construction of the furnaces, the use of a manganese-rich flux, and the configuration of tuyères. These shifts were considered in relation to the social dimensions of iron production, specifically the protection of technical knowledge. Informed by ethnographic data from the study area, variations were noted in the participation in, or exclusion from, iron production activity on the basis of gender and clan affiliation. This stands in contrast to ethno-historic accounts that speak of a strongly regulated production environment. This paper considers that an uncritical emphasis on conservatism provides an inadequate framework for addressing long-term change in iron production technologies. It suggests that constellations of knowledge in western Uganda fostered the potential for innovation and experimentation, resulting in dynamic technological practice. This paper urges a more nuanced discussion of how complex metallurgical technologies transform and move within cultural and physical landscapes, with ramifications for how we conceptualize the emergence and adoption of early technologies. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this paper explores the temporalchanges apparent in the iron production technologies of western Uganda during the mid-second millennium AD , in relation to different smeltingcommunities and the ‘networks of knowledge,that may have linked them and influenced their technological trajec-tories . 
 it identifies shifts insmelting technology over time , which in turn inspired a discussion ofthe identity, relationships and behaviour of those who made andworked with iron. In this way , a understanding of how past iron production was organised in this part of the Great Lakes region can beformed , and the mechanisms of socio-economic activity that 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Anthropological Archaeologyjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jaaForging networks and mixing ores: Rethinking the social landscapes of ironmetallurgyLouise IlesDepartment of Archaeology, University of Sheffield, United KingdomA R T I C L E I N F OKeywords:IronMetallurgyTechnologyEthnographyAfricaUgandaKnowledgeGenderClansNetworksA B S T R A C TThis research explores the networks of technological knowledge that influenced changes in the iron productionpractices of western Uganda in the second half of the second millennium AD. Temporal and spatial variability intechnological processes were observed within the research area, in terms of the style and construction of thefurnaces, the use of a manganese-rich flux, and the configuration of tuyères. These shifts were considered inrelation to the social dimensions of iron production, specifically the protection of technical knowledge. Informedby ethnographic data from the study area, variations were noted in the participation in, or exclusion from, ironproduction activity on the basis of gender and clan affiliation. This stands in contrast to ethno-historic accountsthat speak of a strongly regulated production environment.This paper considers that an uncritical emphasis on conservatism provides an inadequate framework foraddressing long-term change in iron production technologies. It suggests that constellations of knowledge inwestern Uganda fostered the potential for innovation and experimentation, resulting in dynamic technologicalpractice. This paper urges a more nuanced discussion of how complex metallurgical technologies transform andmove within cultural and physical landscapes, with ramifications for how we conceptualize the emergence andadoption of early technologies.1. Introduction: Variability and change in iron metallurgyArchaeometallurgical research in Africa continues to illustrate theextensive technological diversity that dominated the pre-industrial ironsmelting landscapes of the African continent (many examples to befound in Cline, 1937; Childs, 1991; Killick, 2016). This variation is farin excess of that documented in Europe, despite the much greater vo-lume of European research that has been carried out (Killick, 2015),and yet it appears to stand in opposition to the recurring narrative inethnographies of the rigidity and invariability of African iron produc-tion technologies. The conservatism and protectionism of technologicalknowledge implied in the ethnographic and ethnohistoric literaturecannot satisfactorily address questions of how and why broad techno-logical variation in the smelting record ultimately developed. Thus, thispaper sets out to explore potential social influences on processes ofvariation and change in iron production practices, using the pre-colo-nial archaeometallurgy of western Uganda as a case study.Technology can be construed as the application of knowledge(Jordan, 2015) – knowledge that is discernible within the products itcreates, and the waste associated with those products. Technologicalchange, therefore, is the process of transformations in knowledge: “acontinuous, cumulative, and, largely, an irreversible process” (Parayil,1991: 299). Seeming in contrast to this, ethnohistoric examples ofAfrican iron smelting present technologies that are tightly bound bystrict behavioural and technological rules and rituals. This has oftenbeen interpreted to indicate unchanging, unchangeable technologies,especially in accounts of the early 20th century, which presentedAfrican iron smelting as “hidebound by taboo and ritual, inherentlyconservative with no tendency to innovate” and saw the iron workersthemselves as “automaton[s] reproducing technical steps with the aidof ritual mnemonics” (Fowler, 1990: 37). Such generalisations, drawnfrom early ethnographic studies of African metallurgy (e.g. Cline, 1937;Wyckaert, 1914) and summarised in widely influential books (e.g.Eliade, 1956; Herbert, 1993), have permeated into more recent inter-pretations of the organisation of African iron production (e.g. Brown,1995: 911), and of the organisation of metallurgy in general (e.g. Giles,2007; Roberts, 2008). However, historical analyses of pre- and post-colonial African societies illustrate their capacity for significant socio-cultural transformations in the recent and more distant past (e.g.Connah, 1998; Doyle, 2006a), which suggests that caution is requiredwhen applying the ethnographic record to archaeological data (Iles andChilds, 2014; Cunningham and MacEachern, 2016). Althoughhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2017.10.001Received 27 April 2017; Received in revised form 1 September 2017E-mail address: l.iles@sheffield.ac.uk.1 “the beliefs associated with ironworking itself make it a particularly conservative craft”.Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–990278-4165/ © 2017 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).Tresistance to change may be observed in individual workshops, an as-sumption of persistent conservatism omits the possibility of change thatcan occur within lifetimes, over generations or on even longer time-scales. As Schmidt (1996: 4) warns, “technological histories that holdimportant stories of innovation and invention have been erased andreplaced by representations that focus on ritual practice and beliefssurrounding iron production”.It is possible to place the preoccupation with the continuities andconstants that constitute smelting ‘traditions’ as a tendency to overlookthe dynamic nature of African society and technological capability ingeneral (see Killick, 2015). European travellers to sub-Saharan Africa inthe late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were fascinated byritual aspects of African life, drawn to exotic, repetitious and choreo-graphed performance. This has arguably influenced modern anthro-pological and archaeological interpretations of iron production activity,2 and it is feasible that more elaborate technological behaviours weregiven prominence in early accounts, overshadowing smelting activitythat did not involve explicit ceremonies and rituals, and entrenching aperception of rigid and inflexible gestures and routines (see Iles,2013a). Many iron production technologies of the nineteenth andtwentieth centuries were certainly steeped in ritual, prohibitions andsymbolism (see examples in Childs and Killick, 1993; Schmidt andMapunda, 1997). However, this paper questions to what extent theseelements are universal within African iron production technologies,how dynamic they were in themselves, and what time-depth can beattributed to them (see also Herbert, 1993; Chirikure, 2007; Iles, 2013a;Stahl, 2015; Mtetwa et al., 2017).It is worth acknowledging at this point that bloomery iron smelting3is undoubtedly a high-risk investment activity; once a furnace is firedand a smelt is underway there is a lot at stake. Days or weeks of re-source procurement and preparation culminate in a firing that couldpotentially fail if various requirements have not been met: too muchvariation from a known and accepted ‘recipe’ may result in economicloss for participants, or a loss of status or reputation. Access to the usualresources (including charcoal, ores and clays), furnace construction,weather conditions, the experience and energy of the head smelter andbellowers are all factors that are liable to vary from smelt to smelt, thatmight affect the temperature, furnace atmosphere or progress of asmelt, and which will have an impact on the outcome. Together, theseconsiderations might indeed result in technological conservatism,especially in comparison to technologies with a lower investment oftime and materials.What role can concepts such as experimentation and creativity playwithin these constraints? Was there scope for individuals to experimentwith these processes, stimulating invention and innovation, but also,inescapably, risking failure? Or were unintentional or unavoidablemodifications the primary way by which these complex technologieschanged through time4? The American blacksmith and anthropologistCharles Keller talks of the satisfaction gained from novelty and newideas as a smith, but also of the satisfaction of continuity with the past –a tangible link with those who worked iron before him (Keller andKeller, 1996: 41). It may be important to note that Keller’s experience isof twentieth century artist-blacksmithing communities of NorthAmerica rather than African industrial metalworkers of the nineteenthcentury, but similar sentiments are apparent in Schoenbrun’s analysis ofchanging engagements with shrines and spirit mediums around LakeVictoria on the cusp of the second millennium AD. Schoenbrun (2016:216-7) asks how a community reconciles political transformationalongside maintaining fidelity to their ancestors. In both circumstancesthe question asks, how does traditionalism accommodate change?Where does the balance between these competing forces lie in differentsocieties, past and present?With these questions in mind, this paper considers the temporalchanges apparent in the iron production technologies of westernUganda in the second millennium AD, in relation to different smeltingcommunities and the ‘networks of knowledge’ (Kodesh, 2008, 2010)that may have linked them and influenced their technological trajec-tories. The research set out to explore the cultural landscape of ironsmelting in western Uganda by combining archaeological, archae-ometallurgical and ethnographic approaches. It identified shifts insmelting technology over time, which in turn inspired a discussion ofthe identity, relationships and behaviour of those who made andworked with iron. In this way, a greater understanding of how past ironproduction was organised in this part of the Great Lakes region can beformed, and the mechanisms of socio-economic activity that result inspatial and temporal variability in technological practice can be ex-amined.2. Precolonial iron production in western UgandaThis research explores these ideas of transformations in technolo-gical knowledge using an analysis of data derived from the excavationof several iron production sites in western Uganda, dating to the secondhalf of the 2nd millennium AD. A combination of archaeometallurgicaland ethnoarchaeological evidence was used to reconstruct some of theprecolonial iron technologies undertaken in Mwenge – a region ofwestern Uganda renowned historically for iron production (Fig. 1. Iles,2011, 2013b).This area provides a particularly interesting case study by which todiscuss the movement of iron production knowledge in the wider GreatLakes region. There is little current evidence for very early iron pro-duction either in Mwenge specifically or in western Uganda moregenerally. This diverges from the evidence for iron smelting prior to1000 CE in the southwest corner of the Great Lakes region (includingRwanda, Burundi, the DRC and north-west Tanzania), where evidencefor early iron production stretches back to at least the mid-first-mil-lennium BC (van Grunderbeek et al., 2001). In contrast, the earliestevidence so far for smelting in western Uganda is the furnace at the siteof Munsa, dating to the fourteenth century AD and situated roughly50 km to the west of Mwenge (Fig. 1. Robertshaw, 1997; Iles et al.,2014). It is possible that the lack of iron production remains is linked toa low population density in western Uganda prior to the second-mil-lennium AD, with an accompanying low demand for iron (Schoenbrun,1998; Robertshaw, 1999; Iles, 2013b), although there is scope for morearchaeological research in the region to explore this further. Never-theless, by the mid-second-millennium AD, western Uganda (andMwenge in particular) had developed into a thriving centre for ironproduction, with a wide-reaching reputation for the manufacture ofhigh quality iron: an industry that continued well into the twentiethcentury.Considering western Uganda as an ‘internal frontier’ (Kopytoff,1987) into which communities may have expanded through the secondmillennium AD provides a useful framework for thinking about howiron production might have become established in the landscape andwithin the social structures of the region at this time. Different groupsof people would have moved into the area bringing with them differentpackages of craft knowledge, as well as an increasing demand for ironto clear land, hunt and farm. It is also in this later period that individualwealth – potentially augmented by producing iron – began to play anincreasing role in the formation of hierarchies of power, which pre-viously had been tied to lineage and heredity (Schoenbrun, 1998;2 Echoed in Sarkozy’s supposition that “the African peasant only knew … the endlessrepetition of the same gestures and the same words” (speech given by Nicolas Sarkozy in2007 at the University of Dakar, Senegal, quoted in Stahl, 2014).3 Bloomery (or direct) smelting describes the separation of iron oxides from a host ore,and their transformation to iron. A carbon-saturated, reducing atmosphere within a fur-nace reduces the iron oxides to iron metal. The heat within the furnace is high enough tomelt the gangue (rock) minerals (which form the main part of the waste product of theprocess, slag), but not high enough to melt the iron: the iron remains mostly solidthroughout (a bloom).4 Doolittle’s “incremental changes” (1984) or Merton’s “unintended consequences”(1936).L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9989Ashley, 2010; Robertshaw, 2010). Iron is likely to have played a role inthis socio-economic shift, augmenting the wealth and thus power ofthose who took part in its production. Did this melting-pot of knowl-edge in-flows on one hand and increasing demand on the other inspiretechnological innovation? Through an amalgamation of the existingethnohistorical, ethnoarchaeological and archaeological data, in con-junction with the archaeometallurgical and ethnoarchaeological datapresented here – it became clear that there was indeed significanttemporal variation in past iron production practice within Mwenge overthe past 600 or so years.2.1. Archaeometallurgical evidenceDuring fieldwork in Mwenge in 2007, six smelting sites were ex-cavated, and samples of slag5 and technical ceramic (tuyères6, furnacelining) were taken from each site for further analysis. Previous paperssaw the publication of the results of the archaeological and archae-ometallurgical analyses (Iles, 2011, 2013b, 2014), but a summary ofkey points is provided here.Smelting remains were excavated at the sites of Kyakaturi, Mirongo,Rugombe, Kirongo, Kisamura and Rukomero (Fig. 2), and slag andtuyère remains collected from these sites were analysed using a com-bination of optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and po-larizing energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence with energy dispersivespectroscopy to explore the bulk chemistry and mineralogicalcomposition of each studied sample (Iles, 2014). Radiocarbon datesgenerated from charcoal excavated from the lower fills of excavatedfurnaces at each site clustered in two ranges: fourteenth-fifteenth cen-turies AD (Kyakaturi, Mirongo, Rugombe) and seventeenth-twentiethcenturies AD (Kirongo, Kisamura and Rukomero) (Table 1). The fur-naces themselves were all found to be pit furnaces, ranging between 50and 100 cm in diameter, and extending between 30 and 60 cm in depth,but there were some distinct differences in the technologies undertaken,summarised below in brief descriptions of the smelting sites presentedin chronological order. Further detail on the technological reconstruc-tions is available in Iles, 2011, 2014.At some point in the late thirteenth / fourteenth century, smelters atthe site of Kyakaturi were making iron from a very rich iron ore withsignificant levels of phosphate (c. 1.4 wt%), and using tuyères madefrom highly refractory clay. Using this ore had several implications forthe ironworkers: the high iron content meant that it would have beennecessary for them to add crushed quartz to the smelt to enable a slag toform, and the phosphoric nature of the ore would have resulted in ironwith a phosphorous content of up to 0.35 wt% – a potentially brittlemetal, but tough (Iles, 2014).During roughly the same period, smelters at Mirongo, approxi-mately 20 km to the southwest of Kyakaturi, had no need to add quartz:the ore they used had sufficient gangue to allow a slag to form, parti-cularly in conjunction with the less refractory clay they crafted theirtechnical ceramics from. These differences are not unexpected, andcould feasibly relate to the particular raw materials available at eachlocation. However, a variant in evidence at Mirongo attributable to aconscious choice made by the smelters, was that the furnace was op-erated with only one tuyère: a design element seen also in the furnace atFig. 1. Map of western Uganda showing location of Mwengein relation to modern population centres and other sitesmentioned in the text.5 The waste product of smelting, primarily composed of rock minerals from the ore thathave been melted away from the iron oxides in the ore during the course of a smelt.6 The ceramic pipes that are used to introduce air into the body of a furnace.L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9990the fourteenth century site of Munsa (Iles et al., 2014). The use of asingle tuyère certainly had implications for the formation of the slagblock and the growth of the bloom within the furnace, but it would alsohave meant that a smaller number of bellowers were needed to powerthe bellows.Slightly later in time, in the first half of the fifteenth century,smelters working at the site of Rugombe (Fig. 3) – also nearby – werebeginning to experiment with a new technology: the addition of amanganese-rich flux. This addition would have enhanced the operatingparameters of the smelt as well as increasing the potential yield of ironfrom the ore (Iles, 2014), and was demonstrated by elevated levels ofmanganese oxide (c. 3–7wt% as compared to c. 1 wt%) in some of theslag blocks at that site.By the time the three later sites were in operation – sometime be-tween the seventeenth and twentieth centuries – the addition of amanganese-rich flux had become more prevalent, and more pro-nounced. Slag blocks from the site of Kisamura and Kirongo containedparticularly high levels of manganese oxide, not infrequently rangingup to 12wt%. These two sites – as well as a cluster of slag blocks fromMirongo (Mirongo Group 2) – showed particularly strong technologicalsimilarities. Combining evidence from furnace excavation and slagmorphology suggests that furnaces with a single-tuyère were being usedat Kisamura and Kirongo (Fig. 4), and there is evidence for the use ofFig. 2. Sites in Mwenge.Table 1Radiocarbon dates of excavated furnaces in western Uganda, calibrated using OxCal 4.3and IntCal13 to 2-sigma (https://c14.arch.ox.ac.uk/oxcal/OxCal.html) (Iles et al., 2014).Site Lab Code date bp Cal. adMunsa AA-19334 615 ± 50 1285–1411Kyakaturi OxA-20936 625 ± 50 1290–1399Mirongo OxA-20933 553 ± 27 1314–1430Rugombe OxA-20931 479 ± 26 1410–1450Kirongo OxA-20938 148 ± 25 1667–1949Kisamura OxA-20932 102 ± 25 1685–1928Rukomero 1 OxA-20934 148 ± 25 1667–1949Rukomero 2 OxA-20935 170 ± 28 1661–1954Fig. 3. Excavated furnace at Rugombe.L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9991banana plants in the furnace pits at Kisamura and Mirongo Group 2(Iles, 2009). This might correlate with the comparatively late arrival ofbanana plants in western Uganda. Though there was a “banana re-volution” around the shores of Lake Victoria between the twelfth andfifteenth centuries, when banana cultivation increased in scale andimportance (Schoenbrun, 1998: 167), it is likely that these plants wouldhave arrived in the drier areas of western Uganda – with its strongeremphasis on pastoralism – slightly later in time (see also Hamiltonet al., 2016).The outlying smelting site during this later time-period, both tech-nologically and geographically, is Rukomero. Set further apart from theother Mwenge sites, the smelters at Rukomero were not adding a dis-cernible flux of any kind to their smelts, and they were smelting inlarger, deeper furnaces, which resulted in more inconsistent furnaceatmospheres during firing (Fig. 5). Given the broad calibration rangeassociated with the radiocarbon dates from Kirongo, Kisamura andRukomero (Table 1), it is currently not possible to say whether thesesites were contemporaneous or otherwise.2.2. Mixing ores in MwengeIn addition to this archaeological evidence, Mwenge enjoys anunusually rich documentary history of iron production. Some of theiron working technologies of the Bunyoro Kingdom (under whose jur-isdiction Mwenge found itself in the later centuries of the second mil-lennium AD) were recorded and photographed by the missionary andethnographer John Roscoe in the early twentieth century (Roscoe,1915, 1923). Roscoe witnessed Nyoro smelting at a craft exhibitionorganised for the king in the vicinity of Hoima (Fig. 1; Deane, 2007).Descriptions of early-twentieth century smelting also appear within theclan traditions recorded by the historian Carol Buchanan (1974, 1979).Ethnoarchaeological interviews undertaken by Terry Childs in the1990s (1998, 1999, 2000) provide useful technical detail derived fromthe memories of a smith from Nkinga (Fig. 2). Furthermore, archae-ological survey in 2007 led by the author also came across those whoremembered smelting. In order to locate and record metallurgical sites,the 2007 survey combined interviews with targeted informants whowere already known to have had links to past iron production, along-side daily walking survey. The walking survey presented valuable op-portunities to speak to a wide spectrum of local community members,many of whom had memories or stories of past iron smelting (for amore detailed discussion of the survey and interviews, see Iles, 2013a).This approach ensured that a broader and more inclusive range ofmemories was accessed in the community, rather than just those whowere prominent locally for their connections to past iron productionactivity. This is important if a wide range of voices and experiences is tobe considered in our construction of knowledge regarding iron pro-duction technology (Iles, 2015; see also Chirikure, 2016; Mtetwa et al.,2017).The accounts of Childs, Buchanan and Roscoe – although they de-scribe different furnace designs and tuyère configurations7 – are linkedby their descriptions of the use of two ores, mixed together prior to asmelt. Childs’ (1998: 130) account refers to one ore that is black andglittery, and one that is red and dense. These two ores were combinedas they dried before use, giving them the opportunity to ‘befriend’ or‘embrace’: possibly an indirect reference to a genderisation of theseores, as also noted in Roscoe’s account:“There were two kinds of stone in use and in common parlance theywere referred to as the male and the female. The male was regardedas better in quality, but it had the disadvantage of being hard tobreak and prepare for smelting. It was black in colour and was foundin the hill Nyaituma, usually on the surface of the ground. The fe-male, or soft, iron was found in Galimuzika Busanga; it was red andlay in layers running into the hillside.”(Roscoe, 1923: 217-8)There are a handful of other examples in the ethnographic literatureof African iron smelting where two ores are combined. The Jur, in whatis now South Sudan, smelted male and female ores together – ‘Obau’and ‘Okina’ – “it is the general belief that both of these substances mustbe present before iron can be produced” (Crawhall, 1933: 41). In Ca-meroon, Babungo smelters used limonite and haematite ores of dif-ferent colours, again classified as male and female, their combinationnecessary for successful iron production (Fowler, 1990: 203). Also inCameroon, We/Isu smelters mixed a male ore (a ferrous gravel) with afemale ‘ore’ (a clay) (Rowlands and Warnier, 1993: 524). Marakwet andAtharaka smelters of western Kenya, interviewed by Brown (1995: 45),referred to different ores as male and female or husband and wife, whileSomali smelters in eastern Kenya considered iron ore to be female andiron metal male (ibid.). Todd (1985: 93) also recorded the use of amixture of limonite and magnetite to smelt in south-west Ethiopia,though whether they were associated with genders was not noted.Closer to Mwenge, there are several further examples of dual-oresmelting in present day Uganda. Roscoe’s (1911: 379) account of Ba-ganda smelters, probably witnessed close to Mpigi (Fig. 1; A. Reid pers.comm. 2010) also refers to a hard ‘male’ ore and a soft ‘female’ orebeing combined, which Cline (1937: 47-8) again suggests would havebeen a magnetite ‘male’ ore and a haematite ‘female’ ore. These smel-ters were of the Bushbuck clan, who obtained their ore from the borderof Kooki and western Buddu (Fig. 1). An informant in the village ofKamugenyi, also in Buddu (Fig. 1) – a smith and former smelter, born in1910 – spoke of the use of two ores, and although he could not be morespecific about their nature, MacLean recorded the occurrence of yel-lowish-brown limonite and black goethite within the landscape(MacLean, 1996: 29). Of particular interest is the long distance Ma-cLean’s informant recalled travelling to collect iron ore from Lwendaula– over 30 km and two days journey to the west of the smelting site atKamugenyi (Fig. 1; MacLean, 1996: 29), but very close to the source ofthe iron ore in Roscoe’s 1911 account, and also to the smelting site ofKiwesi, which was also excavated during the 2007 research (Fig. 1; seeIles, 2013d).Fig. 4. Excavated furnace at Kirongo, looking south, with slag block in-situ. The mor-phology of this slag block is suggestive of the use of one tuyere.7 Childs describes a furnace pit one meter in diameter and one meter deep, lined withash but with no walls or superstructure and with a protective shelter built over it. Onepair of bellows was placed at the side of the furnace, with a tuyère set into the pit (Childs,1999: 31-2). Buchanan’s account describes the construction of small pit furnaces with sixor seven bellows, surrounded by stones, all within a thatched enclosure approximatelytwo metres in diameter (Buchanan, 1974: 103). Roscoe’s account of the royal smelters ofBunyoro describes unusual furnaces, comprising round pits, approximately 50 cm deepand 50 cm in diameter, with a baked clay cover. A hole in the cover was used as achimney (Roscoe, 1923: 220-1).L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9992Identifying the mineralogy of the ores used in the Mwenge smeltingpresented an opportunity to link the ethnographic record of Nyorosmelting with archaeological data. The description of the red, soft ore isfeasibly a description of haematite. Cline (1937: 117) interprets the‘male’ ore to be a colluvial or alluvial magnetite. This is an under-standable assumption based on Roscoe’s description, but importantlyone that was made with no first-hand knowledge of the area. Instead,the black, sparkling ore described in the ethnographic literature is likelyto be a manganiferous mineral added to the smelts, evident in theelevated manganese oxide levels present in many of the archaeologicalslag samples. The addition of this material would have acted as a flux,reducing the viscosity of the resulting slag, facilitating the separation ofthe slag from the bloom, and improving the yield of iron from the ironore. Recent analysis of a sample of the ‘male’ ore, collected from a minenear Kirongo, confirmed this hypothesis (a full discussion of the tech-nical analyses and the implications of a manganese-rich flux is pre-sented in Iles, 2014).3. Shifting technological knowledge in western UgandaThe evidence presented above suggests a collage of technologicalknowledge in western Uganda from the fourteenth century AD to withinmodern memory. Later technologies (including inferences from twen-tieth-century ethnographic examples) show increasing evidence for theuse of a manganese-rich flux. However, this is not the only technolo-gical change through time – later sites tended to use furnaces with asingle tuyère rather than multiple tuyères, and the slag blocks fromthese sites were more likely to have impressions of banana plants inaddition to reeds and grasses (Iles, 2009, 2011, 2013c, 2014). Whatmight have prompted these shifts in smelting practices? As Gosselain(2008a: 152) states regarding pottery, but which is just as applicable toall crafts, “we cannot hope to understand the spatial and temporalevolution of pottery traditions without paying attention to the specificsocial and historical contexts to which they belong.” The ethnographicand historic accounts of the region were thus re-examined in order toconsider the different communities of practice in the region, and thepossible means of knowledge flow that may have encouraged techno-logical change; salient points are discussed below.3.1. Networks of clans as networks of knowledgeIn many accounts of sub-Saharan African crafts, participation andthe behaviour of participants – the contexts that frame potentialknowledge transmission activities – are tightly bound with identity.Identity, particularly gender and clan, has regularly been seen asshaping whether and to what extent technical, social and esotericknowledge of iron production was focused within particular groups,and whether and to what extent it was spatially and socially restricted(see Herbert, 1993; Sterner and David, 1991; Tamari, 1991).Clans or castes associated with metal working are commonthroughout eastern Africa, such as the smelters of the nineteenth-cen-tury kingdom of Karagwe (Reid and MacLean, 1995), the blacksmithsand potters of Darfur (Haaland, 1985), and the blacksmithing clansassociated with pastoralist groups of east Africa (Cline, 1937). Some ofthese smithing and metal working clans are physically and sociallyisolated from the rest of the community, even now (e.g. Fig. 6). Thisbehaviour has been associated with a restriction on the participation ofoutsiders, thus ensuring that knowledge, and therefore power, ismonopolised within a particular clan or lineage (e.g. Haaland, 1985; seealso Crown, 2016). Limiting economic competition has also been linkedFig. 6. Screen-grab from KTN News Kenya broadcast (28July 2013) with a feature on the “despised and isolated”Il-Kunono blacksmithing clan. Reproduced with kindpermission from The Standard Group PLC.Fig. 5. Smelting furnaces excavated at Rukomero.L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9993to the embedding of technology within complex ritual and esotericknowledge (Childs, 1991: 346). Smelts undertaken under the leadershipof a master smelter who alone held ultimate ritual and technicalknowledge were unrepeatable by those without access to that knowl-edge. In some cases, master smelters required apprentices to prove theirloyalty and their dedication to the craft before they were initiated to thefull secrets of smelting and given the “essential technical and ritualknowledge” needed to smelt (Childs and Killick, 1993: 329).These models, which link the concealment of knowledge to themaintenance of power and authority, presume a particular perspectiveon the role, history and operation of clans in the region. The clanstructure of the Great Lakes is typically seen as an exclusory, patrilinealsystem, with membership as “exclusive as any medieval guild system”(Ingham, 1975: 16). However, this idea originated with very earliestethnographic accounts of the region, accounts written at a time atwhich “the disorder and demographic collapse of colonial rule” hadalready transformed the social organisation of knowledge (Guyer andEno Belinga, 1995: 118; Kodesh, 20108). Instead, the dynamic andvariable nature of clan organisation is increasingly being emphasised,with implications for how the organisation of craft production is per-ceived (Tamari, 1991; Wallaert-Pêtre, 2001; Stahl, 2016). Of particularrelevance in this case, recent historical assessments of clans in Uganda(e.g. Kodesh, 2008, 2010; Willis, 1997) present a nuanced view of clanhistories and functions: that of ‘networks of knowledge’ (Kodesh, 2008,2010), a mobilisation of a collective, compositional knowledge that isimprovised, socially responsive and constantly changing (Guyer andEno Belinga, 1995).The clan-landscape of the Great Lakes transcends both modern-daypolitical borders and the configuration of the second millenniumkingdoms, and is thought to have been a vital feature of economic life inwestern Uganda, playing a pivotal role in social change (Willis, 1997;Schoenbrun, 2016: 230). It operated as an extensive system of “con-tacts, exchanges, and movements” as well as maintaining “ancestralvocations” associated with specific clans, including certain productionindustries as well as other social and economic roles (Chrétien, 2003:90-4). The Basita clan, for example, is associated with ironworking inBunyoro (Buchanan, 1974: 102-4), but also has counterparts in otherkingdom territories in Uganda, Tanzania and Rwanda (Buchanan, 1979:102; Chrétien, 2003: 89, 90). These units established and maintainednetworks across distant and geographically unconnected clan lands,drawing together dispersed communities “whose leaders possessed avariety of skills, thus forging a powerful connection between clanship… and the composition of knowledge” (Kodesh, 2008: 200; 2010). Theestablishment – around 500 years ago – of these networks of knowledgeresulted in the formation of more “efficacious social and productivenetworks” facilitated by the “language and practices of clanship” toenable larger and larger groups to remain connected as interlockingcommunities (Kodesh, 2010: 182).An overriding theme drawn from the collected histories of the ori-gins of Bunyoro is the wide-ranging, inclusive, multi-ethnic nature ofthe kingdom (Buchanan, 1974): populations are frequently said to ar-rive in the region to be encompassed into the social landscape. Doyle(2006b) highlights this as an unusually positive feature. Stories re-garding the convergence of many different peoples over many differenttime periods have stressed the value of inclusion and cooperation,culminating in what Kopytoff (1987: 51) describes as “anomalouscommunities”. The iron smelting practices recorded in western Ugandaare products of this dynamic and interconnected social landscape, withclans acting as networks of contacts, exchanges and movements,crossing kingdom boundaries and linking extended families and dif-ferent communities of practice. Migration histories of clans associatedwith iron production provide some estimation of the complexity of thegradual movements of small groups and the density of social interac-tions during this period (see Fig. 7; Buchanan, 1974, 1979). The diversebackgrounds of those living in Mwenge – a heterogenous populationconstituted from waves of immigrants – might shed light on the de-velopment of varied iron production styles around the region. Con-sidering iron production within the framework of the clan networksthat gradually colonised this ‘frontier zone’ during the second millen-nium emphasises a viewpoint of social connections and networks,craftspeople moving between communities and bringing with themtheir way of doing things (Huntley et al., 2012: 16).There is certainly a strong indication of the ties between thesmelting industries of the neighbouring – and often hostile – kingdomsof Bunyoro and Buganda, born of a vigorous relationship of cooperativetrade as well as competition. Bunyoro supplied all the iron to “thecountries to the south and the east and for many years the Nyoro smithswere superior to the others” (Roscoe, 1923: 141-2), Grant (1864: 293)observed that the spears the Banyoro used were the worst in the region,as all high quality spearheads were sold to Buganda. In the earlyeighteenth century, during a period of territorial expansion, Bugandatook the iron-producing district of Buddu from Bunyoro as well as theKingdom of Kooki, gaining access to significant iron resources and localpopulations who were known to be skilled ironworkers (Reid, 2002;Humphris et al., 2009; Schoenbrun, 1998). Some of those who live inKooki today continue to associate themselves with the BunyoroKingdom (Iles, 2011).It is relevant to note that although all published accounts of Nyoroand Ganda smelts mention the use of two ores, elevated levels ofmanganese oxide have not been detected in archaeological smeltingslag from either Buddu or Kooki. Archaeometallurgical research carriedout at a smelting site in Buddu – Birinzi, dated to the 18th–19th cen-turies AD (Fig. 1; Humphris et al., 2009) – found levels of manganeseoxide of under 0.1 wt%, a similar amount to that detected in analyses ofslag from Kiwesi in Kooki, which also provided a post-18th century date(Iles, 2013d). These data indicate that the furnace charge in thesesmelting episodes did not contain a manganese-rich mineral in sig-nificant quantities, though it does not preclude the use of a mix of twoiron ores. As such, although these technologies might be following asimilar recipe – to mix one hard black ore with one soft red ore – theimplications of using a black ore in Buddu may be different from using ablack ore in Mwenge, if those ores happen to be an iron oxide (mag-netite or goethite) and a manganese oxide (e.g. psilomelane/roma-nèchite) respectively.9 It is feasible that this represents different tech-nical outcomes for similar technological behaviours in Mwenge andBuddu providing a knowledge link between different iron productionpractices. Further analyses of slag from Buganda could provide an in-sight into this tantalising proposition.3.2. Interactions and the movement of knowledgeIf it has been useful to shift the emphasis away from clans as ex-clusive and exclusionary units and to consider the social landscape ofMwenge more as a cooperative network, it is also relevant to reflect onthe interactions and experiences of smelting groups and explore howexposure to different smelting practices may have occurred in the past.An emphasis on iron smelting’s conformity to ritualised proceduresnaturally lends itself to an association with “closed” contexts ofknowledge transmission, which is itself associated with limited in-novation and integration of influences from outside groups (as dis-cussed by Wallaert-Pêtre (2001) in relation to ceramic apprenticeships).Although specific learning environments are difficult to infer from the8 See also discussion of the European construction of African ethnic identities inRichards and MacDonald (2015).9 see Radivojević and Rehren (2016) for a discussion of the selection of metallurgicalraw materials on the basis of macroscopic appearance in Vinca culture copper smelting inSerbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that case, the importance of colour over mineraltype drove the selection of copper ore mixes (combining a green and black ore).L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9994archaeological record (Crown, 2001), there are suggestions in Mwengethat some knowledge moved through inter-clan friendships (Iles, 2011:518) or inter-clan marriages, with parallels in the transmission of styledocumented in groups of potters (e.g. Herbich, 1987):“There is a story which says that the Abahinda clan who are Bahumafrom Ankole, did not know how to work in iron. They intermarriedwith the Basita, and the children stayed with the clan of their mo-thers and learned how to work in iron.”(Buchanan, 1974: 102)“part of the Banywagi clan say they accompanied Rukidi south intoKitara [Bunyoro]. They ultimately settled around Ruhoko inMwenge saza, where they were “blacksmiths and worked with theBasita.”(Buchanan, 1974: 214)However, there may have been further social features that fa-cilitated the movement of knowledge between smelting groups, one ofwhich is variability in the participation of women. There are numerousexamples of smelting or smithing groups which exclude women, andwhich forbid women to be in the vicinity of smelting activity (e.g.Roscoe, 1911; Brock, 1965; Reid and MacLean, 1995). Many accountsfrom across the continent describe furnaces becoming the fertile wivesof the smelters, transformed through the rituals, symbolism, decoration,dance and music of matrimony and childbirth to ultimately ‘give birth’to a bloom of iron (see Cline, 1937; Herbert, 1993; Schmidt, 2009). Inmany such accounts, smelters were expected to be faithful to their new‘wives’ and eschew their human ones, if only temporarily, abstainingfrom conjugal relations for the course of the smelt, and sometimesavoiding all contact with women (e.g. Fowler, 1990; Herbert, 1993;Roscoe, 1911). In these examples, women of childbearing age wereexcluded from smelting sites, not only to enable isolation for thesmelters so as not to tempt them to infidelity, which would cause thefurnace to ‘abort’ and fail, but also so as to not induce sterility in thewomen themselves (Herbert, 1993). In order to facilitate this, suchsmelts were sometimes located far from habitation sites (e.g. Childs,1991) or shielded from view by vegetation (e.g. Reid and MacLean,1995) in order to ensure that contact with those not directly involved inthe smelt is avoided (although see Calabrese, 2000; Childs and Killick,1993).Some consider that this relationship between women and ironsmelting in sub-Saharan Africa may in part be a functional device, re-stricting the identity of those involved in, or even observing, me-tallurgical activity (Reid and MacLean, 1995).10 The exclusion ofwomen (especially those of childbearing age, and therefore also ofmarriageable age) is said to have prevented women from acquiringFig. 7. Migration histories of clans associated with iron production in western Uganda, constructed from oral histories and place name analysis (Buchanan, 1974, 1979).10 Although other cultural factors are also certainly at play. See Herbert, 1993 for anin-depth analysis of the relationship between iron production and gender in Africa.L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9995knowledge of iron smelting, either through their participation, throughwitnessing a smelt, or being privy to smelting secrets shared in themarital bed. If marriage was a means by which new sources ofknowledge were tapped (Guyer and Eno Belinga, 1995: 115), by ex-cluding women, this power was restricted to the male factions of acommunity, which may have served – particularly in exogamous clans –to ensure that technological knowledge was not transferred to rivalgroups through matrimony (Reid and MacLean, 1995).However, the exclusion of women is not universal, as a handful ofhistorical and ethnoarchaeological accounts show. Informants inMwenge were divided on whether women were permitted to be activelyinvolved in smelting activities or were forbidden from even ap-proaching a smelting area (discussed in detail in Iles, 2013a, 2015).Other examples of women taking part in iron smelting activity havebeen documented in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuriesamong the Pare of northern Tanzania (Baumann, 1891; Kotz, 1922), theNjanja of Zimbabwe (Chirikure, 2007), the mana (iron workers) of OskaDencha in Ethiopia (Haaland, 2004a), and the Maasai (Cline, 1937:115). These examples – though rare – do illustrate the possibility ofchanging or divergent gender roles in iron smelting ‘traditions’, andsuggest that there is scope for fair consideration as to whether past irontechnologies were always strictly gendered (see also Budd and Taylor,1995; Stahl, 2016).Associated with the exclusion of women is the notion that ironsmelting was undertaken in locations away from the general public, andaway from chance encounters with (potentially smelt-endangering)women. However, several of the Mwenge informants also emphasisedthe public nature of smelting. One informant stated that smelters (aswell as smiths11) generally located furnaces close to roads in order toadvertise their trade and their wares (Iles, 2011: 519), another thatanybody could come and help with the bellowing, with the smeltpublicised by the loud sounds of the bellows (Iles, 2011: 514). An in-formant of Robertshaw’s stated, “ore was taken to other areas orsmelted close to communication routes (paths)” (Robertshaw, 1991).Indeed, archaeological survey often finds furnace bases in or near roadsurfaces (Connah, 1996; Iles, 2011; see Fig. 8). This tends to be thoughtof as sampling bias (e.g. Humphris, 2010: 300), as roads are some of thefew open ground surfaces with minimal vegetation cover that makessurvey by sight possible. However, it is worth considering that furnacesmay well have originally been located beside major routeways, and theroads of today may be remnants of much older pathways that have beenetched into the landscape over time (see Roscoe, 1915: 19), allowing forinteractions between smelters, smiths and others, and associated ex-changes of information – social, and potentially technical. This does notpreclude the possibility that smelts and smelters were separated frompassers-by with fencing, as witnessed in Karagwe (Reid and MacLean,1995). Some (though not all) Mwenge smelters screened off theirsmelting areas using a plant called orusororo, whose name means “toseparate” (Childs, 1999: 32), and some informants during the 2007survey did emphasise the secret nature of smelting.This builds a picture of smelting practices in Mwenge wherebyparticipation in iron smelting could sometimes be broadly inclusive andwhereby technological practice can sometimes be publicly visible.Together these factors hint of a reflexive system that has a greatertendency towards change and innovation than previously presumed.This is in keeping with considerations of cultural behaviour that steeraway from assuming stability: “current practices and beliefs that appearto represent unbroken continuity with the past should continually betested against archaeological evidence” (Brumfiel and Robin, 2008: 4).The boundaries of male/female domains are subject to continual re-negotiation (Herbert, 1993), and other examples also suggest thatethnographic models of gendered practice and secrecy may not haveprevailed in the past (Chirikure, 2007). Access to knowledge is likely tohave fluctuated in relation to various socio-economic factors, such astechnological stability, changes in social diversity, and shifts in thevalue of the finished product (Crown, 2016). A new consideration ofboth gender and secrecy in iron production presents opportunities toexpand understandings of the social realm of iron production and im-plications for the transfer of technical knowledge between differentgroups.4. Concluding thoughtsThis paper argues that new technological elements moved throughwestern Uganda during the mid-second millennium AD due to the in-teractions of different communities of practice in a period of substantialreorganisation of the socio-cultural landscape. An increased demand foriron and a mix of people with different technological backgrounds mayhave provided the impetus for externally driven change. By the mid-second millennium AD, when the kingdoms in this part of Uganda werebecoming established, iron was already forming a major part of localeconomies and regional trade networks, with significant social kudosattached to its production. A range of different populations weremoving into and through the area throughout this time period, bringingwith them different bodies of technological knowledge that had de-veloped in response to different social, economic and environmentalneeds. The great distances travelled by some groups to obtain ore – suchas those documented by MacLean in Buddu (MacLean, 1996) – presenta mechanism whereby different smelting groups may have come intocontact with others from distant locations. Furthermore, networks ofclans across the region may have linked smelters from differentknowledge lineages, and shifting emphases on prohibitions and re-strictions associated with iron technologies may have fostered inter-actions and innovations at different times.The use of a second ore provides a particularly tantalising link be-tween different communities of practice in the Buddu/Kooki andMwenge areas, though it is currently not possible to suggest the di-rection of this knowledge flow. The use of an additional manganiferousmaterial, seen initially in the fifteenth century site of Rugombe, mightbe a feature of a technology integrated with existing Mwenge smeltingpractices. The exploitation of a manganese-rich flux would have in-creased the yield of iron from an ore, and may also have improved theFig. 8. Furnace 1 at Mirongo (foreground), exposed in road surface prior to excavation. Asecond furnace is located approximately 2 m further along the road, but is only indis-tinctly visible in this phoograph.11 Travellers through the region in the late nineteenth century remarked on the gossipthat could be heard at blacksmith’s shops – these were important social hubs (Grant,1864; Schweinfurth et al., 1888).L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9996qualities of the resulting metal itself, as was purported in various re-gions of Europe famed for the production of hard, strong and workableiron and steel (Iles, 2014). It is not possible to determine whether thesematerials were deliberately selected to produce a superior iron, or be-cause they were easier to smelt, or because they fitted with a ‘recipe’, orfor another reason entirely. However, this development neverthelesscontributed to the establishment of Bunyoro as a key regional centre foriron production.Dynamic social contexts may have facilitated the spread of technicalknowledge. In particular, this research questions the extent to whichiron production knowledge was universally protected within certaingroups through esotericism and the exclusion of women and non-clanmembers, keeping recipes and methods secret from competitors.Although it is often the control of secret knowledge that leads to theacquisition and maintenance of prestige, authority and influence, theremay also be benefit in the timely sharing of knowledge, through thedevelopment of trust, indebtedness and personal relationships, wherecooperation is beneficial to all (Antonelli, 2000; Crown, 2016). In asetting of rapidly increasing demand for metal products, it is plausiblethat a hunger for production was stronger than the “metal monopoly”proposed by Haaland (2004b: 2).Certainly, the ethnographic data hints at a scenario of varying de-grees of participation and inclusion, whereby information was some-times shared – although not necessarily freely, and not necessarily allthe time – demonstrating the intricacy and complexity of knowledgeexchange, and the very personal qualities of trust and suspicion thatshape interactions between craftspeople as individuals (e.g. Papousek,1989). The personalities and individual agencies of those involved arecertainly influential, prioritising improvisation, ambition, risk or de-termination to varying degrees (see Dobres, 2000; Gosselain, 2008b;Harris, 2016). The heated discussions between the master smelter andhis assistants as relayed through several smelting reconstructions con-ducted in Barongo, Tanzania (Schmidt, 1997) are testament to thecomplex and personal influences that might be at play at each and everysmelt, and what might happen when those discussions and compro-mises go wrong. A master smelter not only has to negotiate the physicalaspects of a smelt, he also is tasked with managing the personalities ofeach of his workers. Issues of ownership, status, craft specialisation,centralisation, conflict and competition, knowledge of other pyr-otechnologies, and a group’s tolerance of technological change andinnovation will impact upon how a technology shifts and develops ineach individual case, determining what elements of a technology re-main the same through time and what will be transformed (Hjärthner-Holder and Risberg, 2003: 84-5):“the acceptance or rejection of an invention, or the extent to whichits implications are realized if it is accepted, depends quite as muchupon the condition of a society, and upon the imagination of itsleaders, as upon the nature of the technological item itself.”(White, 1962: 28)More rigorous dating, in particular, holds the key to more robustanalysis of patterns of change in the iron technologies of westernUganda, allowing for future research to develop methodologies that cantest and examine some of the proposed pathways through whichknowledge of these technologies were acquired, adapted and optimisedto suit new local needs and increasing demand. There is much scope torefine our understanding of the archaeology of iron production inwestern Uganda. Exploring iron production in conjunction with otherlinked fields of practice, such as the use of manganese or haematite slipson local pottery, would be highly relevant.In contrast to the “wealth and maturity” of understandings of pastiron production processes and iron working methods, “our under-standing of the nature of the relationships between the people and so-cieties that contextualised its use” are underdeveloped (Juleff, 2013:137). While there is great success at identifying and characterisingvariation in metallurgy, there is less success at detecting andcharacterising the processes of change that shaped that variation(though there are exceptions of course, e.g. Charlton et al., 2010). Thisis particularly striking in comparison with studies of pottery manu-facture, which sits at “the leading edge of archaeological engagementwith the concept of communities of practice” (Joyce, 2012: 154).The availability of relevant data must have much to do with thisdistinction: ceramicists have multiple strands of evidence to work fromto infer technological behaviour – temper use, clay acquisition, formingtechniques, surface decoration, shape and so on. Unlike metallurgists,they have been able to observe different modern potting groupsworking concurrently, including their interactions and relationships,and their propensity to innovation and improvisation (e.g. Gosselain,2016). Incorporating formal theories of learning into their work hasenabled an explicit emphasis on the social contexts of knowledgetransmission, such as the boundaries between different traditions, theimpact of ‘mediators’ or ‘brokers’ in forging links across these bound-aries, and the implications of different forms of knowledge acquisitionand apprenticeships on innovation and the organisation of production(Lyons and Clark, 2012: 28; e.g. Minar and Crown, 2001 (eds.); Cordelland Habicht-Mauche, 2012 (eds.); Roddick and Stahl, 2016 (eds.)). Asarchaeometallurgists, engaging with these concepts has the potential toreveal more about the individuals, groups and societies carrying outpast metal technologies, as well as the networks, affiliations and re-lationships that shaped their technological behaviour. Unfortunately,with local memories of iron production waning fast, they are becomingincreasingly difficult – if not impossible – to explore ethnographically.Whilst variation within technique and style is widely recognised,more can be done to scrutinise the possible range of localised responsesto the changeable social and economic contexts within which tech-nology is embedded. Ethnographic information derived from Africanexamples is used to provide context and colour to many archaeologicalremains of metalworking sites throughout the globe, both explicitly andimplicitly, often with only limited understanding of the original eth-nographic research that it is based on. Certain narratives are oft re-peated: smiths and smelters worked in secret, women were excluded,information was protected. We must be careful that the narratives webuild are based on a firm footing, and that the caveats of ethnographicresearch are loudly proclaimed. In most smelting reconstructions (orinterview series), an ethnographic account focuses on only one mastersmelter’s method for iron production. This research suggests that whatis likely to be a high level of local technological variation is unable to beexpressed within just one reconstruction; there is a need to be wary ofdrawing on a limited set of primary observations that are repeatedlycited. As Schmidt (1998: 141) asserts:“It is the anomaly, the piece of evidence that does not fit the modelor analog, that begs to be explained and therefore holds the key tounderstanding change and reveals deeper systems of meaning.”It is through an exploration of these nuances that a more sensitiveand revealing picture can be built of how past smelters operated andinteracted within the boundaries of their political, social, environ-mental and personal surroundings.AcknowledgementsThis paper draws heavily on the author's PhD research, completed atUCL Institute of Archaeology, London in 2011. The fieldwork wasconducted with the approval of the Uganda National Council forScience and Technology (research project SS 1947), the UgandaMuseum and the Kingdom of Bunyoro. The research was funded by theArts and Humanities Research Council (05/115324) and the radio-carbon dates were funded by an AHRC/NERC ORADS grant. The BritishInstitute in Eastern Africa, the UCL Graduate School and the Universityof London Central Research Fund provided additional funding and lo-gistical support. I wish to thank Rose Nkaale, Dismas Ongwen,Charlotte Karungi and Elijah Kisembo for their support in Uganda, andL. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9997Andrew Reid, Marcos Martinón-Torres, David Killick, Pete Robertshaw,Terry Childs, John Sutton, Thilo Rehren, Ann Stahl and Miguel del Pinofor their thoughts and input at various stages of the research. Manythanks to Caroline Jackson and Candice Goucher for their comments onan earlier draft of this paper, as well as two anonymous referees. Allerrors remain my own. Appreciation is directed to The Standard GroupPLC as copyright holder of Figure 6.ReferencesAntonelli, C., 2000. Collective knowledge communication and innovation: the evidence oftechnological districts. Reg. Stud. 34, 535–547.Ashley, C., 2010. Towards a socialised archaeology of ceramics in Great Lakes Africa. Afr.Archaeol. Rev. 27, 135–163.Baumann, O., 1891. Usambara Und Seine Nachbargebeite. Dietrich Reimer, Berlin.Brock, B., 1965. Iron working amongst the Nyiha of southwestern Tanganyika. South Afr.Archaeol. Bull. 20, 97–100.Brown, J., 1995. Traditional Metal Working in Kenya. Oxbow, Oxford.Brumfiel, E., Robin, C., 2008. Gender, households, and society: an introduction. Archaeol.Papers Am. Anthropol. Assoc. 18, 1–16.Buchanan, C., 1974. The Kitara complex: the historical tradition of Western Uganda to the16th century. [Unpublished PhD thesis]. Indiana University, Bloomington.Buchanan, C., 1979. Courts, clans and chronology in the Kitara complex. In: Webster, J.(Ed.), Chronology, Migration and Drought in Interlacustrine Africa. Longman Press,London, pp. 87–124.Budd, P., Taylor, T., 1995. The faerie smith meets the bronze industry: magic versusscience in the interpretation of prehistoric metal-making. World Archaeol. 27,133–143.Calabrese, J., 2000. Metals, ideology and power: the manufacture and control of mate-rialised ideaology in the area of the Limpopo-Shashe confluence, c. AD 900–1300.South Afr. Archaeol. Soc. Goodwin Series 8, 100–111.Charlton, M., Crew, P., Rehren, Th., Shennan, S., 2010. Explaining the evolution of ir-onmaking recipes – an example from northwest Wales. J. Anthropol. Archaeol. 29,352–367.Childs, S.T., 1991. Style, technology and iron-smelting furnaces in Bantu-speaking Africa.J. Anthropol. Archaeol. 10, 332–359.Childs, S.T., 1998. ‘Find the ekijunjumira’: iron mine discovery, ownership and poweramong the Toro of Uganda. In: Knapp, A., Pigott, V., Herbert, E. (Eds.), SocialApproaches to an Industrial Past: The Archaeology and Anthropology of Mining.Routledge, London, pp. 123–137.Childs, S.T., 1999. ‘After all, a hoe bought a wife’: the social dimensions of ironworkingamong the Toro of East Africa. In: Dobres, M., Hoffman, C. (Eds.), The SocialDynamics of Technology: Practice, Politics and World Views. Smithsonian InstitutionPress, London, pp. 23–45.Childs, S.T., 2000. Traditional iron working: a narrated ethnoarchaeological example. In:Bisson, M., Childs, S.T., de Barros, P., Holl, A. (Eds.), Ancient African Metallurgy: TheSocio-Cultural Context. Altamira, Walnut Creek, pp. 199–253.Childs, S.T., Killick, D., 1993. Indigenous African metallurgy: nature and culture. Annu.Rev. Anthropol. 22, 317–337.Chirikure, S., 2007. Metals in society: iron production and its position in iron age com-munities of Southern Africa. J. Social Archaeol. 7, 72–100.Chirikure, S., 2016. ‘Ethno’ plus ‘archaeology’: what’s in there for Africa(ns)? WorldArchaeol. 48, 693–699.Chrétien, J.-P., 2003. The Great Lakes of Africa: A Thousand Years of History. Urzone,New York.Cline, W., 1937. Mining and Metallurgy in Negro Africa. George Banta, Wisconsin.Connah, G., 1996. Kibiro: The Salt of Bunyoro, Past and Present. BIEA, London.Connah, G. (Ed.), 1998. Transformations in Africa: Essays on Africa’s Later Past. LeicesterUniversity Press, London.Cordell, C., Habicht-Mauche, J. (Eds.), 2012. Potters and Communities of Practice: GlazePaint and Polychrome Pottery in the American Southwest, A.D. 1250–1700.University of Arizona Press, Tucson.Crawhall, T., 1933. Iron working in the Sudan. Man 33, 41–43.Crown, P., 2001. Learning to make pottery in the prehispanic American Southwest. J.Anthropol. Res. 57, 451–469.Crown, P., 2016. Secrecy, production rights, and practice within communities of pottersin the prehispanic American Southwest. In: Roddick, A., Stahl, A. (Eds.), Knowledgein Motion: Constellations of Learning Across Time and Place. University of ArizonaPress, Tucson, pp. 67–96.Cunningham, J., MacEachern, S., 2016. Ethnoarchaeology as slow science. WorldArchaeol. 48, 628–641.Deane, E., 2007. Visualising History: The Mackie Ethnological Expedition (1919–1920) toEastern Africa as seen through the photographs of the Reverend John Roscoe.[Unpublished MA dissertation]. University of East Anglia, Norwich.Dobres, M.-A., 2000. Technology and Social Agency: Outlining a Practice Framework forArchaeology. Blackwell, Oxford.Doolittle, W., 1984. Agricultural change as an incremental process. Ann. Assoc. Am.Geogr. 74, 124–137.Doyle, S., 2006a. Crisis and Decline in Bunyoro: Population and Environment in WesternUganda 1860–1955. James Currey, Oxford.Doyle, S., 2006b. From Kitara to the Lost Counties: genealogy, land and legitimacy in theKingdom of Bunyoro, western Uganda. Social Identities 12, 457–470.Eliade, M., 1956. Forgerons Et Alchimistes. Flammarion, Paris.Fowler, I., 1990. Babungo: A Study of Iron Production, Trade and Power in NineteenthCentury Ndop Plain Chiefdom (Cameroon). [Unpublished PhD thesis]. UCL, London.Giles, M., 2007. Making metal and forging relations: ironworking in the British Iron Age.Oxford J. Archaeol. 26, 395–413.Gosselain, O., 2008a. Mother Bella was not a Bella: inherited and transformed traditionsin southwestern Niger. In: Stark, M., Bowser, B., Horne, L. (Eds.), CulturalTransmission and Material Culture: Breaking Down Boundaries. University of ArizonaPress, Tucson, pp. 150–177.Gosselain, O., 2008b. Thoughts and adjustments in the potter’s backyard. In: Berg, I.(Ed.), Breaking the Mould: Challenging the Past Through Pottery. BAR InternationalSeries 1861. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 67–79.Gosselain, O., 2016. The world is like a beanstalk: historicizing potting practice and socialrelations in the Niger River area. In: Roddick, A., Stahl, A. (Eds.), Knowledge inMotion: Constellations of Learning Across Time and Place. University of ArizonaPress, Tucson, pp. 36–66.Grant, J., 1864. A Walk Across Africa: Or Domestic Scenes From My Nile Journal. WilliamBlackwood and Sons, London.Grunderbeek, M.-C., Roche, E., Doutrelepont, H., 2001. Un type de fourneau de fonte defer associe a la culture Urewe (age du fer ancient) au Rwanda et au Burundi.Mediterr. Archaeol. 14, 271–297.Guyer, J., Eno Belinga, S., 1995. Wealth in people as wealth in knowledge: accumulationand composition in Equatorial Africa. J. Afr. History 36, 91–120.Haaland, R., 1985. Iron production, its socio-cultural context and ecological implications.In: Haaland, R., Shinnie, P. (Eds.), African Iron Working: Ancient and Traditional.University Publishers, Oslo, pp. 50–72.Haaland, R., 2004a. Iron smelting – a vanishing tradition: ethnographic study of this craftin sout-west Ethiopia. J. Afr. Archaeol. 2, 65–79.Haaland, R., 2004b. Technology, transformation and symbolism: ethnographic perspec-tives on European iron working. Norwegian Archaeol. Rev. 37, 1–19.Hamilton, A., Karamura, D., Kakudidi, E., 2016. History and conservation of wild andcultivated plant diversity in Uganda: forest species and banana varieties as casestudies. Plant Diversity 38, 23–44.Harris, M., 2016. Finding connections along the river in the lower Amazon, Brazil. In:Roddick, A., Stahl, A. (Eds.), Knowledge in Motion: Constellations of Learning AcrossTime and Place. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp. 155–178.Herbert, E., 1993. Iron, Gender and Power: Rituals of Transformation in African Societies.Indiana University Press, Indianapolis.Herbich, I., 1987. Learning patterns, potter interaction and ceramic style among the Luoof Kenya. Afr. Archaeol. Rev. 5, 193–204.Hjärthner-Holder, E., Risberg, C., 2003. The introduction of iron in Sweden and Greece.In: Nørbach, L. (Ed.), Prehistoric and Medieval Direct Iron Smelting in Scandinaviaand Europe: Aspects of Technology and Science. Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, pp.83–86.Humphris, J., 2010. An Archaeometallurgical Investigation of Iron Smelting Traditions inSouthern Rwanda. Unpublished PhD thesis. UCL, London.Humphris, J., Martinón-Torres, M., Rehren, Th., Reid, A., 2009. Variability in singlesmelting episodes – a pilot study using iron slag from Uganda. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36,359–369.Huntley, D., Fenn, T., Habicht-Mauche, J., Mills, B., 2012. Embedded Networks?Pigments and long-distance procurement strategies in the late prehispanic Southwest.In: Cordell, L., Habicht-Mauche, J. (Eds.), Potters and Communities of Practice: GlazePaint and Polychrome Pottery in the American Southwest, A.D. 1250–1700.University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp. 8–18.Iles, L., 2009. Impressions of banana pseudostem in iron slag from eastern Africa.Ethnobotany Res. Appl. 7, 283–291.Iles, L., 2011. Reconstructing the Iron Production Technologies of Western Uganda:Reconciling Archaeometallurgical and Ethnoarchaeological Approaches. UCL,London accessible online: http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1306719/.Iles, L., 2013a. Applying ethnographic presents to archaeological pasts: preliminarythoughts on memories of iron production from western Uganda. In: Humphris, J.,Rehren, Th. (Eds.), The World of Iron. Archetype, London, pp. 281–287.Iles, L., 2013b. The development of iron technology in precolonial western Uganda.Azania 48, 65–90.Iles, L., 2013c. The use of plants in iron production: insights from smelting remains fromBuganda. In: Stevens, C., Nixon, S., Murray, M., Fuller, D. (Eds.), The Archaeology ofAfrican Plant Use. Left Coast Press, San Francisco, pp. 267–274.Iles, L., 2013d. Analysis of iron working remains from Kooki and Masindi, westernUganda. Nyame Akuma 80, 43–58.Iles, L., 2014. The exploitation of manganese-rich ‘ore’ to smelt iron in Mwenge, westernUganda, from the mid-second millennium AD. J. Archaeol. Sci. 49, 423–441.Iles, L., 2015. Iron production in Uganda: memories of a near-forgotten industry. In:Orange, H. (Ed.), Reanimating Industrial Spaces: Conducting Memory Work in Post-Industrial Societies. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, pp. 158–175.Iles, L., Childs, S.T., 2014. Ethnoarchaeological and historical methods. In: Roberts, B.,Thornton, C. (Eds.), Archaeometallurgy in Global Perspective: Methods andSyntheses. Springer, New York, pp. 193–215.Iles, L., Robertshaw, P., Young, R., 2014. A furnace and associated ironworking remainsat Munsa, Uganda. Azania 49, 45–63.Ingham, K., 1975. The Kingdom of Toro in Uganda. Methuen, London.Jordan, P., 2015. Technology as Human Social Tradition: Cultural Transmission AmongHunter-Gatherers. University of California Press, Oakland.Joyce, R., 2012. Thinking about pottery production as community practice. In: Cordell, L.,Habicht-Mauche, J. (Eds.), Potters and Communities of Practice: Glaze Paint andPolychrome Pottery in the American Southwest, A.D. 1250–1700. University ofArizona Press, Tucson, pp. 149–154.Juleff, G., 2013. Invention, innovation and inspiration: optimisation and resolvingL. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9998technological change in the Sri Lankan archaeological record. In: Humphris, J.,Rehren, Th. (Eds.), The World of Iron. Archetype, London, pp. 137–145.Keller, C., Keller, J., 1996. Cognition and Tool Use: The Blacksmith at Work. CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge.Killick, D., 2015. Invention and innovation in African iron-smelting technologies.Cambridge Archaeol. J. 25, 307–319.Killick, D., 2016. A global perspective on the pyrotechnologies of sub-Saharan Africa.Azania 51, 62–87.Kodesh, N., 2008. Networks of Knowledge: clanship and collective well-being in Buganda.J. Afr. History 49, 197–216.Kodesh, N., 2010. Beyond the Royal Gaze: Clanship and Public Healing in Buganda.University of Virginia Press, London.Kopytoff, I., 1987. The African Frontier: The Reproduction of Traditional African Systems.Indiana University Press, Bloomington.Kotz, E., 1922. Im Banne Der Furcht: Sitten Und Gebräuche Der Wapare in Ostafrika.Advent-Verlag, Hamburg.Lyons, P., Clark, J., 2012. A community of practice in diaspora: the rise and demise ofRoosevelt Red Ware. In: Cordell, L., Habicht-Mauche, J. (Eds.), Potters andCommunities of Practice: Glaze Paint and Polychrome Pottery in the AmericanSouthwest, A.D. 1250–1700. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp. 19–33.MacLean, R., 1996. The Social Impact of the Beginnings of Iron Technology in theWestern Lake Victoria Basin: a district case study. [Unpublished PhD thesis].University of Cambridge.Merton, R., 1936. The unanticipated consequences of purposive social action. Am. Sociol.Rev. 6, 894–904.Minar, C., Crown, P. (Eds.), 2001. Learning and craft production. J. Anthropol. Res.57 (4).Mtetwa, E., Maposa, Y., Manyanga, M., Chirikure, S., 2017. When the smith is a woman:innovation, improvisation and ambiguity in the organisation of African iron me-tallurgy. In: Manyanga, M., Chirikure, S. (Eds.), Archives, Objects, Places andLandscapes: Multidisciplinary Approaches to Decolonised Zimbabwean Pasts. LangaaRPCIG, Bamenda, pp. 295–318.Papousek, D., 1989. Technological change as social rebellion. In: van der Leeuw, S.,Torrence, R. (Eds.), What’s New? A Closer Look at the Process of Innovation. UnwinHyman, London, pp. 140–166.Parayil, G., 1991. Technological knowledge and technological change. Technol. Soc. 13,289–304.Radivojević, M., Rehren, Th., 2016. Paint it black: the rise of metallurgy in the Balkans. J.Archaeol. Method Theory 23, 200–237.Reid, R., 2002. Political Power in Pre-Colonial Buganda: Economy, Society and Welfare inthe Nineteenth Century. James Currey, London.Reid, D.A.M., MacLean, R., 1995. Symbolism and the social context of iron production inKaragwe. World Archaeol. 27, 144–161.Richards, F., MacDonald, K., 2015. From invention to ambiguity: the persistence of eth-nicity in Africa. In: Richards, F., MacDonald, K. (Eds.), Ethnic Ambiguity and theAfrican Past: Materiality, History, and the Shaping of Cultural Identities. Left CoastPress, Walnut Creek, pp. 17–54.Roberts, B., 2008. Creating traditions and shaping technologies: understanding the ear-liest metal objects and metal production in western Europe. World Archaeol. 40,354–372.Robertshaw, P. 1991. Unpublished fieldwork notes.Robertshaw, P., 1997. Munsa earthworks. Azania 32, 1–20.Robertshaw, P., 1999. Seeking and keeping power in Bunyoro-Kitara, Uganda. In:McIntosh, S. (Ed.), Beyond Chiefdoms: Pathways to Complexity in Africa. CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, pp. 136–150.Robertshaw, P., 2010. Beyond the Segmentary State: creative and instrumental power inwestern Uganda. J. World Prehistory 23, 255–269.Roddick, A., Stahl, A. (Eds.), 2016. Knowledge in Motion: Constellations of LearningAcross Time and Place. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.Roscoe, J., 1911. The Baganda. Macmillan and Co, London.Roscoe, J., 1915. The Northern Bantu: An Account of Some Central African Tribes of theUganda Protectorate. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Roscoe, J., 1923. The Bakitara or Banyoro. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Rowlands, M., Warnier, J.-P., 1993. The magical production of iron in the CameroonGrassfields. In: Shaw, T., Sinclair, P., Andah, B., Okpoko, A. (Eds.), The Archaeologyof Africa: Foods, Metals and Towns. Routledge, London, pp. 512–550.Schmidt, P., 1996. Reconfiguring the Barongo: reproductive symbolism and reproductionamong a work association of iron smelters. In: Schmidt, P. (Ed.), The Culture andTechnology of African Iron Production. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, pp.74–127.Schmidt, P., 1997. Iron Technology in East Africa: Symbolism, Science and Archaeology.James Currey, Indiana.Schmidt, P., 1998. Reading gender in the ancient iron technology of Africa. In: Kent, S.(Ed.), Gender in African Prehistory. Altamira, Walnut Creek, pp. 139–162.Schmidt, P., 2009. Tropes, materiality, and ritual embodiment of african iron smeltingfurnaces as human figures. J. Archaeol. Method Theory 16, 262–282.Schmidt, P., Mapunda, B., 1997. Ideology and the Archaeological Record in Africa:Interpreting Symbolism in Iron Smelting Technology. J. Anthropol. Archaeol. 16,73–102.Schoenbrun, D., 1998. A Green Place, A Good Place: Agrarian Change, Gender, and SocialIdentity in the Great Lakes Region to the Fifteenth Century. James Currey, Oxford.Schoenbrun, D., 2016. Pythons worked: constellating communities of practice with con-ceptual metaphor in northern Lake Victoria, ca. AD 800 to 1200. In: Roddick, A.,Stahl, A. (Eds.), Knowledge in Motion: Constellations of Learning Across Time andPlace. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp. 216–246.Schweinfurth, G., Ratzel, F., Felkin, R., Hartlaub, G. (Eds.), 1888. [trans. R. W. Felkin]Emin Pasha in Central Africa: being a collection of his letters and journals. GeorgePhilip and Son, London.Stahl, A., 2014. Africa in the World: (re)centering African history through archaeology. J.Anthropol. Res. 70, 5–33.Stahl, A., 2015. Metalworking and ritualization: negotiating change through improvisa-tional practice in Banda, Ghana. Archaeol. Papers Am. Anthropol. Assoc. 26, 53–71.Stahl, A., 2016. Complementary crafts: the dynamics of multicraft production in Banda,Ghana. In: Kelly, S., Ardren, T. (Eds.), Gendered Labor in Specialized Economies:Archaeological Perspectives on Female and Male Work. University Press of Colorado,Boulder, pp. 159–190.Sterner, J., David, N., 1991. Gender and caste in the Mandara Highlands: northeasternNigeria and northern Cameroon. Ethnology 30, 355–369.Tamari, T., 1991. The development of caste systems in West Africa. J. Afr. History 32,221–250.Todd, J., 1985. Iron production by the Dimi of Ethiopia. In: Haaland, R., Shinnie, P.(Eds.), African Iron Working: Ancient and Traditional. University Publishers, Oslo,pp. 88–101.Wallaert-Pêtre, H., 2001. Learning how to make the right pots: apprenticeship strategiesand material culture, a case study in handmade pottery in Cameroon. J. Anthropol.Res. 57, 471–493.White, L., 1962. Medieval Technology and Social Change. Oxford University Press,Oxford.Willis, J., 1997. Clan and history in western Uganda: a new perspective on the origins ofpastoral dominance. Int. J. Afr. Historical Stud. 30, 583–600.Wyckaert, R., 1914. Forgerons païens forgerons chrétiens au Tanganika. Anthropos 9,371–380.KTN News Kenya “Meet the Il-Kunono clan that is despised and isolated in Samburucounty”, broadcast 28 July 2013. Last accessed on 24 August 2017 at www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_Ri1yH-c1A&t=5s.L. Iles Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 49 (2018) 88–9999