ABSTRACT: 
The apparent sexualization and exploitation of young girls by the consumer media is a much debated topic in the advanced liberal democracies. This paper will develop the argument that the &lsquo;consumer-media culture&rsquo; has established itself as one of the most powerful influences in processes of self-formation for young people, and that a tweenie self can be understood as an artefact of consumption. We will identify and analyse the resources that the consumer media provides to tweenies - girls aged between 9 and 14 - as they seek to fashion a sense of self. The paper presents an analysis of the resources presented to this population of young girls/women by an Australian &lsquo;appearance&rsquo; magazine, Dolly. We will argue that these identity resources are limited in scope, are dominated by images of young, slim and attractive females, and position the tweenie self as an artefact of consumption.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''  
 
FULL TEXT: 
  This is the published version Brookes, Fiona and Kelly, Peter 2009, Dolly girls : tweenies as artefacts of consumption, Journal of youth studies, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 599-613. Available from Deakin Research Online http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30035216 Reproduced with the kind permission of the copyright owner Copyright: 2009, Taylor and Francis This article was downloaded by: [Deakin University] On: 02 October 2011, At: 14:52 Publisher: Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK Journal of Youth Studies Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cjys20 Dolly girls: tweenies as artefacts of consumption Fiona Brookes a & Peter Kelly a a Behavioural Studies, Monash University, Melbourne, 3031, Australia Available online: 16 Oct 2009 To cite this article: Fiona Brookes & Peter Kelly (2009): Dolly girls: tweenies as artefacts of consumption, Journal of Youth Studies, 12:6, 599-613 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13676260902960745 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and- conditions This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material. Dolly girls: tweenies as artefacts of consumption Fiona Brookes* and Peter Kelly Behavioural Studies, Monash University, Melbourne, 3031 Australia The apparent sexualization and exploitation of young girls by the consumer media is a much debated topic in the advanced liberal democracies. This paper will develop the argument that the ‘consumer-media culture’ has established itself as one of the most powerful influences in processes of self-formation for young people, and that a tweenie self can be understood as an artefact of consumption. We will identify and analyse the resources that the consumer media provides to tweenies  girls aged between 9 and 14  as they seek to fashion a sense of self. The paper presents an analysis of the resources presented to this population of young girls/women by an Australian ‘appearance’ magazine, Dolly. We will argue that these identity resources are limited in scope, are dominated by images of young, slim and attractive females, and position the tweenie self as an artefact of consumption. Keywords: consumption; gender; identity Introduction ‘Childhood is not a marketable commodity,’ claims a September 2007 newspaper headline from The Adelaide Advertiser (Williams 2007). In this article, Nadine Williams expresses her concern about the decision to select a 12-year-old Gold Coast girl to be the face of Gold Coast Fashion Week in 2007. Williams suggests that this is an example of rushing young girls into adulthood and claims that this decision contributes to processes that exploit and overexpose children. She suggests that it is not simply a case of parenting being at fault. Rather, society, she claims, has lost sight of why ‘tweens’ should be recognized as children and encouraged to embrace childhood rather than rushing them into adulthood. William’s argument is not unique. The apparent sexualization and exploitation of young girls/women is a topic of debate for many parents, academics, politicians and social commentators in the advanced liberal democracies at the start of the twenty-first century. Of concern here are issues relating to young girls/women and body image, self-esteem, sexually suggestive clothing, anorexia and obesity. Williams’ article and others such as Patricia Edgar’s (2007), Childhood Under Siege and Larissa Dubecki’s (2008), Why 10 Is Too Young for Your First Brazilian, point to concerns about the influence of the ‘consumer media’ on children. These arguments suggest that the ‘consumer-media culture’  a blend of ‘markets and information and communication media [that] together hold a powerful and privileged position in today’s culture, society and economy’  has established itself as one of the most powerful influences over identity formation for children and young people (Kenway and Bullen 2001, p. 8; see also Livingstone 2002). *Corresponding author. Email: fiona.brookes@arts.monash.edu.au ISSN 1367-6261 print/ISSN 1469-9680 online # 2009 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/13676260902960745 http://www.informaworld.com Journal of Youth Studies Vol. 12, No. 6, December 2009, 599613 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Of particular interest in this paper is the emergence of a population/category identified as the tweenies  primarily girls aged between 9 and 14  who have become the targets of a variety of processes in the consumer-media culture. The ‘tweens’ or tweenies phenomenon emerged at the end of the twentieth century as a result of the consumer media identifying pre-teenage girls as a potentially lucrative age group. Anita Harris suggests that the tweenies phenomenon has been created as a fantasy world of ‘girlness’  a world that ‘creates a way for girls to stake a claim for themselves as young and female’ (2005, p. 213). This is a fantasy world that appeals to pre-teen and teenage girls who want to occupy a space that is separate from children, older teenagers and adults, a place where they can be recognized as a young female. It is against this briefly sketched background  and the many concerns about the influences of the media and consumer culture on tweenies that are hinted at there  that this paper is located. Our contribution to this often heated debate is to suggest that a tweenie self can be understood as being, to a significant extent, an artefact of consumption. Drawing on the workof feminist scholars such as Anita Harris and Susan Hopkins, and the social theories of Zygmunt Bauman, we will argue that the tweenie self is the active, ongoing, never complete product of a process of fashioning that draws on the array of resources that come to hand in a tweenie’s life  in families, in school, in peer groups  and which are also provided by the consumer media. We will situate this claim against the backdrop of research that has reported on the powerful, intimate relationships created between the consumer media and tweenies, and the possibilities and limitations generated by this relationship (Harris 2005, Mason and Fattore 2005, Tucci et al. 2006, Lumby and Albury 2008, The Senate 2008). Much of this research suggests that this self-fashioning is a complex, contradictory process shaped by fantasies and desires that emerge from the consumer media and intense interpersonal relationships in peer groups, schools and families, and which, together, produce a range of options for a tweenie self. The possibilities and limitations of these relationships are powerful influences on the ways in which tweenies imagine themselves, their bodies, their attractiveness and sexuality, and their relationships with peers and family. We support our suggestion that a tweenie self can be understood as an artefact of consumption by presenting a brief content analysis of Dolly magazine  Australia’s most popular appearance magazine for young, teenage, women. This content analysis provides the basis for an analysis of what we identify as the discourse of the active, healthy, attractive self that dominates the resources that Dolly provides its readership. These resources  advertisements, stories, images, and advice  are dominated by representations/images of the young, female self that suggest, powerfully, that a competent self, a self that is fit to belong, is one that can be fashioned from the various artefacts (clothes, mobile phones, beauty products) of the consumer-media culture. The outcome of this fashioning, it is promised, will be a fit, healthy, attractive and desirable self. The paper will develop this discussion in the following ways. In the following section, we identify and examine the emergence of the tweenies phenomenon, and its intimate relationship to the activities of sections of the consumer media. A content analysis of the advertisements featured in four issues of Dolly magazine from 2006 will consider the types of consumer goods and resources featured in this magazine. This analysis and consideration of the types of images presented in Dolly position a discussion about how the figure of a fit, healthy, attractive self is narrowly defined for 600 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 tweenies in Dolly. Our final section reflects on this analysis of Dolly and the tweenie phenomenon and suggests that Zygmunt Bauman’s provocative concept of a liquid, consuming life provides a powerful sociological framework for situating the ambivalence, pleasure, anxiety and hard work that is involved in the project of fashioning a tweenie self. An important aside: we are both parents of girls in this age group. Many of the issues we discuss here are part of our daughters’ everyday lives  and our own. This subjectobject relation (Law 2000) is an important dimension of our interests in this paper. From the outset, we acknowledge this relationship and the complexities, ambiguities, tensions, possibilities and limitations we identify in the relationships between our daughters and the consumer media; their seemingly ever-changing sense of self; their relationships with peers and family; and the active, often difficult and hard work that they are involved in as they fashion a sense of self and belonging. Tweenies: the changing nature of childhood In this section we will review the research that examines the complex relationships between tweenies and the consumer media, and the active, often contradictory, often pleasurable, often painful process of fashioning an appropriate form of selfhood that is a fundamental dimension of the lives of tweenies. This review will enable us to develop an understanding of how the debates and discussions about the influence of the consumer media over this age group have centred on the sexualization and commodification of their childhood, and young girls apparently growing up too fast (Burns 2005, Lamb and Brown 2006, Brooks 2008, Dubecki 2008, Hamilton 2008, The Senate 2008). While it has been suggested that the twenty-first-century tweenies phenomenon has been created and is being driven by the spending potential of this market, this has not been the only factor in its emergence. The changing nature of childhood and families has contributed significantly to the development of a relationship between the tweenies and the consumer media (Buckingham 2000, Kenway and Bullen 2001, Livingstone 2002, Langer 2005, Wyness 2006). Increasingly, the consumption of consumer goods and services has become an important part of family leisure activities in the industrialized, developed democracies and children are being raised in family settings where a dominant narrative is one of ‘having more’ and responding to desire or needs immediately without the need to save or make do (Langer 2005, Bauman 2007). As a consumption space, the tweenies are complex and sometimes contradictory. For example, Anita Harris (2005, pp. 212213) argues that the tweenies phenomenon has two main defining characteristics: first, that ‘tweenie is the site within which feminine child-ness, that is, ‘girlness’, is entwined with consumption, and, second, girls’ desires to create a mature but ‘feminine identity’ are taken seriously by the tweenies market. Harris claims that ‘girlness’, predominantly defined ‘through the colour pink; fluffy, glittery, sparkly and shimmery objects and fashions’, can be found in every tweenies location. Yet, Lamb and Brown (2006, p. 37) argue that the consumer media has managed to combine innocence and edge in the tweenies phenomenon: alongside the pink ‘girlness’, it incorporates micro-mini skirts and shorts, heavy make- up, and slogans such as Hello, my name is Hottie. Journal of Youth Studies 601 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Immersed in a consumer-media culture from birth, tweenies understand the relationship between identity and consumer goods and are aware that a sense of self can be fashioned from the resources to be found in the market place. Harris acknowledges social concerns surrounding the exploitation and sexualization of girls and the ‘phenomenon that they are growing up too fast’ but suggests that it is important to recognize the shift in ‘young feminine identities that is offered by [the] tweenie [phenomenon]’. This sort of recognition will enable a greater understanding of ‘the ways tweenie offers girls an agentic, albeit limited, subject position that they are able to negotiate and play with’ (2005, pp. 213222). As one 10-year-old girl puts it, ‘I love shopping. You can get new clothes and stuff you like. Stuff from Supre´, like skinny jeans and tank tops and things. About once every two weeks we go to the shops. We spend a couple of hours there. We wander in and out of the shops’ (Melissa, quoted in Hamilton 2008, p. 32). Statements such as Melissa’s are repeated in research studies conducted with groups of tweenies, and researchers recognize the girls’ active participation in their consumption activities (Russell and Tyler 2002, Harris 2005, Malik 2005; see also Lamb and Brown 2006, Brooks 2008, Hamilton 2008). However, researchers also acknowledge that the complexity of the consumer media’s influence limits our sense of tweenies’ subjective understandings of the consumer media’s aspirations to ‘own them and channel their desires’ (Lamb and Brown 2006, p. 5). Studies have shown that body image is one of the greatest concerns for young girls at the beginning of the twenty-first century. Debates and discussions about the influence of the consumer media on tweenies are particularly concerned about the role of the body: ‘Girls get many messages about how they should look and behave. Many of these messages are telling them that what matters is how ‘‘hot’’ or ‘‘sexy’’ they look or dress, and these are very powerful messages’ (APS 2007; see also The Senate 2008). The images, definitions and representations of a body ideal that circulate in the consumer media are actively sought by tweenies; ‘the girls we surveyed told us that the latest gossip is about bodies and appearance . . . . It begins to be a moral failing if a girl does not take care of herself, which means buying and wearing the right things’ (Lamb and Brown 2006, p. 126). The body is recognized as playing a significant role in the formation of a feminine identity (Bordo 1993, Hopkins 2002, Malik 2005). Body image is expressed through clothes, accessories, make-up, the activities girls participate in, and their behaviours and demeanour, which combine to present a desired image. The tweenie girl is aware that presenting a self that is appropriate to her peers is pivotal to the forms of selfhood that she fashions. Her strong desire for acceptance outside her familial relationships adds further complexity to these concerns (Heilman 1998, Sands and Wardle 2003, Jones et al. 2004, Smolak 2004, Dohnt and Tiggemann 2006, Malik 2005). Phillip Wexler (1992, p. 34) suggests that ‘The peer network isn’t just the place where you reinforce your image, or where you communicate. It is a social structure integral to self construction.’ The tweenie girl is aware that presenting a self that is appropriate to others affirms her social status. As one 13-year-old girl suggests, ‘Girls want to fit in so much. If someone says they look fat, they won’t eat as much. . . . If someone doesn’t like their hair, they’ll change it. If someone says they talk too much, they won’t talk as much. They’ll change their attitude, until they think they’re perfect’ (Lilly, quoted in Hamilton 2008, p. 122; see also Jones et al. 2004, Gonick 2005). For the tweenie girl, getting it right is paramount. The risk of failure is a very public possibility. 602 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 It is also claimed that 914-year-old girls aspire to look older than they really are and like to see themselves as mature; to ‘trade up age-wise’ (Kenway and Bullen 2001, p. 48, Linn 2004, p. 132). Advertisers view this as having ‘one foot in the kid world and one in the adult world’ (Linn 2004, p. 17). Yet Harris (2005, p. 212) argues that tweenies are not trying to look like their mothers, or even their older sisters. Rather, they want to occupy a space that is separate from children, teenagers and adults, and create an identity in which they and others recognize them as a ‘young female’  ‘a group that is distinct from younger children and from teenagers’ (Willett 2005, p. 291). Hopkins suggests that ‘girls today are preoccupied with extending their personal power  they know they can make things happen (2002, p. 10). In reporting on their research about tweenie-aged girls’ shopping experiences, Russell and Tyler (2002, p. 630) also suggest that tweenie-aged girls object to the ‘idea of being made up into a specific character. They did not want to be a princess or a fairy . . . . Keeping their own femininity from going ‘‘over the top’’ appeared to be something that the girls wanted to take on themselves.’ The tweenie girl’s strong desire to be in control, mature and independent places her in conflict with contemporary discourses of childhood innocence and vulnerability (Hopkins 2002, Harris 2005). Dolly girls: tweenies and the active, healthy, attractive self It is against this sketch of the tweenies phenomenon  and the powerful relationships between the consumer media, young girls/women, and processes of self-fashioning  that we locate a discussion and analysis of the resources that the Australian magazine Dolly provides to its young female readers. With a variety of media products targeting tweenies, researchers acknowledge that the resources provided by appearance magazines are actively sought by tweenie-aged girls (Strasburger and Donnerstein 2000, Jones et al. 2004, Pattee 2004, Carter 2005, Harris 2005). The term ‘appearance magazine’ is used in this context to describe magazines that use images to shape and reinforce a culturally accepted appearance for its predominantly female readers. Hopkins (2002, p. 96) argues that ‘whilst feminist scholars may reproach fashion/ beauty magazines for promoting false and superficial values’, tweenies turn to appearance magazines for information because their developmental needs, dreams and desires appear to be taken seriously. As Hopkins suggests, ‘there is evidence to suggest many young readers consider these magazines to be an important source of information and inspiration’ (2002, p. 96). For some tweenies, such as 12-year-old Tania, the information is integral to their fashioning of a sense of self: ‘I guess I learned all of my hair and make-up tips from those magazines. I never thought about that, but I guess it is like my role model for beauty’ (cited in Malik 2005, p. 268). Alongside the fantasy world of ‘girlness’, appearance magazines offer a ‘sisterly relationship’, one of trust, advice and understanding (Pattee 2004, p. 5). Bronwyn McCahon’s (the editor-in-chief of Dolly) monthly letter to readers starts with a ‘Hi guys’, and takes on a chatty, intimate tone before concluding with ‘as always, you know where to find me if you want to chat  www.ninemsn.bronspace. Have an awesome month. Bron xx’ (Dolly, November 2006). Widely recognized as feminine spaces, ‘supplying information on how to ‘‘do’’ femininity’, appearance magazines are also spaces offering social acceptance and success for their readers (Hopkins 2002, p. 96). In these spaces, girls are told that they Journal of Youth Studies 603 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 can do anything. . . . In contemporary girls’ magazines, young femininity is coolly confident and independent. . . .The ideal reader of girls’ magazines is not trying to find a husband  she is too busy in her own fantasy of self-reflecting autonomy. . . . Contemporary girls’ magazines are thick with unabashed Girl Power, ambition and assertiveness. ‘It’s all about you,’ girl culture seems to say, ‘and who you want to be.’ (Hopkins 2002, pp. 186187; see also Heilman 1998, Jones et al. 2004, Pattee 2004) The desire to be recognized as mature is reflected in tweenies’ choices of consumer products (Kenway and Bullen 2001, Strasburger and Wilson 2002, Linn 2004). Harris (2005, p. 213) suggests that ‘tweenie is merely evidence that ever-younger people are being taken seriously and given opportunities to express their desires, styles, and opinions in the public world, or at least, its markets.’ Tweenies are very aware that information about goods and images that provide them with a sense of maturity are located in appearance magazines aimed at more mature audiences, rather than in those targeting their own age group (McRobbie 1997, Malik 2005, Mitchell and Reid-Walsh 2005). Social commentators interviewing tweenie-aged girls report that girls are bypassing the ‘young girl’ magazines such as Total Girl before the age of 10 and moving onto magazines such as Dolly and Girlfriend (Burns 2005, SBS 2007, Brooks 2008). Dolly has been published since 1970. It is published monthly (12 issues per year). Dolly’s publishers, Australian Consolidated Press (ACP 2007a), claim that it is the number-one youth magazine in Australia. Dolly’s current status as the number-one youth and music magazine in Australia is confirmed by a 200506 Roy Morgan Readership Survey (ACP 2007b). Dolly does not directly target the ‘tweenies’ age group, but research and the publishers both recognize that Dolly magazine is purchased and read by this age group (Pattee 2004, Burns 2005, Mitchell and Reid- Walsh 2005, SBS 2007). The ACP magazines website lists Dolly’s target market as ‘Women 1417’, with the content recorded as ‘Youth Lifestyle’ (ACP 2007a). It is interesting to note the use of the term ‘women’ to describe Dolly’s market and ‘youth’ to define its content. It is also interesting to note the age range of participants interviewed for the ‘Dolly Youth Report’, a 2001 Dolly/AMR: Quantum Harris Youth Report that studied the behaviours, attitudes and values of 1017-year-olds in Australia. While Dolly does not record its target market as 1013-year-olds, in this report it actively obtained information about the ‘tweenies’ age group. ACP (2007a) claims that Dolly covers every aspect of a girl’s life from fashion, health and beauty to celebrities, entertainment and social issues. Dolly provides readers with a guide to life and the content is relevant to what is hot and happening each month. The key to Dolly’s massive success is that it relates to teenagers on their own level  it’s a valued friend and confidante. Dolly is the single most trusted source of information for teenager [sic] girls. This quotation provides an insight into the relationship Dolly believes it develops with its readers. ACP is claiming that Dolly is a ‘trusted source of information’ and the resources it presents will provide readers with a valuable guide to fashion their own sense of self. While we might remain sceptical about such a claim, we see here an indication of the roles that magazines such as Dolly might play for tweenies in processes of fashioning a self: 604 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 The magazines may look like they are telling you: you should wear this makeup, and these kind of clothes, you should follow this kind of style, you should be doing this with your boyfriend, that you should want to travel to these places. But really that’s why me and my friends buy them. That stuff is very inspiring and even the make-over stories are so encouraging. (Tabitha, age 10, quoted in Malik 2005, p. 270) As a guide to life  a guide that is full of ‘hot and happening’ images of fashion, goods, services, advice and information Dolly magazine provides an appropriate source for analysing the resources the consumer media presents to Australian tweenies. Our analysis of Dolly magazine draws on our familiarity with the magazine, and with the variety of appearance magazines that position themselves in relation to the tweenie demographic. The brief analysis we present here is part of a larger study that developed an analysis of all 12 of the 2006 issues of the magazine, and an in-depth content analysis of the January, April, July and November issues of 2006. A strong case can be made that these issues are largely representative of the format, layout, material and images to be found in any issue of Dolly over the past few years (an historical comparison over a longer time-frame is beyond the scope of this paper). Our aim in the preliminary content analysis was to determine the extent and type of advertisements and images (including the use of celebrities) in each issue as a first step in identifying and analysing the resources that Dolly provides its readership (Carly 1993, Bauer and Gaskell 2000, Liamputtong and Ezzy 2005). This analysis revealed that consumer goods and services are presented on every page of the Dolly magazine, though not always in the form of an advertisement. Many of the articles in the magazine are supported by photographs of clothes and accessories that provide the reader with details of the product, brand, prices and retail outlets that stock these consumer goods. The practice of employing the framework of an article to advertise fashion products is used extensively throughout the four issues of the magazine and significantly increase the level and scope of consumer goods presented to readers. Our preliminary analysis also revealed that many of the advertisements in the four issues promote products that readers would wear or use on their body. These included advertisements for clothes, hair, skin and beauty products. With many of the articles in Dolly also promoting clothing and accessories, the advertising of clothes, accessories and body-related appearance products is considerable. The emphasis on consumer goods and services for the body provides a powerful illustration of the feminist argument that the body plays a significant role in how individuals inform others of who they are. As Hopkins suggests, ‘If these magazines and advertisements concentrate on the rewards of mastery of beauty ideals, it is in part because that imagery ‘‘works’’; it excites, motivates and moves girls and young women’ (2002, p. 96). The extensive use of celebrities to support advertisements and articles was also identified; from the front cover of the magazine through to the back cover, images of celebrities are regularly featured. Recognizing at one level that tweenies are heavily influenced by the brands and products that they associate with their favourite singers, actors and pop culture idols, these celebrities are included in Dolly as role models (Kenway and Bullen 2001, Hopkins 2002). Celebrities such as the 18-year-old singer and actor Hilary Duff, pictured on the front cover of the January issue, are presented by Dolly as successful, confident and independent young women. Journal of Youth Studies 605 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 The inclusion of celebrity images in Dolly responds to tweenies’ needs and desires on two levels. In addition to linking tweenies’ favourite singers and actors to brands and products, the celebrity images act in support of the fantasy world of ‘girlness’ and femininity that Dolly is attempting to create (Hopkins 2002, Pattee 2004, Harris 2005). Dolly provides tweenies with images and information about celebrities that they admire and respect to create a girl cultural connection; ‘Popstars, models and movie stars are presented as the ultimate role models. The new girl heroes are those with star power.’ Tweenies are presented with a sense that you can always achieve anything, anytime and be exactly ‘who you want to be’ (Hopkins 2002, pp. 187190). Having established this connection, Dolly magazine has the potential to define the needs and desires of tweenies. This can be achieved through the products and services being promoted, but also in the presentation of these various resources that are used to fashion a sense of self. Many of the advertisements and articles in the four issues of Dolly are supported by images of young, slim, attractive females with unblemished, healthy complexions and sparkling white smiles; ‘In girls’ magazines, beauty is the quality which empowers the heroine to transcend common people and to join the image elite’ (Hopkins 2002, p. 193). As Bauman (2005) suggests, the freedom to choose is often in conflict with the desire to belong, but in this instance the options are limited. With the body playing a significant role in how we tell others who we are, the presentation of consumer goods and services in this limited fashion communicates a powerful message  particularly for the tweenie, who is actively seeking resources that enable her to fashion a sense of self that is acceptable to others. If, as Hopkins suggests (2002, p. 186), ‘the energy of youth comes from the naı¨ve belief that anything is possible’, in presenting these products in such a narrow range of images, Dolly has the potential to communicate to tweenies that these are the only identities available to them. Of particular concern here is the outcome for the tweenie who struggles to fashion a sense of self that does not, or cannot, measure up to this idealized body. In considering the potential damage this limited range of choices can cause for the individual, it is also appropriate to question how the repetitiveness and limited range of images could be redefining discourses for its readers. The last part of this section presents a discussion of how Dolly magazine is defining a particular meaning for the self through the resources it provides. This is a message that suggests to its readers that the fashioning of a sense of self is made possible through consumer goods and services; importantly, the body presenting these products must conform to a particular ideal. We will illustrate this point by focusing this discussion on the discourse of the active, healthy, attractive self in Dolly magazine. The discussion will explore the proposition that the active, healthy, attractive self has become an artefact of consumption in Dolly magazine. As we have suggested, the term ‘artefact’ signifies something that is produced or fashioned from the resources that come to hand. The something is the self that 914-year-old girls fashion from the resources that come to hand in the various areas of their lives. Our proposition is that the resources Dolly presents to its readership, including tweenies, are powerful, commodified and prepackaged, and, at the same time, limited in scope and form. Tweenies can fashion an active, healthy, attractive self from these resources, but this self must take a particular form. Dolly presents many images of young, slim, attractive females, with perfect smiles and flawless complexions. It also presents them as confident, ‘can do’ girls. Many of 606 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Dolly’s advertisements feature images of flawless, attractive young women that are confidently engaging in physical pursuits. In a full-page spread on p. 11 of the January 2006 issue, we are introduced to the Rip Curl girl. The image of her emerging from the sea, surfboard tucked under her arm, demands attention. As she looks happy, relaxed and in control of her life, the most significant message in this image is her appearance. She fits the image of the slim, attractive young female, and the bikini she wears, a Rip Curl product, enhances and accentuates her fit, toned body. Similarly, the attractive, young female in the full-page Mermaid Sister adver- tisement, featured on p. 6 in this issue, is striding towards the camera with an aura of control and confidence. Her slim, toned body moves confidently towards the camera. She is fit, happy and radiant  a radiance that comes, we are to believe, from her being able to fashion a self through her relationship with Mermaid Sister. The April issue features a similar image on p. 28, as it presents products from Kissed by Lovable. November’s issue introduces the Billabong girl in a full-page advertisement on p. 7. The females featured in these advertisements are all slim, tanned and attractive. They also appear confident, in control of life, and ready to engage in a form of physical activity. The minimal clothing they wear accentuates their fit, toned bodies and conveys a message about the type of body that is required to undertake these activities. The July issue of Dolly, perhaps because the weather is a little cooler in the southern hemisphere at this time of the year, does not feature images of scantily clad young women. However, the attractive, long-limbed young females are still present. The Supre’ girls in the full-page advertisement on p. 39 are covered up, but these attractive young females are actively engaged in a game of bowls. The clothing they wear is designed to accentuate their slim, long-limbed bodies, and their wide smiles highlight their attractiveness. These images are representative of many of the images of young women located throughout Dolly magazine. Indeed, the repetitive, even monotonous, regularity of such a limited range of body shapes and physical activities is a striking feature of our analysis of these magazines. Similar images appear throughout the four issues of the magazine as attractive, slim young females are presented engaging in sports and other leisure activities. The intention appears to be to create a sense of action and fun, an intent that is enhanced by the clothing the females wear. In these images the active, healthy, attractive self has become an artefact of consumption: something that can be fashioned via the use and consumption of the resources provided in Dolly and other elements of the consumer-media. The young women featured in the Rip Curl, Mermaid Sister, Kissed by Lovable and Billabong advertisements all appear to be participating in active pursuits, but their bodies, their outfits, and the accessories they wear are the important features of these advertisements. For tweenies, examining and attaching a meaning to the active, healthy, attractive self they observe in these images, the message is clear: this form of selfhood can be fashioned, can be made from the resources Dolly provides access to. Alternative images or definitions of active, healthy, attractive behaviours and dispositions are difficult to find in Dolly. In an article featured on p. 124 in the January 2006 issue, ‘What Does the Average Australian Girl Look Like?’, information about the average girl’s activities is presented. This two-page article is featured under the Dolly category of the Body Confidence Club. This article discusses issues such as the average girl’s height, weight, waist, bust and hip measurements, family structure and leisure activities. The article includes a statement about the average Australian girl’s Journal of Youth Studies 607 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 participation in sport  ‘maybe because she also thinks she needs to lose weight’. Interpreting young girls’ participation in sport in this manner in an article that could be reassuring readers that not all females are slim, toned and attractive, reinforces the argument that Dolly is defining the discourse of the active, healthy, attractive self in a limited way. It is through wearing these products and fashioning this particular body image that girls are able to participate in active pastimes. The discourse of the active, healthy, attractive self is being defined by a limited body image in Dolly. For the tweenie who is unable to present a slim, toned, attractive body to others, the opportunity to participate in active healthy pastimes might be avoided. The risk of failure is too great. Tweenies and a consuming life: collateral casualties of consumption? Dolly and its publishers claim that the magazine ‘provides readers with a guide to life and the content is relevant to what is hot and happening each month.’ As a guide to life, it ‘covers every aspect of a girl’s life from fashion, health and beauty to celebrities, entertainment and social issues’. Moreover, the reason that the magazine has been so successful is that it ‘relates to teenagers on their own level  it’s a valued friend and confidante. Dolly is the single most trusted source of information for teenager [sic] girls’ (ACP 2007a). It is on the strength of these claims, which, as we suggested, need to be approached with some scepticism, that we should try to understand the nature, the character, the range, the limits, and the possibilities of the resources that such magazines provide to young women/girls as they engage in the ongoing processes of fashioning a self. The limited types and forms of resources that Dolly provides to its readers as they seek resources to fashion a sense of self produces a particular discourse of the active, healthy, attractive self. All aspects of young women’s lives are defined by Dolly in relation to consumption. As a trusted, often playful, sometimes serious, valued friend, Dolly provides its young readers with a limited range of resources from which to fashion a self. The tweenie self, which is narrowly presented as slim, active, healthy and attractive, is, indeed, an artefact of consumption. The way in which tweenies  individuals and groups  work with these resources to fashion a self is, as the research suggests, a complex, contradictory, sometimes pleasurable, sometimes painful process. Acknowledging the active, choice-making capacity of tweenie girls as they fashion a sense of self is important. However, much of the research on tweenies also indicates that they need to negotiate the tensions between the desire to embrace the possibilities of constructing a sense of self, and the need to be accepted by their social group. These tensions are important to the ways in which tweenies fashion a self, and for a range of health and well-being issues that may, as research indicates, emerge from these tensions (Russell and Tyler 2002, Harris 2005, APS 2007, The Senate 2008). We want to conclude this discussion by situating the tweenies phenomenon, the resources that the consumer media provides this population  in the very process of constructing this cohort as a distinct demographic  and our analysis of the slim, healthy, active, attractive self that dominates the resources that Dolly provides its readers, in the liquid life/consuming life framework that Zygmunt Bauman has developed over the last decade. Our aim is to understand the issues that we have identified here in a framework that can accommodate the ambivalence, anxiety, 608 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 possibilities, and even irony of a process of self-fashioning that is both active and constrained; seemingly open but limited; shaped by the fantasy world of the consumer media and lived out in the embodied spaces of family, schools and peer groups. Zygmunt Bauman’s (2000, 2005, 2007) prolific, innovative and suggestive cultural sociologies of ‘liquid life’ have opened up a range of possibilities for exploring the globalized social, cultural, economic and political landscapes of the twenty-first century. These possibilities  which are potentially generative of innovative and significant ways of understanding the tweenies phenomenon  are central to our concluding comments. For Bauman (1997, p. 119), a cultural sociology of liquid life is informed by a sociological imagination that embraces a ‘tolerance and equanimity towards the wayward, the contingent, the not-wholly determined, the not-wholly understood and the not-wholly predictable’. Anthony Elliott (2007, pp. 318) argues that Bauman ranks as ‘one of the world’s most influential social theorists and politically engaged public intellectuals’, whose theory of liquid life provides a ‘reflective reconfiguration of the institutional and personal domains for the analysis of modern societies’. For Bauman (2000, pp. 113 114), the metaphors of fluidity and liquidity provide a means to contrast our current era with a period he describes as ‘heavy modernity’: ‘the epoch of weighty and ever more cumbersome machines, of the ever longer factory walls enclosing ever wider factory floors and ingesting ever more populous factory crews, of ponderous rail engines and gigantic ocean liners’. Bauman (2005, p. 1) suggests that we have moved from this era and now live in a period he describes as ‘light modernity’, in which social practices are fluid and constantly changing  ‘a society in which the conditions under which its members act change faster than it takes the ways of acting to consolidate into habits and routines’. As individuals seek guidance from, and are influenced by, the worlds in which they grow up, the stability and security these social practices provide for individuals diminishes, and individuals are compelled to continually make and remake a sense of self (Bauman 2005; see also Giddens 1991, Elliott and Lemert 2006). For Bauman (2005, pp. 18), the speed and flow and lack of solidity in a liquid life dictates that ‘conditions of action and strategies designed to respond to them age quickly and become obsolete before the actors have a chance to learn them properly.’ In a liquid life, we struggle to keep up with the constant need to monitor and reflect on and alter the ways in which we imagine ourselves, and the Other. This is ever- present, difficult and oftentimes risky work: Ours is, as a result, an individualized, privatized version of modernity, with the burden of pattern-weaving and the responsibility for failure falling primarily on the individual’s shoulders. It is the patterns of dependency and interaction whose turn to be liquefied has now come. They are now malleable to an extent unexperienced by, and unimaginable for, past generations; but like all fluids they do not keep their shape for long. Shaping them is easier than keeping them in shape. Solids are cast once and for all. Keeping fluids in shape requires a lot of attention, constant vigilance and perpetual effort  and even then the success of the effort is anything but a foregone conclusion. (Bauman 2000, pp. 78) In this sense, liquid life is precarious for the tweenie  as it is for all of us  as she is compelled to constantly monitor and review the encouragements, incitements, compulsions, desires and fantasies that shape social relations and practices in places such as families, schools, and peer relations. To be ‘caught napping’, to be ‘left Journal of Youth Studies 609 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 behind’, to overlook ‘use-by dates’, and to be ‘saddled with possessions that are no longer desirable’ are some of the fears, anxieties, uncertainties and possibilities that give shape to a liquid life (Bauman 2005, p. 2). What’s hot?, as Dolly would suggest, is a fundamental question for tweenies and is knowledge that is vital to processes of fashioning a self. Bauman (2007) suggests that a liquid life is a ‘consuming life’, where objects (human and non-human), relationships, work, and education can be understood as objects of consumption, and in which individuals are judged by the form that their consumption takes. He contends that an object or activity loses its value for the individual once consumed and suggests that the individual moves quickly onto the next object. In this way, Bauman (2007) claims, individuals are constantly in search of objects that they desire to replace those they already possess. Similarly, Anthony Giddens (1991, p. 198) argues that the project of fashioning a sense of self can be ‘translated into one of the possession of desired goods’. Giddens maintains that the consumer market effectively creates needs and desires for the individual, through the targeted marketing of specific products and services. He argues that the consumer market ‘packages’ a lifestyle or identity for the individual, a package that has been created by developing psychological and sociological understandings of the needs of a particular age, or gendered, group of consumers. The simple possession of goods is not sufficient to fashion identity. Rather, individuals must also use those goods to communicate their sense of self to others (Giddens 1991, pp. 196200). As we have suggested, the body has been recognized as playing a significant role in how individuals inform others of who they are. For tweenies, the clothes, make-up and accessories individuals wear, and their demeanour and comportment play an important part in the ways in which the know themselves and make themselves known to others, their peers especially. Individuals mobilize their bodies in a variety of ways, depending on the activity or social event they are participating in. Their intention is to communicate a message about themselves to others (Giddens 1991, pp. 99102). Giddens recognizes that this places the responsibility for fashioning their appearance with the individual. Here, individuals are at risk of presenting a ‘self ’ that is not acceptable to others (Finkelstein 1991, Giddens 1991). Bauman (2005, pp. 1011) suggests that it is unclear which of the two major components of a liquid life is more powerful, the ‘attractions of the ‘‘consumer’’ pole, or the repulsion of the ‘‘waste’’ pole’ as they ‘cooperate’ to shape the individual’s life: Fear adds strength to desire. However attentively it focuses on its immediate objects, desire cannot help but remain aware  consciously, half-consciously or subconsciously  of that other awesome stake hanging on its vigour, determination and resourcefulness. However intensely concentrated on the object of desire, the eye of the consumer cannot but glance sideways at the commodity value of the desiring subject. Liquid life means constant self-scrutiny, self-critique and self-censure. Liquid life ‘feeds on the self ’s dissatisfaction with itself. In many respects, all our lives, as Bauman (2007) suggests, have been transformed into artefacts of consumption. The particular concerns for a tweenie self as an artefact of consumption is that this self is commodified and sexualized in ways that are dominated by limited representations of what it is to be slim, active, healthy and attractive. The consequences of this commodification and sexualization are, and will continue to be, matters of public, policy and academic debate. It is not enough that 610 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 these consequences might be positioned, as Bauman (2007, pp. 117151) suggests, as collateral damage in a consuming life. The term ‘collateral’, as Bauman so powerfully argues, seeps into our consciousness via its aim to deny or deflect criticism of the practices of high-tech, smart warfare, that, supposedly, produce unintended casualties and victims. The collateral casualties of consumerism are, in this context, tweenies, whose needs to fashion a self that can belong in a variety of interactional settings, have been commodified, packaged and presented back to them. These fantasies of belonging packaged in the image of the happy, healthy attractive self can indeed produce positive dimensions for a tweenie’s self. But these fantasies can produce uncertainties and anxieties that manifest themselves in ways that negatively impact on the physical, mental and sexual health and well-being of tweenies. We live consuming lives, but we should still be able to imagine that the consequences of living such lives  collateral or otherwise  are things that can be challenged, especially for those young people who are being made up to live a consuming life: There’s a lot of pressure from magazines to be perfect. People at school talk about the way you look. You have to have the right clothes, wear the right labels and be skinny. (Lizzie, age 13, quoted in Tarica 2006, p. 4) References ACP Magazines, 2007a. Dolly [online.] Available from: www.acpmagazines.com.au/ Publications.aspx?id7eec0d52-2bfb-4ae4-9d47-4e23f164682dandmagDolly [Accessed 4 June 2007]. ACP Magazines, 2007b. Roy Morgan readership and circulation 2006 [online.] Available from: www.acpmagazines.com.au/Publications.aspx?id7eec0d52-2bfb-4ae4-9d47-e23f164682dandmag Dolly [Accessed 4 June 2007]. APS, 2007. Protecting girls from sexualisation in the media. Australian Psychological Society [online.] Available from: http://www.psychology.org.au/news/media_releases/2Oct2007/ [Accessed 11 October 2007]. Bauer, M. and Gaskell, G., eds., 2000. Qualitative researching with text, image and sound. A practical handbook. London: Sage. Bauman, Z., 1997. Postmodernity and its discontents. Cambridge: Polity Press. Bauman, Z., 2000. Liquid modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press. Bauman, Z., 2005. Liquid life. Cambridge: Polity Press. Bauman, Z., 2007. Consuming life. Cambridge: Polity Press. Bordo, S., 1993. Unbearable weight: feminism, Western culture, and the body. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Brooks, K., 2008. Consuming innocence: popular culture and our children. St Lucia: University of Queensland Press. Buckingham, D., 2000. After the death of childhood: growing up in the age of electronic media. Malden, MA: Polity Press. Burns, J., 2005. Tweenage idols [online]. Available from: www.theage.com.au/news/Fashion/ Tweenage-idols/2005/05/20/1116533535958.html [Accessed 27 March 2007]. Carly, K., 1993. Coding choices for textual analysis: a comparison of content analysis and map analysis. Sociological methodology, 23, 75126. Carter, F., 2005. It’s a girl thing: teenage magazines, lifestyle and consumer culture. In: D. Bell and J. Hollows, eds. Ordinary lifestyles: popular media, consumption and taste. Maidenhead: Open University Press, 173186. Dohnt, H.K. and Tiggemann, M., 2006. Body image concerns in young girls: the role of peers and media prior to adolescence. Journal of youth and adolescence, 35 (2), 141151. Dolly Magazine, 2006. January issue. ACP Magazines Ltd. Sydney: PMP Print. Dolly Magazine, 2006. April issue. ACP Magazines Ltd. Sydney: PMP Print. Dolly Magazine, 2006. July issue. ACP Magazines Ltd. Sydney: PMP Print. Dolly Magazine, 2006. November issue. ACP Magazines Ltd. Sydney: PMP Print. Journal of Youth Studies 611 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Dubecki, L., 2008. Why 10 is too young for your first Brazilian. The age, 8 January, p. 11. Edgar, P., 2007. Childhood under siege. The age, 13 January, Insight, p. 5. Elliott, A., 2007. Editor’s introduction. In: A. Elliott, ed. The contemporary Bauman. London: Routledge, 318. Elliott, A. and Lemert, C., 2006. The new individualism. Abingdon: Routledge. Finkelstein, J., 1991. The fashioned self. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. Giddens, A., 1990. Consequences of modernity. Oxford: Polity Press in association with Basil Blackwell. Giddens, A., 1991. Modernity and self-identity: self and society in the late modern age. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Gonick, M., 2005. From nerd to popular? Refiguring school identities and transformation stories. In: C. Mitchell and J. Reid-Walsh, eds. Seven going on seventeen: tween studies in the culture of girlhood. New York: Peter Lang, 4662. Hamilton, M., 2008. What’s happening to our girls?. Melbourne: Viking. Harris, A., 2005. In a girlie world: tweenies in Australia. In: C. Mitchell and J. Reid-Walsh, eds. Seven going on seventeen: tween studies in the culture of girlhood. New York: Peter Lang, 209223. Heilman, E.E., 1998. The struggle for self: power and identity in adolescent girls. Youth and society, 30 (2), 182208. Hopkins, S., 2002. Girl heroes: the new force in popular culture. Sydney: Pluto Press Australia. Jones, D., Vigfusdottir, T., and Lee, Y., 2004. Body image and the appearance culture among adolescent girls and boys: an examination of friend conversations, peer criticism, appearance magazines, and the internalization of appearance ideal. Journal of adolescent research, 19 (3), 323339. Kenway, J. and Bullen, E., 2001. Consuming children: education-entertainment-advertising. Buckingham: Open University Press. Lamb, S. and Brown, L.M., 2006. Packaging girlhood: rescuing our daughters from marketers. schemes’’. New York: St. Martin’s Press. Langer, B., 2005. Children: the consumer generation. In: M. Poole, ed. Family: changing families, changing times. Sydney: Allen and Unwin, 155179. Law, J., 2000. On the subject of the object: narrative, technology, and interpellation. Configurations, 8, 129. Liamputtong, P. and Ezzy, D., 2005. Qualitative research methods. South Melbourne: Oxford University Press. Linn, S., 2004. Consuming kids: the hostile takeover of childhood. New York: The New Press. Livingstone, S., 2002. Young people and new media. London: Sage. Lumby, C. and Albury, D., 2008. Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Environment, Communication and the Arts inquiry into the sexualisation of children in the contemporary media environment, 23 April [online]. Available from: www.aph.gov.au/ Senate/committee/eca_ctte.sexualisation_of_children/submission/sub146.pdf [Accessed 10 June 2008]. Malik, F., 2005. Mediated consumption and fashionable selves: tween girls, fashion magazines, and shopping. In: C. Mitchell and J. Reid-Walsh, eds. Seven going on seventeen: tween studies in the culture of girlhood. New York: Peter Lang, 257277. Mason, J. and Fattore, T., eds., 2005. Children taken seriously in theory, policy and practice. London: Jessica Kingsley. McRobbie, A., 1997. More! New sexualities in girls’ and women’s magazines. In: A. McRobbie, ed. Back to reality? Social experience and cultural studies. New York: Manchester University Press, 190209. Mitchell, C. and Reid-Walsh, J., eds., 2005. Seven going on seventeen: tween studies in the culture of girlhood. New York: Peter Lang. Pattee, A.S., 2004. Mass market mortification: the developmental appropriateness of teen magazines and the embarrassing story standard. Library quarterly, 74 (1), 120. Russell, R. and Tyler, M., 2002. Thank heaven for little girls: ‘Girl Heaven’ and the commercial context of feminine childhood. Sociology, 36 (3), 619637. Sands, E.R. and Wardle, J., 2003. Internalization of ideal body shapes in 912-year-old girls. International journal of eating disorder, 33, 193204. 612 F. Brookes and P. Kelly D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 SBS, 2007. Bratz, bras and tweens. Insight [online]. Available from: http://news.sbs.com.au/ insight/trans.php?transid1000 [Accessed 1 May 2007]. The Senate, 2008. Sexualisation of children in the contemporary media. Standing Committee on Environment, Communications and the Arts [online]. Available from: www.aph.gov.au/ senate/committee/eca_ctte/sexualisation_of_children/report/index.htm [Accessed 21 July 2008]. Smolak, L., 2004. Body image in children and adolescents: where do we go from here? Body image, 1, 1528. Strasburger, V.C. and Donnerstein, E., 2000. Children, adolescents, and the media in the 21st century. Adolescent medicine, 11 (1), 5168. Strasburger, V. and Wilson, B.J., 2002. Children, adolescents and the media. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Tarica, E. 2006. Little misunderstood. The age, 20 November, p. 4. Tucci, J., Mitchell, J. and Goddard, C., 2006. Every child needs a hero: a report tracking Australian children’s concerns and attitudes about childhood. Australian Childhood Foundation, Melbourne [online]. Available from: http://www.childhood.org.au/Assets/ Files/ba08ed6f-a0a9-4cd0-8e08-cbea49282ce9.pdf [Accessed 20 July 2008]. Wexler, P., Crichlow, W., Kern, J., and Martusewicz, R., 1992. Becoming somebody: toward a social psychology of school. Abingdon: Routledge Falmer. Willett, R., 2005. Constructing the digital tween: market discourse and girls’ interests. In: C. Mitchell and J. Reid-Walsh, eds. Seven going on seventeen: tween studies in the culture of girlhood. New York: Peter Lang, 278293. Williams, N., 2007. Childhood is not a marketable commodity. The Adelaide advertiser, 25 September, p. 22. Wyness, Michael, 2006. Childhood and Society: An Introduction to the Sociology of Childhood. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. Journal of Youth Studies 613 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 4:5 2 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 