ABSTRACT: 
Access to information is the first "pillar" of the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (1998). This article examines how the information disclosure obligations on states within the Aarhus Convention express a particular blend of human environmental rights, conjoining procedural entitlements (and duties) with a substantive right to an environment adequate to human health and well-being: "Aarhus environmental rights" have been lauded for increasing citizen access to environmental information, helping to secure more transparent and accountable regulatory processes. However, the information rights are rendered inconsistent in practice by three properties: 1) the discretion accorded to Convention Parties in interpreting Aarhus rights; 2) the exclusion of private entities from mandatory information disclosure duties; and 3) the indeterminate coupling of procedural and substantive rights. These tensions reflect a structural imbalance in the articulation of Aarhus rights between social welfare and market liberal perspectives. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 the Aarhus Convention has been recognized as a unique international agreement in terms of integrating hu-man rights and environmental protection . 
 the Aarhus Convention has also been recognized as heralding a more responsive relationship between people andgovernments . 
 this in part reºs the efforts of environmentalNGOs in lobbying UNECE regarding decision-making entitlements for civil so-ciety actors—lobbying which found fertile ground in the 1990s in the context ofexternal democracy promotion within Eastern Europe . however , transparency norms in the Aarhus Convention have been framed mainly by a market liberal understanding in 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Michael Mason Information disclosure and environmental rights: the Aarhus Convention Article (Published version) (Refereed) Original citation: Mason, M. (2010) Information disclosure and environmental rights: the Aarhus Convention. Global environmental politics, 10 (3). pp. 10-31. ISSN 1526-3800 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/GLEP_a_00012 © 2010 The MIT Press This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/29135/ Available in LSE Research Online: April 2012 LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE Research Online website. 10Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights Michael MasonResearch ArticlesInformation Disclosure andEnvironmental Rights:The Aarhus Convention•Michael Mason*IntroductionAccess to information is the ªrst “pillar” of the Convention on Access to Infor-mation, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Envi-ronmental Matters (Aarhus Convention),1 negotiated under the auspices of theUnited Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE). The Conventionis often lauded as a unique international agreement in terms of integrating hu-man rights and environmental protection: Article 1 of the Convention presentsthe “right of every person of present and future generations to live in an envi-ronment adequate to his or her health or well-being” as justiªcation for itsrecognition, in environmental matters, of rights to information access, publicparticipation and access to justice.2 These Aarhus procedural rights bring corre-sponding duties on states. Thus, for citizens’ access to information, there are in-formation disclosure obligations on public authorities. Similarly, for citizenrights to access to decision-making and justice in environmental matters, theConvention sets out associated duties. The effective implementation of all theprocedural rights is seen as a condition for realizing the substantive right to anadequate level of environmental quality. This claim about the necessary con-joining of procedural and substantive environmental rights is also found in thepreamble to the Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers (Kiev Pro-tocol), which was adopted at an Extraordinary Meeting of the Parties to theAarhus Convention.3 The Kiev Protocol entered into force on 8 October 2009* Thanks to Aarti Gupta and fellow participants of the Transparency in Global Environmental Gover-nance Workshop at Wageningen University, 23–24 April 2009, for feedback on an earlier draftof this article. I am also grateful to the Global Environmental Politics referees for their constructivecomments.1. Aarhus Convention 1999 (adopted 25 June 1998; entered into force 30 October 2001).2. Aarhus Convention 1999. This right is also stated in the seventh preambular paragraph of theConvention.3. Kiev Protocol 2003 (adopted 21 May 2003; entered into force 8 October 2009).Global Environmental Politics 10:3, August 2010© 2010 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technologyand is presented by UNECE as the ªrst legally binding international instrumentallowing access to pollution inventory information.“Aarhus environmental rights” have been lauded for increasing citizen ac-cess to environmental information across Europe, helping to secure more trans-parent and accountable regulatory processes. Indeed, UNECE presents theConvention as heralding a more responsive relationship between people andgovernments. As will be shown, the agreement has introduced innovative mech-anisms for empowering public participation in national and internationaldecision-making, affording a special status to affected publics and nongovern-mental organizations (NGOs). This in part reºects the efforts of environmentalNGOs in lobbying UNECE regarding decision-making entitlements for civil so-ciety actors—lobbying which found fertile ground in the 1990s in the context ofexternal democracy promotion within Eastern Europe. Transparency, expressedas information access, was deemed to be a necessary expression of, and condi-tion for, democratic governance. However, transparency norms in the AarhusConvention have been framed mainly by a market liberal understanding inwhich information disclosure obligations fall directly on public authorities andonly indirectly steer private sector institutions and actors. As will be argued here,the construction and implementation of Aarhus rights according to this under-standing has weakened the information access rights of citizens and affectedpublics.In this article, I examine the nature and scope of the information disclo-sure obligations under the Aarhus Convention. After outlining the developmentof environmental information disclosure provisions by UNECE, I brieºy set outthe relevant provisions of the agreement and characterize its construction of in-formation disclosure rights. The application of these disclosure rights is then ex-amined, drawing mainly on materials from the treaty secretariat and Parties tothe Convention, but also referring to the perspectives of relevant nonstate ac-tors. An analysis of the experience so far of applying Aarhus information rightspinpoints inherent (unexamined) inconsistencies in Aarhus informational gov-ernance. These include the discretionary authority accorded to Parties, the exclu-sion of private actors from mandatory duties regarding information disclosure,and the indeterminate coupling of substantive and procedural rights. Ana-lytically, I argue that these inconsistencies reºect a structural imbalance in thearticulation of Aarhus environmental rights between social welfare and marketliberal perspectives. While the Convention expresses, in Article 1, a socially justcommitment to decent environmental conditions for all, the differential obliga-tions placed on public authorities and private actors reveal a more restricted(liberal) understanding of rights. The article highlights various manifestationsof this normative mismatch.Environmental Information Disclosure and UNECEThe drafting of the Aarhus Convention drew on ten years of experience ofenvironmental agreements within UNECE, as part of the “Environment for Eu-Michael Mason • 11rope” process. While ostensibly a forum for pan-European economic integra-tion,4 UNECE has developed a body of international environmental law cover-ing transboundary aspects of air pollution, environmental impact assessment,industrial accidents and the protection and use of shared watercourses.5 Duringthe East-West détente process of the mid-late 1970s, it was the selection oftransboundary air pollution cooperation as a negotiation issue for mutual gainthat favored UNECE as an institutional setting for environmental rule-making.6Following the collapse of communist rule in Eastern Europe, in 1991 UNECEco-initiated the Environment for Europe process to promote pan-European en-vironmental cooperation. Environment for Europe discussions served as the im-mediate backdrop for the two years of negotiations that produced the AarhusConvention, and it was at the Fourth Ministerial Conference (in Aarhus, Den-mark in June 1998) under this process that the Convention was adopted.According to UNECE, the Aarhus Convention was based in part on its ex-perience of implementing previous environmental agreements, including theapplication of information disclosure provisions.7 In an effort to codify thesevarious entitlements, in 1995 UNECE produced Guidelines on Access to Envi-ronmental Information and Public Participation in Environmental Decision-Making. The geopolitical context of regime change and independence in formerWarsaw Pact countries gave an unprecedented opportunity for the Commissionto set a regional governance agenda that, in the creation of new legal instru-ments, fused democratic entitlements with environmental protection norms.Between 1990 and 1995, 16 newly independent Central and Eastern Europeanstates had joined UNECE and, at least symbolically, were keen to embrace dem-ocratic values. In October 1995, at the Third Ministerial Conference under theEnvironment for Europe umbrella, the participating environment ministers en-dorsed the UNECE Guidelines. They also adopted the Soªa Ministerial Declara-tion, which called for all countries in the region to ensure that they had an effec-tive legal framework to secure public access to environmental information andpublic participation in environmental decision-making.8Thus, the ambitious multilateralism of UNECE in regard to the pan-Euro-pean development of environmental information disclosure cannot be divorcedfrom its democracy promotion efforts in Central and Eastern Europe. Indeed,Secretary-General Koª Annan introduced the Aarhus Convention as the mostambitious venture in “environmental democracy” undertaken by the UN.9 From1989 both the European Commission and the US funded major governmentaland nongovernmental capacity-building programs in the former communist12 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights4. The ECE includes 56 countries in the European Union, non-EU Western and Eastern Europe,South-East Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States and North America.5. See http://www.unece.org/env/welcome.html, accessed 20 April 2010.6. Wettestad 2000, 95. These negotiations resulted in the ªrst UNECE environmental treaty—TheConvention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (adopted 13 November 1979; enteredinto force 16 March 1983).7. Economic Commission for Europe 2000, 25.8. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 1995.9. Economic Commission for Europe 2000, v.countries, which included the creation in Budapest of a Regional Environmen-tal Center for Central and Eastern Europe. In this context of external democracypromotion, the development of the Aarhus Convention was notable for the ac-tive role of transition countries in shaping its provisions, for these states were al-ready adopting new environmental information and participation laws with anexplicit human rights component.10 It is not surprising, therefore, that Article 1of the Convention champions a substantive environmental right—the equal en-titlement of all persons, across generations, to a decent level of environmentalquality. This represents a strong conception of social welfare, which is compati-ble, in principle, with socialist and social democratic norms from a range of Eu-ropean political traditions. It implies regulatory constraints (to a greater orlesser degree) on private investment and trade decisions generating signiªcantenvironmental harm.However, the substantive commitment to environmental justice in Article1 has been at odds with the aggressive free market restructuring facilitated forthe new democracies by multilateral development banks (e.g. European Bankfor Reconstruction and Development) and private investment actors. Thismeans that the UNECE mandate for facilitating European economic develop-ment—which in the preamble to the Aarhus Convention is interpreted as “sus-tainable development”—has deferred in practice to a market liberal model ofeconomic development. Thus, the Commission’s commitment to informationdisclosure as supportive of its core commitment to East-West cooperation hasmirrored Western economic liberalization and privatization objectives for tran-sition countries, which have been set as conditionalities for European Unionand WTO membership. Within this dominant norm complex of neoliberalism,information disclosure by governmental and private actors is market-correctingrather than market-transforming: it is seen as reducing the incidence of environ-mental externalities by rectifying information deªcits and asymmetries. In otherwords, it is appropriate for states to facilitate information disclosure as a publicgood to promote market efªciencies, but in the service of, rather than as a chal-lenge to, proªt-motivated imperatives for economic growth.11It is necessary to recognize, therefore, the historicity of the informationalgovernance12 formulated by UNECE for the Aarhus Convention. In the ªrst place,the Commission articulated an inºuential variant of what, at the global scale,Aarti Gupta labels “governance by disclosure”—a growing number of regulatoryforms (mandatory and voluntary) animated by assumptions of due process andempowerment through information.13 For the Aarhus Convention, as will beshown below, the procedural entitlements favoring public information accessare legally innovative. The causal assumption that information can empowerMichael Mason • 1310. Jancar-Webster 1998; and Stec 2005.11. Examples of this perspective include Hamilton 1995; Tietenberg 1998; and Dasgupta et al.2001.12. By information governance I mean, following Mol (2008, 80), environmental governance inwhich information, information technologies and information processes play a central role.13. Gupta 2008. See also Florini 2007.members of the public is explicitly made in the ninth and tenth preambularparagraphs of the Convention, where improved access to information—con-joined with public participation—is claimed to enhance public awareness andunderstanding, the communication to decision-makers of matters of publicconcerns, and the greater public accountability of public authorities. ManyParties to the Convention, in their implementation reports, support the viewthat information disclosure is enabling for their citizens.14 Within the wider re-search community, there is also empirical support for this claim, though by nomeans a scholarly consensus.15Second, in keeping with market liberal notions of regulatory action, theAarhus Convention restricts its direct obligations to public authorities. While“public authority” is understood in an expansive sense as all governmental au-thorities and natural or legal persons with public administrative functions andother environmental responsibilities, functions and public service providers(Article 2),16 this deªnition clearly circumscribes its class of duty holders. Pri-vately owned entities only fall within the immediate scope of the convention in-sofar as they perform public functions deemed to be environment-related, suchas the provision of energy or water services. In terms of public international law,the Convention resonates with those state-based rules which populate the man-datory domain of governance by disclosure, notably treaty obligations on infor-mation exchange, notiªcation, consultation and consent.17 Signiªcantly, whenUNECE considers the role of the private sector in the Implementation Guide tothe Aarhus Convention, it is in relation to non-mandatory notions of “corpo-rate citizenship” and stakeholder engagement. Business and industry is men-tioned as one of the “major groups” already identiªed by the Rio Declarationand Agenda 21 at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Develop-ment.18 The claim that direct environmental information disclosure for privateoperators can effectively be tackled by voluntary means (e.g. eco-labeling andeco-auditing schemes) is stated explicitly in Article 5(6) of the Convention,which relates to the public dissemination of information held by privateentities.Information Disclosure Provisions in the Aarhus ConventionThe Access to Information PillarAs already mentioned, Article 1 of the Aarhus Convention establishes access toenvironmental information as the ªrst of three procedural rights—for all14 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights14. Economic Commission for Europe 2000, 18; and 2008b, 21–22.15. Compare, for example, the sanguine view of Stephan 2002 with the more skeptical outlook ofFung et al. 2007.16. Regional economic integration organizations that are Parties to the Convention are alsoclassiªed as public authorities; thus, ratiªcation of the Convention in February 2005 by the Eu-ropean Community means that it has direct Aarhus obligations.17. Louka 2006, 120–126.18. Economic Commission for Europe 2000, 19–20.persons—in support of the human right to a healthy environment. Articles 4and 5 cover, respectively, the means by which environmental information canbe requested from public authorities and the obligations on Parties to ensurethat such authorities actively disseminate environmental information from avariety of sources. Both articles include the provision that obligations are en-acted “within the framework of national legislation,” which allows Partiessigniªcant discretion in disclosing information, including conditions for refus-ing information requests (e.g. for reasons of national defense and security, com-mercial conªdentiality and personal data protection). However, Parties areobliged to interpret grounds for refusal in a restrictive way “taking into accountthe public interest served by disclosure and taking into account whether the in-formation requested relates to emissions into the environment.”19 In contrast tothe passive (request-based) disclosure obligations on public authorities con-tained in Article 4, Article 5 covers the forms and categories of environmentalinformation which public authorities are actively required to collect and dis-seminate. The priority accorded to public access places the onus on these au-thorities to order and publish relevant environmental information, includingnational state-of-the-environment reports, legislation and policy documents,environment-related policy information, and information on pollution releasesand transfers.Furthermore, Article 5 provided a legal basis for the Aarhus Parties to de-velop the Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers (PRTRs)—a com-mitment agreed at the First Meeting of the Parties to the Aarhus Convention inOctober 2002 at Lucca, Italy. The Protocol was adopted at an ExtraordinaryMeeting of the Parties seven months later in Kiev.20 It is presented by UNECE asthe ªrst legally binding international instrument on pollution inventories, withthe goal of enhancing public access to information through the establishmentof coherent, integrated, nationwide pollutant release and transfer registers.Parties are obliged to ensure effective public access to the information con-tained in national registers, which follow a harmonized reporting scheme thatis mandatory, annual, multimedia, facility-speciªc and pollutant or waste-speciªc. The Kiev Protocol is open to all states, so its contribution to informa-tional governance transcends the membership of the UNECE.The only other provision of the Aarhus Convention that has generated anew legal instrument requiring the approval of its Parties is an Amendmentadopted at the Second Meeting of the Parties to the Convention, held in Almaty,Kazakhstan, 25–27 May 2005. The Amendment, which is not yet in force, adds aprovision to the Convention (Article 6 bis) requiring each Party to “provide forearly and effective information and public participation prior to making deci-sions on whether to permit the deliberate release into the environment andplacing on the market of genetically modiªed organisms.”21 This clause is de-Michael Mason • 1519. Aarhus Convention 1999, Article 4(2).20. Kiev Protocol 2003.21. United Nations Economic and Social Council 2005, Article 6 bis(1).signed to render more precise a reference to genetically modiªed organisms inArticle 6(11) of the Convention, which had deliberately been left vague in itsdrafting in recognition of the political difªculties at that time accompanying thenegotiations over what became the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety.22 In recog-nition of the need to have non-conºicting national biosafety frameworks, theAmendment to the Aarhus Convention calls for Aarhus Parties to ratify or ac-cede to the Cartagena Protocol. Nevertheless, by complementing the informa-tion disclosure provisions of the latter, the Amendment attests to the fact thatAarhus transparency norms have a wider currency than the Convention.Information Access as a Human Environmental RightThe Aarhus Convention is drafted in terms of human rights, declaring in itsopening article a basic right of every person to a healthy environment. Prior tothe Convention, a number of countries had already recognized such a substan-tive environmental right in their national constitutions: the Aarhus formulationextended this emphatically to international human rights law, as reafªrmed atthe First Meeting of the Parties in Lucca:We recognise the close relationship between human rights and environmen-tal protection. Through its goal of contributing to the protection of the rightof every person of present and future generations to live in an environmentadequate to his or her health and well-being, the Convention reºects thislink.23Yet the Aarhus Convention is mainly concerned with procedural rights of citi-zens, with access to information supportive of access to decision-making andaccess to justice in environmental matters. It therefore expresses a particularblend of human environmental rights, marking procedural entitlements as nec-essary for the successful exercise of substantive environmental rights. As the ªrstpillar, access to information may be interpreted as an indispensable prerequisitefor the other environmental rights in the Convention.24 Arguably, this impliesthat the corresponding information disclosure obligations placed on the Con-vention Parties and public authorities become critical to the successful function-ing of the treaty.The three pillars of the Aarhus Convention mirror the procedural entitle-ments to information, public participation and justice expressed in Principle 10of the Rio Declaration.25 There is also a semantic debt to another UNECEagreement—the 1991 Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in aTransboundary Context (Espoo Convention). From this treaty, the Aarhus Con-vention imports the broad notion of the public as “one or more natural or legal16 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights22. See Gupta 2010 for analysis of political conºicts around transparency in the Cartagena protocolnegotiations.23. Lucca Declaration 2004, para. 6.24. Hayward 2005, 178.25. Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (UN Doc. A/CONF.151/26/REV.1).persons” adding, for emphasis, associations, organizations or groups in accor-dance with national legislation or practice.26 The Aarhus Convention also has aseparate formulation of “the public concerned,” encompassing those personslikely to be affected by, or having an interest in, the relevant environmentaldecision-making, including environmental NGOs.27 These expansive notions ofpublic actors are politically signiªcant, because Aarhus entitlements are ad-dressed to persons regardless of nationality, residence or citizenship.28 At leastin principle, then, information disclosure (and other Aarhus) obligations onpublic authorities are extensive and without discrimination.Yet, Aarhus environmental rights straddle uneasily between, on the onehand, their embodiment as procedural entitlements and, on the other, the so-cial welfare aspiration, expressed in Article 1, to provide environmental qualityadequate to the human health and well-being of all persons. The UNECE as-sumption that the former necessarily promotes the latter is asserted rather thansubstantiated.29 In the ªrst place, the social welfare aim embodied in Article 1 isshort-changed insofar as there is no elaboration of its constituent standards orregulatory signiªcance. Instead, there is in the rest of the treaty a textual “brack-eting” of the Aarhus substantive environmental right, which preserves the lib-eral political axiom that the state should not encroach unnecessarily on the eth-ical domain of private life-choices and welfare preferences. Similarly, restrictingthe subjects of Aarhus duties to public authorities means that private corporateentities are shielded from direct obligations under the treaty: this is also consis-tent with traditional liberal legal protections afforded to markets against gov-ernmental interference.Implementation and Compliance Experience of Aarhus Provisions on InformationDisclosureThe Aarhus Convention entered into force on 30 October 2001. As of 8 October2009, there were 43 Parties to the Convention, 23 Parties to the Kiev Protocoland 24 Parties to the Amendment on genetically modiªed organisms. DecisionI/8, adopted at the First Meeting of the Parties, requires Parties to the Conven-tion to report on their implementation activities before the relevant Meeting ofthe Parties. There have now been two reporting cycles: by the Second Meeting ofthe Parties in May 2005, 24 out of 30 Convention Parties had submitted na-tional implementation reports (NIRs), while by the Third Meeting of the Partiesin Riga, 11–13 June 2008, 35 out of 41 Parties had submitted NIRs.30 For eachreporting cycle, the Aarhus Convention secretariat is charged with producing aMichael Mason • 1726. Espoo Convention, Done at Espoo Finland on 25 February 1991, Article 1(x); Aarhus Conven-tion 1999, Article 2(4).27. Aarhus Convention 1999, Article 2(5).28. Aarhus Convention 1999, Article 3(9).29. For example, Economic Commission for Europe 2000, 29.30. Economic Commission for Europe 2005, 2; 2008b, 3. As of April 2009 four Convention Partieshave still to submit their second national implementation reports—Croatia, Lithuania, Luxem-bourg and Spain.synthesis report on implementation, but is limited by its mandate and resourceconstraints in verifying the content of the reports—a constraint characteristic ofthe implementation norms of multilateral environmental agreements.There are three regional groupings in implementation capacity categorizedby the Aarhus Convention secretariat. First, the Parties from Eastern Europe, theCaucasus and Central Asia (EECCA) are deemed to face common implementa-tion issues on the basis of their shared experience as post-Soviet states movinginto democratic governance. These Parties are credited by the secretariat withhaving made most progress with the access to information pillar in the Conven-tion, in part enabled by signiªcant capacity-building for implementation ªn-anced since 1999 by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe(OCSE). OCSE has supported the creation of Aarhus Centers and Public Envi-ronmental Information Centers—for awareness-raising, training and communi-cations activities—in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kyrgyz-stan and Tajikistan.31In the second regional grouping—the European Union (EU) countriesand Norway—implementation of information access provisions are more ad-vanced, given prevailing legislation and more mature democratic systems. Fur-thermore, European Community ratiªcation of the Aarhus Convention meansthat it is now binding on Community authorities and on Member States, har-monizing the implementation of the Convention across the European Union.Thus, Regulation (EC) No. 1367/2006 applying the Aarhus Convention toCommunity institutions and bodies was adopted in September 2006. The Euro-pean Commission subsequently published Directives designed to align Com-munity legislation with each of the three Aarhus pillars, of which Directive2003/4/EC on public access to environmental information was adopted in Jan-uary 2003, repealing a 1990 Directive on environmental information access.32The third regional grouping—South-Eastern Europe (SEE)—covers threeParties (Albania, Bulgaria and The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)deemed by the Aarhus Convention secretariat to share implementation chal-lenges arising from their experience of the regional insecurity of the western Bal-kans and their participation in Stabilization and Association Agreements withthe European Union. Indeed, the European Commission sponsors a RegionalEnvironmental Reconstruction Programme for South Eastern Europe, whichsupports capacity-building for Aarhus Convention implementation.33The two synthesis reports on implementation, prepared to date by theAarhus Convention secretariat, indicate that Parties appear to have fewest prob-lems in implementing information disclosure obligations compared to the18 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights31. Economic Commission for Europe 2008b, 6–7; Organization for Security and Co-operation inEurope 2008.32. Commission of the European Communities 2008: 4. While a Directive (2003/35/EC) has alsobeen adopted in relation to the public participation pillar of the Aarhus Convention, the pro-posed Directive on access to justice (COM (2003) 624) is still pending within the Communitylegislative process.33. Economic Commission for Europe 2005, 5–6; and Regional Environmental ReconstructionProgramme for South Eastern Europe 2007.other two pillars of the Convention. For the provisions on access to informationupon request (Article 4), all submitted NIRs show relevant legislation in place.However, with regards to EECCA and SEE Parties, some of the implementationobstacles identiªed by the secretariat in the ªrst synthesis report (2005) recurthree years later in the second. These include legislative gaps and discrepanciescompared to Convention clauses, ambiguities over the meaning of “environ-mental information” and the lack of awareness of citizens’ information rights.There are also marked variations in the legal grounds upon which informationrequests may be refused. Different legal approaches to implementing Article 4are also found in EU countries and Norway, but within a more established cul-ture of openness: the most signiªcant variation—and one that goes beyondAarhus freedom of information provisions—is the right of the public in Norwayto access information directly from private enterprises, rather than only frompublic authorities.34 The reported experience of Parties in implementing theAarhus obligations on the collection and dissemination of environmental infor-mation (Article 5) is similar across the two synthesis reports: appropriate lawsare in place, but many EECCA and SEE Parties noted procedural uncertaintiesand resource constraints impacting negatively on active information disclosure.In contrast, most EU countries and Norway reported no major obstacles to theimplementation of Aarhus provisions on information collection and dissemi-nation: indeed, the Convention secretariat applauded progress by these Partiesin developing electronic tools for information disclosure and in setting up pol-lutant release and transfer registers consistent with their ratiªcation of the KievProtocol.35Nevertheless, recent public communications to the Aarhus ConventionCompliance Committee reveal a more mixed picture—at least in terms of al-leged breaches of information disclosure obligations of the Convention. It iswidely recognized that the Aarhus compliance mechanism is legally innovativecompared to other multilateral environmental agreements.36 Article 15 of theConvention expressly allows for “appropriate public involvement” in a non-confrontational, non-judicial and consultative compliance review mechanism.As agreed at the ªrst Meeting of the Parties (Decision I/7), this has been inter-preted to include the right of NGOs to nominate candidates to the ComplianceCommittee, as well as the right of members of the public (including NGOs) tosubmit communications regarding compliance by Parties and to take part inCommittee discussions with respect to their submission.37 By the end of 2008,the Compliance Committee had only received one submission from a Party tothe Convention with regard to compliance by another Party, but had received35 communications on compliance from the public.38 Over half of the publicMichael Mason • 1934. Economic Commission for Europe 2005, 7–9; and 2008b, 10–11.35. Economic Commission for Europe 2005, 9–11; and 2008b, 11–13.36. Morgera 2005, 140; and Mason 2006, 296.37. Economic Commission for Europe 2004a.38. See http://www.unece.org/env/pp/pubcom.htm for information on public communications tothe Aarhus Convention Compliance Committee.submissions concern issues of public participation, which has led the Compli-ance Committee to register concerns about the implementation of the secondpillar of the Convention.39 Yet, as Table 1 below indicates, there have also beenten public communications regarding the compliance of Parties with the infor-mation disclosure provisions of the Aarhus Convention and all these submis-sions (from 2004 to the end of 2008) are allegations of non-compliance.It can be seen from Table 1 that public communications to the Compli-ance Committee about information disclosure have focused on Article 4—theConvention provision on access to information. In response to the ªrst roundof public submissions in 2004–5, the Committee ruled two communications asinadmissible under the terms of Decision I/7 and found three EECCA Parties—Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Armenia—to be non-compliant with Article 4 obliga-tions on Parties calling for public authorities to respond effectively to requests20 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights39. Economic Commission for Europe 2008c, 16.Table 1Public communications to the Aarhus Convention Compliance Committee (2004–2008) citing Information Disclosure Provisions of the Convention (Articles 4 and 5)*UNECE reference Party concerned Articles cited Received StatusACCC/C/2004/01Kazakhstan 4(1) and 4(2) 07.02.2004 FindingsadoptedACCC/C/2004/03Ukraine 4(1) 06.05.2004 FindingsadoptedACCC/C/2004/08Armenia 4(1) and 4(2) 20.09.2004 FindingsadoptedACCC/C/2004/09Armenia Articles 4 and 5 22.09.2004 NotadmissibleACCC/C/2005/14Poland Article 4 04.07.2005 NotadmissibleACCC/C/2007/21EuropeanCommission4(1) and 5(3) 14.08.2007 FindingsadoptedACCC/C/2008/24Spain 4(8) 13.05.2008 UnderreviewACCC/C/2008/28Denmark 4(1) and 5(1) 07.09.2008 UnderreviewACCC/C/2008/29Poland Article 4 20.10.2008 UnderreviewACCC/C/2008/30Moldova 4(1) and 4(4) 03.11.2008 Underreview*Note: References in these public communications to any other Convention Articles are excludedhere.for environmental information. The constructive recommendations made bythe Committee to the three Parties emphasized necessary legislative and regula-tory measures for compliance. By the 2008 Meeting of the Parties in Riga, theGovernment of Kazakhstan was deemed to be compliant with Article 4 of theConvention, but both Ukraine and Armenia were still judged not to be compli-ant with Convention provisions on access to information.40 Public communica-tions to the Compliance Committee in 2008 (Table 1) indicate that charges ofnon-compliance regarding information disclosure are no longer restricted toEECCA countries. For the complaint against the European Commission, thecharge by an Albanian NGO was that the European Investment Bank was not re-leasing environmental information that it had requested, although the Compli-ance Committee ruled that the European Community was not in a state of non-compliance, as the information had eventually been provided.41 In the case ofSpain, the allegation was that a fee imposed by the Party for environmental in-formation was unreasonable (in breach of Article 4(8)), while in the Danishcase, the communicant charged that the public authorities failed to dischargeboth passive (Article 4) and active (Article 5) information disclosure responsi-bilities concerning the administration of antibiotics in livestock. Both commu-nications are under consideration by the Compliance Committee, along withallegations of Article 4 non-compliance leveled by NGOs against Poland andMoldova.The Incompleteness of Aarhus Information RightsIt is arguably still too early in the lifetime of the Aarhus Convention to offer adeªnitive assessment of its contribution to the information disclosure policiesand practices of its contracting Parties. Nevertheless, there is now sufªcient im-plementation experience to pinpoint problematic areas in realizing Aarhusrights and obligations regarding access to environmental information. I nowhighlight three such areas: 1) the discretion accorded to Parties in interpretingAarhus rights; 2) the exclusion of private entities from mandatory disclosure du-ties; and 3) the indeterminate coupling of procedural and substantive rights.The Discretion Allowed to Parties in Interpreting Aarhus RightsAt several instances in the Aarhus Convention—including the speciªcation ofobligations for Parties for each of the three pillars—there are references to pre-scribed action “within the framework of/in accordance with national legisla-tion.” The Convention secretariat has interpreted this to mean that Parties areallowed “ºexibility” in deciding how to implement selected Aarhus obliga-Michael Mason • 2140. Economic Commission for Europe 2008a, 12; and 2008c, 8–9. All three Parties were judgedstill not to be in compliance with access to justice (Article 9) provisions of the Convention.41. Economic Commission for Europe 2009.tions.42 This discretionary allowance seems sensible in view of the varying legalsystems and governance capacities of the various Parties across the UNECE re-gion, but some early commentators on the Convention already anticipateddifªculties arising from the ambiguity of these phrases, including for the accessto information pillar.43 Implementation experience indicates that the discretionallowed to Parties on Aarhus information provisions has been most problem-atic for EECCA Parties, some of whom have struggled to accommodate freedomof information within administrative cultures with an institutional memory ofsecret and closed decision-making. As Stephen Stec notes, “access to informa-tion, the right to disseminate information, and the control of information arestill contentious issues in many countries with a common legacy of strict infor-mation control.”44 Of course, part of the administrative challenge facing publicauthorities in EECCA (and SEE) countries is to respect the political legitimacy ofcivil society actors as Aarhus rights-holders. For the ªve EECCA Parties facingpublic charges of non-compliance under the Convention, each submission tothe Convention Compliance Committee was made by a domestic NGO.Even for western European democracies and EU, though, it has beenclaimed that the interpretive discretion allowed to Parties by the Conventionhas diluted the force of its obligations. In particular, there are concerns thatrights to information and participation have sometimes been treated more nar-rowly in implementing legislation than the letter or spirit of the Convention.For example, EU Directive 2003/35/EC—transposing Aarhus public participa-tion provisions to EU Member States—restricts the right to participate in envi-ronmental decision-making to those affected by or with an interest in the deci-sion, rather than to any member of the public (as set out in the AarhusConvention).45 This has implications for information access, as the public par-ticipation provisions created by the Convention have corresponding informa-tion disclosure entitlements. Aarhus-enabled public rights to information andparticipation seem to be most at risk of truncation for decision-making withtransboundary environmental effects. While the Convention recognizes thatAarhus rights have effect regardless of nationality (Article 3(9)), this principle ofnon-discrimination runs against state practice not to grant decision-makingrights to foreign publics. Zwier argues that the activities of European exportcredit agencies expose most vividly the implementation gap here, as AarhusConvention rights to access information and decision-making extend in princi-ple to people abroad affected by the environmental effects of projects ªnancedby such agencies. Yet in practice, these foreign publics typically have no access toinformation on export credit agency activities impacting on their lives and live-22 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights42. Economic Commission for Europe 2000, 30–31. For the access to information pillar, the term“within the framework of national legislation” appears in Articles 4(1) and 5(2).43. Lee and Abbot 2003, 93.44. Stec 2005, 14.45. Verschuuren 2005, 38–39.lihoods.46 It is noteworthy also that, while the Compliance Committee did notuphold the public communication of an Albanian NGO47 alleging that the Eu-ropean Community (through the European Investment Bank) had been inbreach of information disclosure provisions, it did judge that the Bank had in-terpreted too narrowly what constitutes “environmental information” in rela-tion to ªnancing agreements.48Discretion to each Party “within the framework of its national legislation”is also expressed in Article 9(1) of the Aarhus Convention, concerning the ac-cess to justice for those persons who consider that their requests for informationunder Article 4 were not effectively met. Self-reporting by Parties on their imple-mentation of Article 9(1) reveals a wide range of administrative and/or judicialproceedings and bodies for review of appeals related to requests for informa-tion.49 The routing of appeals through divergent legal vehicles justiªes theºexibility of implementation allowed by the Convention, although this makesit difªcult to assess the equality of treatment of applicants between the Parties.So far the Aarhus Convention Compliance Committee has not recorded asigniªcant number of grievances over Article 9(1). Public communications havealleged non-compliance with Article 9(1) by three Parties—Kazakhstan, Bel-gium and Denmark. Of these, Kazakhstan was initially found by the Compli-ance Committee to be in breach of this access to justice article (by denying ap-peal standing to an NGO), but subsequently found to be in compliancefollowing the introduction of a new Environmental Code.50 The charge by anNGO that Belgium did not provide sufªcient standing for environmental NGOsfor appealing information refusals (and other aspects of the Aarhus justice pil-lar) was deemed not to be valid as it related to cases before the Convention hadentered into force in Belgium.51 Finally, the alleged non-compliance of Den-mark with Article 9(1) is currently under review by the Compliance Committee.This case is noteworthy as the communicant charges the Danish authoritieswith having no independent and impartial review body to address the relevantinformation disclosure appeal.52The Exclusion of Private Entities from Mandatory Information Disclosure DutiesAs already noted, Aarhus obligations fall directly on Convention Parties andconstituent public authorities, with privately owned entities having Aarhus re-Michael Mason • 2346. Zwier 2007, 228–229.47. See the documents regarding this case, reference number ACCC/C/2007/21, at: http://www.unece.org/env/pp/compliance/Compliance%20Committee/21TableEC.htm, accessed 20April 2010.48. European Commission for Europe 2009, 6–7.49. Economic Commission for Europe 2008b, 18–19.50. Decision III/6c, ECE/MP.PP/2008/2/Add.151. Economic Commission for Europe 2008c, 9.52. See the documents regarding this case, reference number ACCC/C/2008/28, at: http://wwwsponsibilities only insofar as they perform public functions deemed to be envi-ronment-related. Convention provisions on information disclosure addressingthe environmental impact of private operators (Article 5(6)) and products (Arti-cle 5(8)) are framed in a non-mandatory, aspirational fashion. To be sure, theobligation on Parties to establish pollutant release and transfer registers (Article5(9)), as developed in the Kiev Protocol, is regarded as an important Conven-tion mechanism for increasing corporate accountability.53 While the Protocolhas now entered into force, there are few signs within Convention practice of a“hardening” of information disclosure duties on private entities. In its 2008 re-view of implementation practice, the Aarhus Convention secretariat noted anextensive preference amongst Parties for voluntary eco-labeling and environ-mental auditing by the private sector, with mandatory disclosure of product in-formation generally limited to speciªc sectors (e.g. European energy efªciencyrequirements for household appliances and vehicles).54 Moreover, at the ThirdMeeting of the Parties in June 2008, in deliberations over the 2009–2014 strate-gic plan for the Convention, the European Union vetoed a proposal by Norwayto afford the public the right to access information directly from industry—aproposal inspired by community-right-to-know entitlements enshrined in theNorwegian constitution and Environmental Information Act 2003.55Excluding private enterprises from mandatory information disclosure du-ties is of course consistent with a market liberal model of corporate social re-sponsibility in which any information disclosure depends on the voluntary con-sent of the operator.56 According to a recent international survey, the well-established right to commercial conªdentiality established by this model rou-tinely disables access to information on pollutants from industrial facilities.57The right to conªdentiality of commercial information is also a justiªed legalbasis for public authorities to refuse requests for environmental informationunder the Aarhus Convention (Article 4(4)(d)). This exemption is tempered inprinciple by a public interest in information disclosure, but the great variationin its legal framing by Parties risks an inequality in implementation practice. Atleast in one case, there is also evidence that the discretion given to ConventionParties in assigning private sector responsibilities has signiªcantly eroded anAarhus mechanism of corporate accountability. Under the access to justice pillarof the Convention, members of the public “have access to administrative or ju-dicial procedures to challenge acts and omission by private persons and publicauthorities which contravene provisions of (. . .) national law relating to the en-24 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights.unece.org/env/pp/compliance/Compliance%20Committee/28TableDenmark.htm, accessed20 April 2010.53. Economic Commission for Europe 2004b, 4; and Morgera 2005, 144.54. Economic Commission for Europe 2008b, 13.55. Economic Commission for Europe 2008a, 19; and European ECO Forum 2008.56. See, for example, Gunningham 2007; and Garsten and Lindh de Montoya 2008.57. Foti et al. 2008, 78.vironment.”58 Thus, some Convention Parties—including Hungary, Latvia, andSweden—have legal mechanisms for facilitating the direct liability of private op-erators for non-compliance with environmental law (including informationdisclosure). However, in Regulation (EC) No. 1367/2006 applying the AarhusConvention to Community institutions and bodies, the European Union omitsthe reference to private parties in its legal codiªcation of this article. For the Eu-ropean Commission, this omission merely reºects the fact that Community in-stitutions or bodies are necessarily public authorities, but as this includes themacting in a legislative capacity, the exclusion is questionable.59 It reinforces amarket liberal perspective on regulatory authority in which private operators areshielded from administrative and judicial challenges issuing from civil societyactors.The Indeterminate Coupling of Procedural and Substantive RightsThe inºuence of a liberal rights-based paradigm also accounts for the indetermi-nate coupling of Aarhus procedural rights with the substantive right referred toin Article 1 and the seventh preambular paragraph of the Convention. In theªrst place, this reºects a liberal political aversion to prescribe any conception of agood life for individuals who are deemed to exercise freely chosen life-choices.60A Declaration made by the UK Government upon signing and ratifying theAarhus Convention reºects this, treating the human right to a healthy environ-ment as no more than an aspiration, and according legal recognition only to therights of access to information, public participation in decision-making and ac-cess to justice in environmental matters.61 Even for those Aarhus Parties that rec-ognize legally this substantive right, there is extensive uncertainty about its con-nection with the Convention platform of procedural rights. In the structuring oftheir national implementation reports, Parties are requested to follow a tem-plate provided by the Convention secretariat: this includes, at Section XXXII, therequest to report on how their implementation of the Aarhus Convention con-tributes to the protection of the right to live in an environment adequate to hu-man health and well-being. Of the 37 implementation reports received by theConvention secretariat in the second (2008) round of reporting, 13 contain noresponse to this request and the majority of the rest feature substantive rightstatements that are cursory and vague. Interestingly, the recurring claim inthose reports that construct a more signiªcant response is that Aarhus proce-dural rights contribute to fulªlling the substantive right by empowering civilMichael Mason • 2558. Aarhus Convention 1999, Article 9(3). Emphasis added.59. Commission of the European Communities 2008, 28; and Ryland 2008, 530–531.60. Anderson 1996, 10–12; and Wissenburg 1998, 16–17.61. Aarhus Convention 1999, Declarations and Reservations. The UK position arguably also reºectsa political reluctance to institutionalize an open-ended environmental right, although the ideo-logical effect is the same.society (Azerbaijan, Georgia, Slovenia, Ukraine), especially when that substan-tive right has national constitutional protection (Belgium, Finland, Germany,Kazakhstan).62Second, the absence of substantive environmental standards in the Con-vention is also a practical obstacle impinging on its commitment to humanrights, as it arguably reduces the scope for public deliberation on the appropri-ateness of environmental decision-making according to competing social val-ues.63 Information disclosure and public participation become more a meansfor legitimizing rather than interrogating governance institutions and for bench-marking public authorities against procedural check-lists rather than substan-tive environmental standards. Advances in information and communicationstechnologies, which allow citizens to utilize complex information in a politi-cally transformative way, may however increase the scope for citizens to explorethe conditions needed to realize environmental health and well-being for cur-rent and future generations. Article 5(3) of the Aarhus Convention requiresParties to ensure that environmental information progressively becomes avail-able in electronic databases that are publicly accessible, and a majority of Partiesare now reportedly using electronic communications tools.64 Thus, it is becom-ing more feasible for these Parties to advance “targeted transparency” in whichthe holders of Aarhus rights are able to make reasoned judgments on speciªcpolicy choices.65 Such moves would complement rather than supplant the gen-eral information disclosure provisions of the Convention, and are in keepingwith its aspirations to environmental democracy.ConclusionAarhus environmental rights have been lauded for increasing citizen access toenvironmental information, and thus helping to secure more transparent andaccountable regulatory processes. The widespread adoption of the Aarhus Con-vention is a testament to the successful diffusion of environmental protectionand democratic governance norms by UNECE. Parties to the Convention havegenerally embraced the access to information pillar as a signiªcant political re-source for citizens. I have argued here, however, that the information rightsgiven force by the Convention are rendered inconsistent in practice by threeproperties: 1) the discretion accorded to Convention Parties in interpretingAarhus rights; 2) the exclusion of private entities from mandatory informationdisclosure duties; and 3) the indeterminate coupling of procedural and substan-tive rights. These constituent properties generate a structural imbalance in the26 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights62. These ªndings are from the author’s survey of 37 national implementation reports submittedby end of 2008.63. Bell 2004, 103–104; and Jones 2008.64. Economic Commission for Europe 2008b, 12.65. “Targeted transparency” means transparency measures tailored to the decision requirements ofusers and decision-makers: see Fung et al. 2007, 39–46.articulation of Aarhus rights via a normative mismatch between the proceduraland substantive elements. The preoccupation in the Convention with proce-dural entitlements ªts comfortably with existing liberal expressions of civil andpolitical rights in international and the domestic law of most UNECE states,even as the bold declaration in the treaty of a universal human right to an envi-ronment adequate for health and well-being encapsulates a more far-reachingconception of social justice. In implementation practice, the tension betweenthese two perspectives is dissipated by the de facto marginalization of theAarhus substantive right.The historicity of Aarhus informational governance is central to under-standing the bracketing of its substantive environmental right. This is character-ized, above all, by a geopolitical context featuring the spread of market liberal-ism and representative democracy to Eastern Europe, as well as the embrace ofneo-liberalism by leading Western governments. Indeed, as Paul Langley ob-served at the start of the century, the rise of transparency as an organizing princi-ple in global environmental governance is closely associated with the partialprivatization of that governance, evident in the growth of voluntary forms of in-formation disclosure (e.g. environmental auditing and management systems).66As noted above, this ideological current has affected the treatment in the AarhusConvention of private entities, which (in contrast with public authorities) areshielded from direct information disclosure duties concerning environmentalinformation. The other articles in this special issue indicate that a structuredpreference for voluntary disclosure from private actors is typical of new trans-parency regimes in global environmental governance.67 While the motives forthe move to transparency vary across different sectors and regions68—in the caseof the Aarhus Convention, the rationale was democratic capacity-building forenvironmental governance—the routine disclosure of environmental informa-tion by private corporations is rarely prescribed. Yet in the Aarhus Convention,this sits uneasily with the substantive right to an environment adequate for hu-man health and well-being, as Aarhus information disclosure (and other) rightsare thereby cut off from the private constellations of power they must breach tobe effective.At the same time, even the mandatory disclosure duties on state-centeredactors in the Aarhus Convention are tempered by the discretion accorded toParties in implementing Aarhus obligations. Here the constraining normativecontext is a global governance realm in which there is no overarching politicalauthority, such that multilateral cooperation must operate on the basis of theconsent of states (and state-centered organizations) to rules that constrain theirsovereign authority. The architects of the Aarhus Convention judged the discre-tionary space allowed to Parties in interpreting Aarhus obligations to be neces-Michael Mason • 2766. Langley 2001.67. See in particular Dingwerth and Eichinger 2010; and Hauºer 2010.68. On this, see also Auld and Gulbrandsen 2010; and Florini 2010.sary for their effective uptake across diverse national governance systems andpolitical cultures. In practice, as noted above, this seems to have diluted theforce of Aarhus information (and participation) rights, particularly for decision-making with transboundary environmental effects, as foreign publics sufferfrom a lack of speciªcation of their Aarhus entitlements. Once again, theemancipatory intent of the Aarhus substantive right suffers, also because the dis-cretion afforded to Convention Parties includes the scope to interpret how tosquare Aarhus procedural obligations with the realization of substantive envi-ronmental justice. Given the potentially far-reaching ramiªcations of theAarhus human right to ecologically adequate conditions of life, it is not surpris-ing that few Parties have made more than a symbolic commitment to meetingit.ReferencesAarhus Convention. 1999. International Legal Materials 38 (3): 517–533. Available at:http://www.unece.org/env/pp, accessed 2 April 2010.Anderson, Michael R. 1996. Human Rights Approaches to Environmental Protection: AnOverview. In Human Rights Approaches to Environmental Protection, edited by Alan E.Boyle and Michael R. Anderson, 1–23. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Auld, Graeme, and Lars Gulbrandsen. 2010. Transparency in Nonstate Certiªcation: Con-sequences for Accountability and Legitimacy. Global Environmental Politics 10 (3):97–119.Bell, Derek R. 2004. Sustainability through Democratization? The Aarhus Conventionand the Future of Environmental Decision-Making in Europe. In Europe, Globaliza-tion and Sustainable Development, edited by John Barry, Brian Baxter and RichardDunphy, 94–113. London: Routledge.Commission of the European Communities. 2008. Aarhus Convention ImplementationReport: European Community, SEC (2008) 556. Brussels: Commission of the Eu-ropean Community. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/aarhus/pdf/sec_2008_556_en.pdf, accessed 30 March 2009.Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. 1979. International Legal Mate-rials 18 (6): 1442–1455.Dasgupta, Susmita, Benoit Laplante, and Nlandu Mamingi. 2001. Pollution and CapitalMarkets in Developing Countries. Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-ment 42 (3): 310–335.Dingwerth, Klaus, and Margot Eichinger. 2010. Tamed Transparency: How InformationDisclosure Under the Global Reporting Initiative Fails to Empower. Global Environ-mental Politics 10 (3): 74–96.Economic Commission for Europe. 2000. The Aarhus Convention: An ImplementationGuide. Geneva: United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.———. 2004a. Decision I/7: Review of Compliance, ECE/MP.PP/2/Add.8. New York:United Nations.———. 2004b. Report of the First Meeting of the Parties: Addendum: Lucca Declaration,ECE/MP.PP/2/Add.1. New York: United Nations.———. 2005. Synthesis Report on the Status of Implementation of the Convention, ECE/MP.PP/2005/4. New York: United Nations.28 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rights———. 2008a. Report of the Third Meeting of the Parties, ECE/MP.PP/2008/2. New York:United Nations.———. 2008b. Synthesis Report on the Status of Implementation of the Convention,ECE/MP.PP/2008/4. New York: United Nations.———. 2008c. Report by the Compliance Committee, ECE/MP.PP/2008/5. New York:United Nations.———. 2009. Findings of the Compliance Committee with Regard to CommunicationACCC/C/2007/21. New York: United Nations.Espoo Convention. 1991. Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in aTransboundary Context. Available at: http://www.unece.org/env/eia/eia.htm, ac-cessed 20 April 2010.European ECO Forum. 2008. Environmental Citizens’ Groups Score Victory on PublicParticipation. European ECO Forum. Press Release, Riga, (13 June 2008). Availableat: http://www.eco-forum.org/documents/061308-PR-MOPªnalday.doc, accessed2 April 2009.Florini, Ann. 2007. Introduction: The Battle Over Transparency. In The Right to Know:Transparency for an Open World, edited by Ann Florini, 1–16. New York: ColumbiaUniversity Press.———. 2010. The National Context for Transparency-based Global Environmental Gov-ernance. Global Environmental Politics 10 (3): 120–131.Foti, Elena, Lalanath de Silva, Heather McGray, Linda Shaffer, Jon Talbot, and JakeWerksman. 2008. Voice and Choice: Opening the Door to Environmental Democracy.Washington, DC: Word Resources Institute. Available at: http://www.wri.org/publication/voice-and-choice, accessed 27 March 2009.Fung, Archon, Mary Graham, and David Weil. 2007. Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promiseof Transparency. New York: Cambridge University Press.Garsten, Christina, and Monica Lindh de Montoya. 2008. The Naked Corporation: Visu-alization, Veiling and the Ethico-Politics of Organizational Transparency. In Trans-parency in a New Global Order: Unveiling Organizational Visions, edited by ChristinaGarsten and Monica Lindh de Montoya, 79–93. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.Gunningham, Neil. 2007. Corporate Environmental Responsibility: Law and the Limitsof Voluntarism. In The New Corporate Accountability: Corporate Social Responsibilityand the Law, edited by Doreen McBarnet, Aurora Voiculescu and Tom Campbell,476–500. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Gupta, Aarti. 2008. Transparency Under Scrutiny: Information Disclosure in Global En-vironmental Governance. Global Environmental Politics 8 (2): 1–7.———. 2010b. Transparency as Contested Political Terrain: Who knows what about theGlobal GMO Trade and Why does it Matter? Global Environmental Politics 10 (3):32–52.Hamilton, James T. 1995. Pollution as News: Media and Stock Market Reactions to theToxics Release Inventory Data. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management28 (1): 98–113.Hauºer, Virginia. 2010. Disclosure and Governance: The Extractive Industries Transpar-ency Initiative and Resource Management in the Developing World. Global Envi-ronmental Politics 10 (3): 53–73.Hayward, Tim. 2005. Constitutional Environmental Rights. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Jancar-Webster, Barbara. 1998. Environmental Movement and Social Change in the Tran-sition Countries. In Dilemmas of Transition: The Environment, Democracy and Eco-Michael Mason • 29nomic Reform in East Central Europe, edited by Susan Baker and Petr Jehlièka, 69–92. London: Frank Cass.Jones, Deiniol. 2008. Solidarity and Public Participation: The Role of the Aarhus Con-vention in Containing Environmentally Induced Social Conºict. Global Change,Peace & Security 20 (2): 151–168.Kiev Protocol. 2003. Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers. Available at:http://www.unece.org/env/pp/prtr/docs/PRTR_Protocol_e.pdf, accessed 2 April2010.Langley, Paul. 2001. Transparency in the Making of Global Environmental Governance.Global Society 15 (1): 73–92.Lee, Maria, and Carolyn Abbot. 2003. The Usual Suspects? Public Participation Underthe Aarhus Convention. Modern Law Review 66 (1): 80–108.Louka, Elli. 2006. International Environmental Law: Fairness, Effectiveness and World Order.Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Lucca Declaration. 2004. ECE/MP.PP/2/Add.1, (2 April 2004). New York: UN Economicand Social Council.Mason, Michael. 2006. Citizenship Entitlements Beyond Borders? Identifying Mecha-nisms of Access and Redress for Affected Publics in International EnvironmentalLaw. Global Governance 12 (3): 283–303.Morgera, Elisa. 2005. An Update on the Aarhus Convention and its Continued GlobalRelevance. Review of European Community and International Environmental Law14 (2): 138–147.Mol, Arthur P. J. 2008. Environmental Reform in the Information Age: The Contours of Infor-mational Governance. New York: Cambridge University Press.Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. 2008. Independent Evaluation ofAarhus Centres and Public Environmental Information Centres. Vienna: OSCESecretariat. Available at: http://www.osce.org/documents/eea/2008/10/33566_en.pdf, accessed 30 March 2009.Regional Environmental Reconstruction Programme for South Eastern Europe. 2007. Re-port of the Tenth REReP Task Force Meeting. Szentendre, Hungary: REReP Secretar-iat. Available at: http://www.rec.org/REC/Programs/REREP/docs/10th_meeting/meeting_report.pdf, accessed 30 March 2009.Ryland, Diane. 2008. Horizontal Instruments and Miscellaneous Issues. In Yearbook ofEuropean Environmental Law: Volume 8, edited by Thijs Etty and Han Somsen, 524–578. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Stephan, Mark. 2002. Environmental Information Disclosure Programs: They Work, butWhy? Social Science Quarterly 83 (1): 190–205.Stec, Stephen. 2005. “Aarhus Environmental Rights” in Eastern Europe. In Yearbook of Eu-ropean Environmental Law: Volume 5, edited by Thijs Etty and Han Somsen, 1–22.Oxford: Oxford University Press.Tietenberg, Tom. 1998. Disclosure Strategies for Pollution Control. Environmental and Re-source Economics 11 (3–4): 587–602.United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. 1995. Declaration by the Ministersof the Environment of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,Soªa, (25 October 1995). Available at: http://www.unece.org/env/efe/history%20of%20EfE/Soªa.E.pdf, accessed 2 April 2010.United Nations Economic and Social Council. 2005. Economic Commission for Europe.Meeting of the Parties to the Convention on Access to Information, Public Partici-30 • Information Disclosure and Environmental Rightspation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters. Reportof the Second Meeting of the Parties. ECE/MP.PP/2005/2/Add.2, (20 June 2005).Available at: http://www.unece.org/env/documents/2005/pp/ece/ece.mp.pp. 2005.2.add.2.e.pdf, accessed 2 April 2010.Verschuuren, Jonathan. 2005. Public Participation regarding the Elaboration and Ap-proval of Projects in the EU after the Aarhus Convention. In Yearbook of EuropeanEnvironmental Law: Volume 4, edited by Thijs Etty and Han Somsen, 29–48. Ox-ford: Oxford University Press.Wettestad, Jørgen. 2000. The ECE Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollu-tion: From Common Cuts to Critical Loads. In Science and Politics in InternationalEnvironmental Regimes, edited by Steinar Andresen et al., 95–121. Manchester:Manchester University Press.Wissenburg, Marcel. 1998. Green Liberalism: The Free and the Green Society. London: UCLPress.Zwier, Wienke. 2007. Export Credit Agencies and the Environment: Implications of theAarhus Convention for Export Credit Agency Accountability. In Yearbook of Euro-pean Environmental Law: Volume 7, edited by Thijs Etty and Han Somsen, 204–233.Oxford: Oxford University Press.Michael Mason • 31