ABSTRACT: 
Inclusive education is the attempt to educate persons with intellectual disabilities by integrating them as closely as possible into the normal structures of the educational system. As this necessitates various kinds of “inclusion through selective exclusion” (partial exemption from grades, special classes, special treatment by teachers, etc.), inclusive education is inherently faced by tensions. Drawing on sociological systems theory, we argue that these tensions can be assigned to three levels of the educational system – the level of the functional macrosystem of education, the level of the organization and the level of the individual (classroom) interaction. Analyzed in this way, it becomes possible to see that the dilemmas of inclusive education result from tensions between the three levels – e.g., inclusion into normal educational organizations requires exclusion from certain functions of the macrosystem of education and so on. The tensions themselves cannot be fully resolved, but they can certainly be addressed in ways that may be more satisfactory to individuals with special educational needs. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 in this article , we argue that the debate on educational inclusion could profit from a more thorough sociological look at these systems . 
 our main theses will be that: • both inclusion and exclusion operate at three distinct levels , that is , the societal , the organiza- tional and the interactional , and that; • important , almost paradoxical tensions exist between inclusion and exclusion at these levels .  
 
FULL TEXT: 
  © 2008 Association ALTER. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved. Résumé L’éducation inclusive vise à scolariser les personnes avec des déficiences intellectuelles en les intégrant le plus étroitement possible dans les structures ordinaires du système éducatif. L’éducation inclusive est confrontée à des tensions inhérentes aux diverses formes d’« inclusion par exclusion sélective » (exemption partielle de notation, classes spécialisées, traitement particulier de la part des enseignants, etc.). S’appuyant sur la théorie sociologique des systèmes, nous avanc¸ons que ces tensions peuvent être attribuées aux trois niveaux du système éducatif – le niveau fonctionnel du macrosystème de l’éducation, le niveau organisa- tionnel et le niveau de l’interaction individuelle (classe). À partir de cette analyse, il est possible d’observer que les dilemmes de l’éducation inclusive résultent des tensions entre ces trois niveaux – ainsi, par exem- ple, l’inclusion dans des organisations éducatives ordinaires suppose l’exclusion de certaines fonctions du ∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: mdi@hig.se (D. Michailakis). 1875-0672/$ – see front matter © 2008 Association ALTER. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.alter.2008.10.001 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 25 macrosystème éducatif. Les tensions elles-mêmes ne peuvent être totalement réduites, mais les fac¸ons dont elles peuvent être traitées peuvent certainement être plus satisfaisantes pour les personnes avec des besoins spéciaux. © 2008 Association ALTER. Publié par Elsevier Masson SAS. Tous droits réservés. Keywords: Inclusive education; Intellectual disability; Systems theory Mots clés : Éducation inclusive ; Déficiences intellectuelles ; Théorie des systèmes Introduction In modern welfare states such as Sweden, the education of persons with intellectual disabilities continues to be a contested subject. The idea of educating a portion of the population through partial segregation into a parallel school system, with permeable but nonetheless discernible boundaries to mainstream schooling, strikes many educators as problematic. Yet in our view, political and pedagogical calls for increased inclusion of pupils with special educational needs are all too often rooted in a poor understanding of key features of modern educational systems. In this article, we therefore argue that the debate on educational inclusion could profit from a more thorough sociological look at these systems. We will make our argument by means of drawing on the theory of social systems developed by German sociologist Niklas Luhmann. Our main theses will be that: • both inclusion and exclusion operate at three distinct levels, that is, the societal, the organiza- tional and the interactional, and that; • important, almost paradoxical tensions exist between inclusion and exclusion at these levels. For the benefit of the reader, we postpone all theorizing to the next section and devote the remainder of this introduction to a brief historic and political overview of the contested terrain. During the 1960s and 1970s, increasing criticism against the way children with disabilities received education emerged in some developed countries. It was argued that education for pupils with disabilities was organized in a segregated setting. Normalization and integration were for- mulated as objectives of educational policy. Already since the 1960s, school authorities in several countries had been obliged by law to give all children the opportunity to be enrolled in regular classrooms of their neighborhood school with age-appropriate peers, or at least to attend the same school. Means for achieving this goal were: • a common curriculum for all forms of education and also; • compulsory education irrespective of whether pupils are to attend ordinary schools or special schools. A result is that the majority of children with disabilities now take part in ordinary education or special classes organizationally related to ordinary schools. However, children with intellectual disabilities remain an exception. To include even these children into normal schools and normal classrooms is one of the aims of the political aspiration of “a school that suits every child”, and it has become one of the primary objectives of education policies of many developed countries. 26 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 Besides being supported by ethical, economical and political considerations, this policy is based on the assumption that it is not suitable to have an educational system based on a pedagogy of segregation. It can be questioned, though, whether the policy ever reached all school yards and changed all relevant administrative routines. A turning point in the debate on inclusive education was the adoption of the Salamanca State- ment. With the UNESCO’s “Salamanca Statement and Framework for Action on Special Needs Education” (1994), the concept of inclusion replaced the formerly widely used concept of inte- gration to describe the process of non-discriminatory education in the regular classroom. The Salamanca Statement proclaims inclusive education as the leading principle in special needs edu- cation. It states that “those with special educational needs must have access to regular schools which should accommodate them within a child-centered pedagogy capable of meeting these needs” (The Salamanca Statement, 1994: p. viii). Inclusive education is regarded as the most effective means of combating discriminatory attitudes and, moreover, to “provide an effective education to the majority of children and improve the efficiency and ultimately the cost effec- tiveness of the entire education system.” (ibid.: p. ix). The Statement is guided by the idea that the school system must actively adapt itself to the individual learning conditions of children with special educational needs in order to enable them to realize their potentials. From a sociological point of view, it deserves mentioning that the ambition to adapt the educa- tional system to the needs of all children is in accordance with the understanding of disability as environment relative. According to this understanding, the welfare state cannot simply concen- trate on a person’s intellectual and/or physical impairments, but must see to the kind of changes in the person’s environment that need to be made in order to enable him/her to participate in all rel- evant social functions. As an alternative to a one-sided, individualistic approach, the Salamanca Statement thus embraces the person–environment relationship. This implies interpreting prob- lems with reference to the wider environmental, social and cultural contexts in which they occur. It also implies that resources must be collected, policies implemented and programs developed. As long as the focus lies on the individual solely, learning difficulties are viewed as limitations of individuals, but with the focus on the person–environment relationship, learning difficulties become the result of a complex intersection of factors which all belong to a greater context, for instance, curriculum, school organization, teachers’ ability and readiness to respond to the diversity of understanding as well as the lack of self-assurance, and henceforth of motivation of disabled persons. According to this view, difficulties in receiving education as experienced by pupils with learning problems are a direct expression of the absence of opportunities to get an education which is physically accessible, adapted to their specific needs and at the same time supportive and focused on a strong belief in their potentials. The ideas formulated in the Sala- manca Statement have direct repercussions on the Swedish debate. Today, the dominant view is that inclusion/exclusion does not depend on pupils’ different abilities/disabilities but on the ways in which those differences are viewed and processed by society. Whether society develops toward integration/inclusion depends on those having the power to influence policy. It is thus a question of political values and the development of an inclusive pedagogy (Emanuelsson, 2004). In Sweden and elsewhere, schooling of children with intellectual disabilities is divided in two groups: those who receive education in special remedial classes and those who are included into regular classes. Although the former group is excluded from ordinary classes, it is considered to be included in the system of education, as the law on compulsory education applies. There are classes for children with intellectual disabilities at both comprehensive school and upper secondary school levels. The Education Act (Skollag, 1985: p. 1100) states that children with intellectual disabilities must enroll in regular classes. The municipality has to provide the support they need. D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 27 Most children with intellectual disabilities have such places nowadays. Children who are unable to attend regular compulsory school or upper secondary due to the severity of their intellectual impairment attend a special program for children with intellectual disabilities (särskola). Special remedial classes, adult education for adults with intellectual disabilities and training schools are school forms that are specially adapted for persons with intellectual disabilities depending on the severity of their impairment. Throughout the years, special remedial classes have developed towards a homogenization between regular classes and special remedial classes. The objective has been that pupils in special remedial classes should receive education that is as similar as possible with pupils in regular classes. Special remedial classes are intended for children who are deemed unable to achieve the standard learning objectives of secondary schools because of some kind of intellectual impairment. The ordinary compulsory school and special remedial classes follow the same curriculum, though children from special remedial classes get grades from special remedial classes. This is a way of marking that education of all children, regardless of learning development, follows the same fundamental values. About three percent of children at school age in Sweden, about 20,000 children, attend programs for children with intellectual disabilities. The responsibility for the decision that a child should be enlisted in special remedial class, once s/he has started school, lies on the school board, but parents must approve or oppose the enrollment of their child in special remedial class. Only about one percent of the children go to the special schools. Compulsory schooling for pupils with intellectual disabilities means a mandatory 9 years of school for all children and youths between the ages of 7–16 years. Beyond that, pupils are entitled to a 10th, non-compulsory, year to augment this education. Those who complete a program in the compulsory school for children with intellectual dis- abilities shall receive a certificate. Upon request, children may also receive a written assessment. Children who wish may also receive grades for years 8, 9 and 10. Grades are set according to student achievement in relation to the criteria given in the syllabi for programs for children with intellectual disabilities. Children who meet the criteria are awarded one of two possible grades: Pass, or Pass with Distinction. The grading scale for national and specially designed programs in upper secondary for children with intellectual disabilities also includes two grades: Pass, or Pass with Distinction. Children who do not achieve a passing grade receive anyhow a certificate for the program completed. A similar certificate is also issued to children with intellectual dis- abilities who take vocational training in an individual program. After they have completed their studies, children in special remedial classes get a certificate, indicating the education they have gone through. This certificate can, after request from the children’s parents, be amended with an assessment about his/her studying abilities. The assessment concerns the children’s abilities to carry on studies. Those who observe the segregation between special and regular classes from a pedagogical, ideological, moral or organizational perspective claim that it is accepted because it is assumed that the procedure which differentiates the two groups reflects the inherent potential of the individual pupil with respect to being/not being educable in regular classes. In their view, this presumption might be false. Specifically, it does not take into account in which way the school system is structured and in which way communication evolves within classrooms. Furthermore, it does not consider other important conditions in the school environment that affect a pupil’s ability to benefit from education. These critics argue that learning problems must be understood in a way that also takes the environment into account. Learning difficulties exist within the context of the classroom where the curriculum, the competence of the teacher, the resources available, etc. influence the degree to which pupils can be educated effectively (Porter & Richler, 1991). All this might be true. What these critics ignore, however, is that the educational system operates internally with certain 28 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 selection criteria that are in themselves discriminatory, namely pass/not-pass, transferable/not transferable to the next grade and others. One of the questions to be considered in the following is whether an all-inclusive education would destroy the internal logic of the educational system for the sake of pedagogical ideology. International standards not only influence the debate in Sweden, but form also the basis for Swedish special needs education policy. In one government report on children with special needs, “inclusion” was defined as the “process which maximizes interaction between disabled and non- disabled students” (SOU, 1997: p. 121). In earlier school practice (i.e., from the 1960s until the mid-1970s), inclusion was organized in such a way that teaching of children with special needs was more or less separated from ordinary class teaching. Thus, inclusion did not necessarily imply that disabled pupils were in the same classroom as non-disabled pupils, but it implied that the individual student’s needs became the focal point and that the school was obliged to compensate him/her in the form of remedial hours, separate teaching groups and the like. Differences between children were to be accepted and respected and ought not to impede teaching in the same classroom. In this perspective, differences between remedial teaching and ordinary teaching were played down and it was demanded (at least in principle) that all teachers have sufficient knowledge in order to teach all children. Segregation, in this perspective, consequently refers to physical separation and avoidance of contact. Thus, on this level, the debate concerns the relationship between disabled children and school organization. On the ideological and political levels, the debate on inclusive education is fuelled by the fact that persons with disabilities continue to live a more or less segregated life. Most frequently, this problem is attributed to the shortcomings of social systems. One of the social systems most routinely held responsible is the educational system. There is a close relationship, it is claimed, between education and inclusion in society. Education opens up a door towards a better life, or is at least a prerequisite towards a better life. This holds for everyone, including those who are disadvantaged because of social class, ethnic belonging or disability. Education of persons with disabilities has consequently been one of the target areas of disability research and policy (Barton, 1988). Traditional conceptions of inclusion There exists an extensive body of literature on the inclusion of intellectually disabled children as well as children with behavioral problems into the educational system. In this section, we shall briefly discuss conceptions of “inclusion”, and we will point out two problems that we see in them. Because excellent reviews of the literature on inclusion are already available (Emanuelsson, Persson, & Rosenqvist, 2001; Haug, 1998; Barton, 1988), we confine ourselves to a succinct discussion of three principal conceptions. First and probably most fundamentally, inclusion of intellectually disabled children as well as children with behavioral problems (from now on, we use the abbreviation “disabled children” to refer to these two groups) can simply mean that these children receive some form of socially organized education (Skolverket, 2003; Arnell-Gustavsson & Söder, 1979; Pijl, Meijer, & Hegarty, 1997). In the course of the 20th century, this form of inclusion has been achieved in most if not all Western societies. In Sweden, for example, since the early 1960s, even children with severe intellectual disabilities are assigned the status of pupils. Irrespective of how severe his or her intellectual impairment, there is virtually no child that never has the status of a pupil during his/her lifetime. For this reason, it is hardly surprising that inclusion in this fundamental sense is nowadays largely taken for granted in the relevant literature (Tideman, 2000; Rosenqvist & D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 29 Tideman, 2000; Gustavsson, 1998). Nevertheless, as we will argue in section 3, it is doubtful that children which fulfill the social role of pupils without ever acquiring grades can be seen as fully integrated into the educational system.Second, inclusion of disabled children is often interpreted as a condition where disabled children and non-disabled children are located in the same schools and taken care of by the same authorities (Skolverket, 2002). The philosophy of “integration” that dominated international policy making before the ratification of the Salamanca Statement in 1994 was largely aimed at this second form of inclusion. In section 4, we will argue that even this organizational form of inclusion faces a central dilemma – using only normal organizational routines in order to deal with disabled children and supporting them organizationally by means of special educational efforts are partly incompatible goals. A third line of thinking sees inclusion mainly as a question of letting disabled and non- disabled children participate in the same lessons. Based on this conception, a recurrent criticism of contemporary educational policies is that children with intellectual disabilities often attend nothing but special classes whereas non-disabled children attend nothing but normal classes (Gustavsson, 1998; Emanuelsson et al., 2001; Börjesson, 1997). If both groups of children shared all or at least some lessons, the argument goes, the children would be able to develop deeper mutual understanding for, or even sympathy with, each other. However, as we will try to show in section 5, even the normative ideal of shared lessons does not guarantee inclusion, because physical co-presence is not tantamount to communicative participation. For the sake of completeness, we mention that inclusion is sometimes interpreted more indi- rectly as special education that maximizes individuals’ integration into society at large (Tideman, 2000; Haug & Tössebro, 1998). Thus, education is seen as inclusive insofar as it succeeds in mak- ing disabled children “as normal as possible”, especially in terms of social status and employability. As sociologists, we note that this success depends on many other factors than just education. It is therefore not really possible to judge the inclusiveness of any country’s educational system on the basis of the degree to which intellectually disabled individuals who have completed education are included into other social spheres. For this reason, we will not consider this conception of inclusion any further. To summarize, we observe that inclusion of disabled children in schools is approached at three different yet mutually conditioned levels, namely at the societal, the organizational and the interaction level. We are going to follow this structure in our article and discuss inclusion in schools at those three different levels and point out the specific problems that are linked with each particular level. In the remainder of this section, we will mention two general problems that many existing conceptions share, independent of the respective level of analysis they focus on. First, while we agree that inclusion can occur at the level of society, organization and interaction, our main objection is that traditional conceptions are unable to free themselves from the topological connotations of the metaphor of inclusion. Being included is chiefly interpreted as being “together with” non-disabled children, at all three aforementioned levels. This topological conception of inclusion represents society, social organizations such as schools and of social interactions such as lessons naïvely as groups of human beings. In the systems theoretical framework on which the present article is based, social entities are understood in more abstract terms. According to systems theory, society is both a social system and differentiated into social subsystems – from function systems, like the educational system, via organizations, such as schools, down to the level of face-to-face interactions, such as school lessons. Social systems are understood as communication systems, that is, composed of a web of interlinked communications. As the fundamental operation of social systems, communication always involves at least two participants – one who receives the message and one who can be held responsible for producing it. Because 30 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 social systems are composed of nothing but communications, even the notions of social inclusion and exclusion need to be understood communicatively. Below, we shall propose an alternative concept of inclusion, a concept that we derive from Luhmann’s theory of social systems. Second, traditional conceptions are often expressly or implicitly moralistic (Emmanuelsson, 1976, 1995, 1997; Rosenqvist, 1994, 2000, 2001; Tössebro, 2004). An educational system that fails to sort out or discriminate among children because of their intellectual achievements is observed as “good”, any other system as “bad”. Correspondingly, education is seen as inclusive insofar as it minimizes selection. To defend this ambition, authors often draw on unquestionably important social values such as solidarity, equality, social justice or democracy (Haug, 1998). While we do not challenge the relevance of these values, we note that they can easily lead to dangerously simplistic suggestions for “improving” the social system of education. Mobilizing such values works almost effortlessly – one can pinpoint a norm and almost directly go over to criticizing existing structures. Unfortunately, this approach has weighty sociological predecessors. In many sociological theories (from Durkheim via Parsons to Habermas), social integration is assumed to be maintained through values. Morality or some common cultural values are what integrates groups or systems and “glues” them together. As far as Parsons is concerned, he holds that a social system can only maintain its balance if a number of basic functions are fulfilled, that is, social goals have to be set, adaptation and integration must be possible and the individual’s motivation must be maintained. For these functions to have the desired effect, the individual has to be socialized, and this socialization must be followed up by control (Parsons, 1951). The problem we see in moralistic finger-pointing is not that the values which usually are mobilized are not universal – after all, who could nowadays argue against tolerance or equality? Rather, the problem seems to be that a priori “critical” discussions of inclusion invite theoretically unfortunate simplifications. This effect is largely due to the communicative logic of values them- selves, which specify practically unreachable goals and thereby permit observing any state of the world as deficient relative to them. It is worth noting that social philosophers tend to know that all values are riddled with paradoxes (e.g., for the case of equality, Nagel, 1991). Because values can depict any concrete social situation as deficient, arguments that mobilize values may generally allow themselves to disregard practical considerations, such as the costs or the organizational implementability of inclusion policies. For this reason, the aim of this article is first and foremost to describe both the possibilities and the limitations associated with inclusion of disabled children at three levels of social order: • the societal level, which refers to the system of education and its relationship to other function systems of society; • the organizational level, particularly schools, and; • the interaction level, particularly the classroom. The next three sections follow this structure. We will also try to establish that inclusion faces central dilemmas at all three levels. Inclusion and exclusion at the societal level Nowadays, all the developed and even most of the developing nations possess large, complex and publicly administered social systems that take care of the education of children for up to 13 years of their lives. If one understands “inclusion” into these systems as simply meaning that children receive some form of publicly administered education, it is safe to say that at least the educational systems of the developed countries have become virtually all-inclusive. Possibly for D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 31 this reason, fundamental inclusion of intellectually disabled children as well as children with behavioral problems into the educational system is hardly ever seen as problematic – after all, they are being educated, whether or not the form of education they receive deserves criticism. In this section, we will draw on the theoretical framework of social systems theory in order to show that it is doubtful that intellectually disabled children are actually included into the educational systems of these countries. However, to understand how we arrive at this observation, it is necessary to consider first how the educational system relates to other function systems which are potentially capable of including/excluding persons. After a brief inspection of social systems theory’s views on this issue, we will argue that inclusion into a function system means being able to produce and to be addressed by communications that execute the system’s central social function. As it turns out, intellectually disabled children are excluded from education insofar as they are not observed in terms of one of the two central functions of the educational system – that is, the function of performance evaluation. Ever since Marx developed his theory of class conflict, social scientific thinkers saw and continue to see modern society as ordered by some form of basic differentiation. In social systems theory, especially as developed in the works of Talcott Parsons (1951) and Niklas Luhmann (1995), older ideas of hierarchical or stratified differentiation have been replaced by the idea that modern society is primarily functionally differentiated. In Luhmann’s most recent version (Luhmann, 1997), on which the following discussion is based, the primary social systems into which society is composed are politics, law, economy, science, religion, art and education (others are conceivable, such as health care and sports, but they have not been discussed as thoroughly by Luhmann). Each of these systems fulfills a specific though highly abstract function for society, this being the reason why systems theory refers to them as function systems. For instance, the function of the legal system is to stabilize expectations, which has nothing to do with creating justice, peace or harmony. A reliable legal system allows people to anticipate under which conditions they are likely to win conflicts, thus giving some of them incentives to start conflicts in the first place. To give another example, the function of the political system is to make power subject to social organization. Again, this function is far more abstract than social values such as balance of power or good leadership. Under the terrible rule of Saddam Hussein, the political system of Iraq fulfilled its function quite reliably. Function systems, as all other social systems in Luhmann’s theory, are communication systems. They are composed neither of people nor of actions, but of communications. What distinguishes function systems from other types of social systems – most importantly, organizations and inter- action systems – is the mode by which they acquire their unity as a system. Whereas interaction systems are unified by way of participants’ co-presence and organizations by way of member- ship or references to the organizational identity, function systems are unified by way of media of communication (e.g., money in the economy, power in the political system and so on). The media operate and are identified through unambiguous binary codes (payment/non-payment, power- ful/powerless and so on). Thus, every function system can be identified by means of a medium of communication and a binary code. Besides reducing complexity, communication media stabilize expectations and thereby prevent disappointments. Money makes access to commodities possible; power makes it possible to condition other people’s actions and so on. In many ways, the function system of education is special. First, all participants in educational communication have to be members in organizations – that is, schools or one of the authorities that administer or constrain communication in schools. This holds both for senders of educating communications (teachers), for recipients (pupils) and for those who are otherwise involved in the administration of educating communication (e.g., through involvement in the development of 32 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 curricula). The membership requirement does not exist in other function systems – for instance, one can be prosecuted without being a member of a legal organization, one can make a payment without having a bank account and so on. Second, in contrast to other function systems, the medium of communication which makes communication recognizable as educational is not an impersonal abstraction such as money (eco- nomic system), power (political system) or truth (scientific system), but a specific type of person: the pupil (Luhmann, 1991). All educational communication refers explicitly or implicitly to per- sons of this type (for an extensive discussion on this topic see Cederström, Qvortrup, & Rasmussen, 1993). Education aims at influencing and steering their psychosocial development, and it is its observable capacity of producing obedient, smart or creative pupils (socially desired results vary historically and cross-culturally) which tends to serve as the ultimate social measure of whether education is “successful” or not. In consequence, for education to be possible, the educational system assumes pupils to be perfectible and it assumes that it is generally possible to convey knowledge to them. Third, the educational system is also unique in that its evolution has been guided by its fulfillment of two central societal functions (Luhmann & Schorr, 2000), rather than just one: • the function of education, which involves exerting socially organized control over children’s secondary socialization, and; • the function of performance evaluation, which involves making children’s responses to educa- tional communication easily observable in terms of grades and school certificates. The first function, controlling secondary socialization, is certainly indisputable and has been acknowledged since antiquity (Aristotle, 2001: Book VII, chapter XV and Book VIII; Plutarch, 1989: chapter “On the education of children”). Quite fundamentally, to educate is to convey an existing body of knowledge and skills to pupils. As the latter are not just passive receptacles but active, self-determined and self-organizing beings, the process is likely to meet problems and resistance, but also likely to lead to the acquisition of secondary skills such as obedience, problem-solving, learning to learn and so on. These contingencies have led to the emergence of the scientific discipline of pedagogy, which tries to generate knowledge about the indeterminacies involved with educational communication. However, no deterministic method for overcoming these indeterminacies exists today, a problem to which Luhmann often refers as the “technology deficit” of education (Luhmann & Schorr, 1982). The second function, making pupils’ responses to education socially observable, solves a problem associated with the first function. Historically, as long as curricula remained simple, static and identical for all pupils, mere teaching sufficed to ensure that most pupils were educated and socialized in the right way. With today’s complex and ever-changing curricula, multiple levels of schooling (from preschool to elite secondary schools) and overwhelming amounts of choices (from courses to entire programs), the psychosocial results of education cannot be predicted from its socially defined contents alone. Thus, with few but relevant exceptions (more on that below), modern schools periodically attribute every pupil extremely simple, but therefore comparable grades which are supposed to summarize the pupil’s performance in individual courses, subjects, or even in his/her entire schooling career. Observation in terms of grades does not hold the pupil responsible for the fact that a grade has been given, but it holds him/her responsible for the specific value of the grade. Thus, whether the pupil passes, passes with distinction or does not pass at all is supposed to reflect a (largely inextricable) combination of intellectual abilities and learning efforts. It is not supposed to be a mere reflection of the objective difficulty of the evaluation. D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 33 Grades contain no reference to the taught contents – as Luhmann tellingly formulates it, the school system does not differentiate between sine and cosine, but between those who can handle that difference and those who cannot (Luhmann & Schorr, 2000). Grades and certificates not only differentiate pupils in terms of relative performance (e.g., a Swedish pupil who earned a VG has performed better than one who got a G), but also in terms of absolute performance (an F in the USA, a 5 in Germany, a U in Sweden all mean “not pass”). Although this absolute form of observation has often been criticized by pedagogy, it has the observational advantage of reducing complexity. Observations of individual performance depends less on the performance of all other individuals and more on the (however arbitrarily) measured performance of the individual in the test situation. It is safe to say that grades are deeply built into the organizational communication of institutions within the educational system as well as in the ways in which other social systems observe educated persons. Within the educational system, grades influence or determine the annual decisions about having to/not having to repeat the year, about the necessity of special remedial measures (e.g., additional or private lessons) and even about organizational membership (e.g., when achievements are deemed generally insufficient), among many other decisions. Because teachers are expected to be able to justify the grades they give, grades also grant schools a fundamental form of control over their teachers. Furthermore, as grades can be counted up and averaged out by simple statistical procedures, they grant authorities further up in the hierarchy a fundamental form of control over schools. Far from merely cementing existing structures, they provide a basis for deciding about improvements and reforms, and even for evaluating the success of reforms after their implementation. Outside the educational system, organizations such as firms, universities or public authorities frequently base their recruitment decisions on grades, and the “public” at large uses them to grant or withhold positive status evaluations. Whatever illusions one may have about the possibility of abolishing grades, it is clear that these and many other social applications of grades would (have to) be replaced by some functional equivalent – which, after all, would probably resemble the concept of grades to a considerable extent. For the descriptive purposes of this article, we choose to be realistic and to see grades eo ipso as a fact of social life. Systems theoretical reflections on the structure of the educational system and its relationship to society may provide the basis for a better understanding of what it means for persons to be included or excluded from the educational system. In principle, functional differentiation involves that each function system regulates inclusion/exclusion of individuals autonomously. In some systems, communicative prerequisites for inclusion are minimal – for instance, in order to participate in the economic system, it is formally sufficient to own, to spend or to receive a minimal amount of money. In other systems, inclusion is more restricted – for instance, in order to participate in scientific communication, it is normally necessary to undergo higher education and to acquire an academic degree. At least in developed countries, basic inclusion into the educational system depends originally only on whether a child has reached school-age. After the child has been a member for the required number of years or levels, basic inclusion begins to depend on how the educational system has observed his or her performance in school. For persons beyond school-age, re-inclusion requires formal employment as a teacher or a member of the administrative staff of schools or other educational authorities. If we confine ourselves to children of school-age, fundamental inclusion into the educational system of developed countries seems to be virtually total and exclusion virtually absent. For instance, in Sweden, since 1967, even children with severe intellectual disabilities are entitled to education. Thus, it seems fair to say that a modern educational system fulfills the first of their two functions – the function of education – with respect to almost every child of school-age. 34 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 However, the educational system fails to fulfill its second function – that of performance evalua- tion – with respect to intellectually disabled children. This observation is uncontroversial because the absence of performance evaluation is intentional. Since diagnoses of intellectual disability are partly based on school-like tests, intellectually disabled children are almost guaranteed to perform worse in intellectual problem-solving tasks than non-disabled children. What is more, performance often varies enormously within a group of children defined as intellectually disabled. In consequence, relative performance variations within such a group can largely be explained by the diagnosed severities of the children’s disabilities. In sum, this construction logic entails that it becomes impossible for the educational system to attribute performance differences of intellec- tually disabled children to contingent factors such as diligence or motivation. A basic intent of grading – holding individuals responsible for their achievements – is thwarted. We want to suggest that education’s renunciation of evaluating intellectually disabled children in terms of grades constitutes an unavoidable yet significant form of exclusion. We mentioned before that social systems theory provides a way of overcoming the topological connotations of the terms “inclusion” and “exclusion”. Social systems are observed as networks of self-reproducing communications. As a strict consequence of this theoretical turn, we conceive of inclusion of a person into a social system as participation (either as sender or receiver) in its communications. The assignment of grades is a key type of communication within the educational system. As intellectually disabled children are excluded from assignments of grades, they are also excluded from the aforementioned large set of communications inside and outside of the educational system that processes grades. Internally, the educational system has routinized this exclusion successfully. In contrast to normal education, special education focuses exclusively on the imparting of skills and knowledge, and it frames this function emphatically as “support”. Because grades are not applied, each year pupils in special schools can count on moving up to the next level, independent of the amount of skills and knowledge they have acquired. In their socialization, school is not an endless sequence of contingent and annoying examinations, but a “natural enclave” (Gustavsson, 1998) that protects them temporarily from the stigmatizing reactions of those who are excluded from this enclave. Even outside of the educational system, the exemption of intellectually disabled children from grading has been dealt with, routinized and thus has led to re-inclusion. In modern welfare states, the concept of disability regulates whether social resources are distributed according to ability or according to need. This idea is due to Stone (1985), who sees the disability concept as the welfare state’s solution to a distributive dilemma. From the perspective of the welfare state, disability does not reflect an essential property but constitutes a social construction. Through this construction, citizens are divided into those who are (at least temporarily) able to earn their own income and those who require permanent support. The main merit of the construction is that distribution in terms of performance and distribution in terms of needs are coordinated without one undermining the other. We add that this regulative success comes at a certain price. For coordination to be possible, the attribution of disability needs to be permanent. In order to discourage individuals who are able to earn their own income from claiming access to need-based benefits, the disability-construction needs to be – and usually is – highly inflexible. The identification as intellectually disabled is among the least flexible. Once one has received this identification, it is difficult to get rid of. The educational system sets the course for the social durability of this identification. For one, switching from special school to normal school is usually difficult and discouraged. What is more, exemption from grades renders identification as intellectually disabled even more durable, because the pupil now lacks a key prerequisite for proving that he or she has been misidentified. In a sense, much D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 35 of the welfare apparatus that exists for the support of intellectually disabled persons processes the inability or the unwillingness of the educational system to differentiate intellectually disabled children in terms of performance. If both education and society at large are so wonderfully capable of including or re-including intellectually disabled children, why should their exclusion from performance evaluations be observed as a problem? We mentioned that since grades and school certificates are so widely applied, not having them is highly consequential. For instance, exclusion from the labor market and inclusion into the welfare system are virtually guaranteed to occur. Thus, the problem – or rather, the dilemma – is not that society cannot deal with the partial exclusion of intellectually disabled children from education, but that this exclusion channels and patterns their life-courses in such foreseeable a way that they themselves (or, more likely, non-disabled observers) may experience debarment from the multitude of choices and options non-disabled members of modern society usually have. Inclusion and exclusion at the organizational level Organization systems represent another type of communication system. Social systems are characterized as organizations when they achieve unity by way of distinguishing persons into members and non-members. Membership is always selective and attached to particular condi- tions, which means effectively that organizations make communicative inclusion and exclusion dependent on these conditions. According to Luhmann, decisions are the principal type of com- munications that reproduce organization systems. As membership is selective, it also depends on decisions. A person, a committee or an organizational routine decides – usually conditioned by earlier decisions, such as statutes – that a person becomes a member. From a systems-theoretical perspective, schools are almost ideal-typical organization systems. We can discern different types of memberships within schools, such as teachers, administrative personnel, pupils or assistants. Membership in schools is regulated formally, as is membership in their organizational sub- systems. For instance, whether a pupil belongs into a special school, a normal school, a regular class or a special remedial class within a normal school depends on observations of the pupil’s intellectual ability/disability. The educational system is unique insofar as inclusion into it presupposes inclusion into some kind of organization (usually a school). No other function system creates this connection. In this section, we shall argue that even inclusion into organizations within the educational system is characterized by a central dilemma. Specifically, as long as intellectually disabled children are institutionally differentiated from normal children, measures for organizational re-inclusion of the former are likely to be accompanied by (possibly less visible but still momentous) forms of organizational re-exclusion. Historically, in Sweden but also in other countries, the total expansion of the educational system and its organizational differentiation came simultaneously. In order to include even intellectually disabled pupils into the system, special remedial classes (särskola) were established in two steps, 1944 for mildly and 1967 for severely intellectually disabled pupils. It is interesting to see that the system’s solution to inclusion was organizational differentiation, which might strike the observer as unnecessarily complicated. However, it can be argued that this was a rather simple solution, since the system of regular classes itself was not affected by admitting intellectually disabled children. Only special remedial classes had to be designed and new curricula as well as new teacher positions had to be established. In systems-theoretical terms, the fundamental function fulfilled by organizational separation of regular and special schools or classes consists of reduction 36 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 of complexity in the psychological environment of the organization, where the psychological complexity to be reduced is the effect of a tremendous heterogeneity of children’s abilities and disabilities. As is common for social systems, the educational system thus increased its own communicative complexity (i.e., differentiated normal from special schools/classes) in order to reduce complexity in its environment. Organizational segregation of intellectually disabled children co-constitutes their identity as intellectually disabled children. Children in special schools or special classes are intellectually dis- abled in virtue of the sub-systems they are members in. From the perspective of the organization, the category “intellectually disabled” is a construction that occurs in relation to the general school attendance mandate. Historically, when intellectually disabled children were incarcerated in spe- cial institutions during the great incarceration period of the 17th century (Stiker, 1999; Ravaud & Stiker, 2001), their institutional membership defined them – and made them identifiable – as idiots. Although psychological intentions may have changed from ignorance or contempt to goodwill, the same logic applies even today. School authorities define the knowledge or the well-adjusted behavior children should acquire and then divide children into those who are able to achieve these aims in regular ways and those who require special assistance in order to achieve at least a fraction of them. It is this sorting procedure that gives rise to special schools, special remedial classes and, ultimately, even special pedagogic. However, as indicated in a report from Swedish School Authorities, it is an extremely contingent procedure. It has been estimated that between the year 1992/93 and 2000/01, pupils in special remedial classes increased with 63% (Skolverket, 2003; Tideman, 1994, 1997a, 1997b) because decreased resources for regular classes entailed that more and more pupils were unable to function without additional support. Thus, although the procedure is highly contingent, its capacity to produce children with learning disabilities expanded tremen- dously in Sweden during the 1990s as an effect of reductions in public spending of the Swedish welfare system, reductions that were an effect of both economic regression and of distending the category of children in need by including even those with diagnosed with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Deficits in Attention, Motor Control and Perception (DAMP), Asperger’s Syndrome and other new diseases and disabilities. Within a systems-theoretical framework, what seems most interesting are the communicative consequences of the fact that a group of children is organizationally differentiated from all other children. When the distinction between educable/uneducable children was abolished from leg- islation in order to ensure the access to the educational system by all children, exclusion at the societal level was effectively replaced by exclusion at the organizational level. The distinction educable/uneducable applied at the level of the function system and excluded intellectually dis- abled people from any form of education. The distinction regular/special classes, on the other hand, applies at the organizational level and excludes intellectually disabled in a less obvious way. As bearers of different social identities and members of different classes, normal and intel- lectually disabled children are addressed by different organizational communications. Regular classes for normal children and special classes for intellectually disabled children are different communication systems – no matter whether they take place in the same building (or, as in Swe- den, sometimes even in the same classroom) and are administered by the same authority. The boundaries of communication systems are not defined by physical locations, but by communica- tive codes. In the case of classes, which systems theory observes as dependent sub-organizations in the organization system “school”, the delimiting criterion is membership. Non-disabled chil- dren are communicatively addressed and treated as members of regular classes, disabled children remain outsiders – and vice versa in the case of special classes. Intellectual ability is the condition for qualifying for membership in a regular class, whereas intellectual disability certified by the D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 37 school board is the qualification for attending a special class. These boundaries are communica- tively momentous. They define under what conditions pupils may speak of “us” versus “them”, they specify who spends most of his or her time with whom, they define what pupils are going to be together on school outings, among a myriad of other things. They also help upholding the communicative order of normal lessons. By being separated from special lessons, normal lessons are not just made simpler and more homogenous. Rather, it is also easier to hold each and every attendant of normal lessons responsible for the learning progress he or she makes. By being defined as normal instead of disabled, pupils do not have an excuse for not grasping the contents of a lesson, which means that the teacher can observe pupils as lazy (rather than being forced to observe him-/herself as overdemanding or pedagogically unskilled). During the last years, efforts have been made in Sweden to decrease organizational segregation of intellectually disabled children. This ambition is captured in the Swedish slogan, En skola för alla, meaning “One school for all” (Lööw, 2002). Critics of this slogan appeal to realism, claiming that severe intellectual disabilities cannot be compensated no matter what financial resources are available, and arguing that inclusion of intellectually disabled children would worsen conditions for non-disabled pupils (Lindblad & Popkewitz, 1999; Haug, 1998). However, in contemporary Sweden, proponents of the slogan clearly dominate, arguing among other things that any type of organizational differentiation which is based on the classification of pupils according to their abil- ities is a failure and must be attributed to teachers’ and pedagogy’s inability to handle the learning problems of children with special needs (Davidson et al., 2003). In general, pedagogy tends to regret the need for selection in schools, a tendency which is obvious in the debate on inclusion of intellectually disabled children into regular classes. Every selection, the argument goes, is against the “nature” of the educational system, since children can never be validly classified in terms of performance. Instead of focusing on selection, education should focus on finding different compensatory solutions, allocating extra resources and developing specially adapted programs in order to increase each individual’s possibilities for learning (Emmanuelsson, 1976, 1995, 1997; Emanuelsson, Persson, & Rosenqvist, 2001). Unsurprisingly from a systems-theoretical point of view, the ambition behind “One school for all” now turns out to be difficult to achieve (Tideman, 1994, 1997a, 1997b), as new codes and new uses of codes (e.g., pass/not pass) need to be designed, attitudes need to be changed, new pedagogical philosophies need to be developed, substantially more complex classroom interaction systems need to be handled by retrained teachers and so on. However, the real problem with the idea behind “One school for all” is not that it is diffi- cult to implement, but that it contains a false promise. We recall our earlier argument against a merely topological understanding of “inclusion”. Our alternative is to observe inclusion as a matter of participating in the communications that constitute a social system. In these terms, let- ting intellectually disabled children be members of the same schools or – to a limited extent – even the same classes does not entail that they lose their special organizational status. In fact, it can be observed that schools which let normal and intellectually disabled children share lessons find themselves forced to develop new organizational rules and routines in order to reinforce the administrative boundaries between the two groups (e.g., teachers are required to place differential demands on them, personal assistants have to be provided, among several other things). Thus, it seems fair to say that even inclusion of intellectually disabled children at the organizational level is characterized by a central dilemma. Put simply, inclusion into regular classes is (and has to be) formally compensated by assignment of a special identity/status that is functionally equivalent (at least from the perspective of the organization) to membership in a special class or even school. Probably the only legitimate hope contained in the idea of “One 38 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 school for all” is that the changed form of organizational exclusion permits interactive inclu- sion of intellectually disabled children. The next section will argue that even this hope is hardly justified. Inclusion and exclusion at the interaction level Inclusion and exclusion of children with intellectual disabilities occur not only at the macroso- cial level of function systems and the mesosocial level of organizations, but also at the microsocial level of individual interactions. At this level, the topological understanding of inclusion that we criticized above is probably most tempting, but also most misleading. Superficially, children seem to be included into classroom interaction as soon as they are allowed to participate. If one observes in this superficial way, all interactive troubles can simply be attributed to “negative attitudes” or lack of knowledge about disability (this attribution is problematized by Söder, 1990). Once again, we suggest that a communication-based understanding avoids the theoretical pit- falls of the topological conception of inclusion. Interaction systems are not physical arrangements but sequences of communications that are exchanged among co-present persons. Conceived in this way, participation in interaction is largely independent of the physiological or mental properties of participants (e.g., intellectual impairments) as well as of participants’ attitudes toward each other. Therefore, exclusion of disabled children from ordinary classes must be understood with reference to communication, rather than with reference to children’s differences regarding bodily or mental structures. Similar to the case of function systems, being excluded from a specific inter- action system means not fully participating as a sender or receiver in its communications. Unlike communication in function systems or organizations, participation and non-participation in inter- action systems are extremely fleeting events. For instance, a bystander is turned into a participant if one of the interactants asks him a question, and a participant turns into a non-participant when he takes his leave or when other participants begin talking over his head (the latter phenomenon occurring frequently in interaction between intellectually disabled and non-disabled individuals). Intuitively, inclusion and exclusion should refer to more permanent states than participation and non-participation. Although we do not think that it is possible to provide an uncontroversial oper- ationalization of interactive inclusion, we suggest the following tentative definition. A potential participant is interactively included if and only if (1) the participant is co-present and interactively addressable, (2) the participant has the formal or moral right to assume the role of the speaker and to make communicative contributions, and (3) the participant’s contributions are likely to make an impact on the interaction, that is, they are likely to be met with (not necessarily positive) replies. Criterion (1) involves that individuals are interactively excluded if they are forced to be absent or if they are co-present but involved in other interactions, asleep, etc. Criterion (2) implies that individuals are excluded if other participants deny them the right to take turns and to con- tribute to the interaction. If individuals fail to anticipate this prohibition and take turns anyway, the prohibition is effectively enforced by criterion (3), which states that individuals are excluded if it is unlikely that any contribution they make is going to be dignified with some sort of reply, including a negative reply, or any contribution is likely to meet nothing but a silencing reply (e.g., “shut up!”). Is it adequate to speak of “inclusion” if all one’s contributions meet criticism? We believe so, for the simple reason that it is necessary to distinguish between conflict and ignorance. A conflict is an interaction system which tends to force its participants to display a high degree of involvement and to counter any claims which strengthen the opponents’ and weaken their own position (Reich, 2003: chapter 4.3). Conflict is therefore a highly inclusive form of interaction. Ignorance, on the other hand, is an entirely different form. By being ignored, a co-present partic- D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 39 ipant is turned into a “non-person” (Goffman, 1967: p. 67) – an experience which can cause deep psychological stress, thus functioning as a strong sanction against unwanted contributions. In this perspective, a participant who speaks little but with great interactive consequences is interactively included, while a participant who speaks a lot but never gets a reply is interactively excluded. Co-presence is certainly a necessary condition for interactive inclusion, but it can now be seen that it is not sufficient. During the last decade, increasing social interaction between disabled and non-disabled chil- dren has become an explicit goal of educational policy in Western Europe as well as North America. The precise implementation of this goal varies strongly between countries, making cross-national comparisons difficult. In the following, we will focus on the case of Sweden, mainly because Sweden (together with other Scandinavian countries) has pursued the goal of interactively includ- ing intellectually disabled children more aggressively than others. Its successes, but even more its failures in achieving this goal are therefore particularly illuminating. In the last section, we mentioned that special remedial classes and regular classes in Sweden are now organizationally integrated in the sense that they both are under the authority of the municipality and that they share the same building. This format fulfills two of the three aims that were specified in a 1979 report by the Swedish Board of Education on the integration of intellectually disabled pupils, that is, the goal of physical integration and the goal of functional (e.g., administrative) integration (Tideman, 2004). It did not, however, increase what the report termed “social integration”, that is, it did not lead to normal pupils fully accepting disabled pupils as peers (Arnell-Gustavsson & Söder, 1979). This is illustrated by the fact that deeper social contacts and friendships between disabled and non-disabled pupils are still rare (Tössebro, 1999; Hill & Rabe, 1996; Tideman, 2000, 2004; Gustavsson, 2004). Researchers and policy-makers continue to be surprised by the fact that physical integration and exclusion from interaction with peers can coincide. We mentioned above that physical co-presence is only a necessary, not a sufficient condition for interactive inclusion. We will now look at the ways in which this discrepancy is reproduced and even reinforced in Swedish education. As in other countries, the Swedish approach to increasing and improving social interaction between disabled and non-disabled pupils that already go to the same school consists chiefly of letting the pupils participate in shared lessons. However, rather than simply merging two classes, which tends to work better for some subjects (e.g., physical education) than others, Swedish schools generally apply the principle of “individual integration” (Stukát, 1986; Haskell & Sparrow, 1989; Högberg, 1996). For each pupil who is registered in a special remedial class, an individual decision is made regarding which of his or her lessons he or she is going to attend in classes with non-disabled pupils (Wahlström, 2002). The pupil will then join this class but follow the curriculum of a related lesson in a special remedial class. This noteworthy format is possible because education in normal Swedish schools is nowadays mainly based on individual work (exercises, self-paced reading, etc.) rather than dense teacher–pupil interaction. Furthermore, an assistant must be present who supports intellectually disabled pupils in keeping up. There is little research on how disabled and non-disabled pupils actually interact in integrated classes, an obvious obstacle for such research being that there is almost no room for interaction in classes that require pupils to focus on individualized tasks. Jensen and Ohlsson (1991) find that 75% of intellectually disabled children that participate in such integrated classes state that they are teased or even hassled by other pupils and that non-disabled children do not want to play with them. Furthermore, 75% of intellectually disabled children are judged as having low self-esteem. Hill and Rabe (1987) report that intellectually disabled pupils also have low status in integrated classes. 40 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 In absence of more fine-grained research, we hypothesize that certain interactive prob- lems and tensions are likely to occur in integrated classes. In virtue of its design, the format of individual integration fails to increase and improve social interaction as well as lasting social contacts between the two types of pupils, essentially because there are few possibil- ities for interaction to develop around questions, shared interests or exercises. In addition, the simultaneous relevance of two different subject matters creates tensions and routinely forces the teacher to prioritize the normal curriculum. Instead of including disabled pupils, the format thus marks them not only as outsiders, but even as a burden on the rest of the class. This problem is, if anything, reinforced by the fact that the performance of normal pupils is subject to consequential evaluations, whereas the perceived outsiders are spared from them. In terms of the quantity of actual communicative exchanges, hardly more intergroup inter- action appears to take place during recesses in the schoolyard – and if it takes place, it tends to be extremely short and fleeting (Göransson, 1995). Nordström (2002) finds that intergroup interaction, if it occurs, is often vertical or even patronizing, and that non-disabled children some- times overtly avoid it by treating disabled children as non-persons. Horizontal interaction, mutual support and solidarity are largely confined to children of the same age and with same or similar intellectual disabilities. This overt exclusion from social interaction cannot be attributed to nega- tive attitudes, among other reasons because attitudes to intellectually disabled children derive to a large extent from interaction with these children (Hill & Rabe, 1994). At least in part, exclusion emerges from the types of interaction in which children usually engage. For instance, as reported by Nordström (2002), one important nucleus of intergroup conflicts and negative attitudes are disputes over game rules. Failure to play by, and sometimes to grasp, game rules creates not only conflicts, but interrupts the flow of the interaction (Ytterhus, 2002). Therefore, a stable finding is that intellectually disabled children constitute less attractive companions in play than non-disabled children. Exclusion at the interaction level is often already manifesting in primary school, but it accen- tuates as the children get older. In a study conducted by the Swedish Board of Education, teachers and schoolmasters expressed that integration of intellectually disabled children into normal classes becomes more difficult the older the children get (Wahlström, 2002; Nordström, 1997, who reports similar results from international research). Again, it would be easy to mobilize attitudinal or other psychological reasons in order to explain this finding. However, it must be kept in mind that differ- ent paces of learning, different curricula and different socialization experiences (being/not being subjected to constant evaluations in terms of grades) reinforce intellectual differences between the two groups over time, thus contributing to the erosion of the common ground which seems to be necessary for the development of mutual understanding as well as strong and lasting social ties (Clark, 1993). Thus, we conclude that the functional logic of the school system itself undermines the now- popular efforts to increase interactive inclusion by letting intellectually disabled and non-disabled pupils share classes. Once more, we describe this condition in terms of a dilemma – given the largely unreformable shape of contemporary Western educational systems, physical inclusion leads to interactive exclusion. In the case of Sweden, the time might be ripe to allow intellectually disabled children to stay in the ghettoized but safe “natural enclaves” (Gustavsson, 1998) of their classrooms. However, if physical co-presence fails to lead to interactive inclusion, how can phys- ical separation be a remedy? To warrant policy recommendations, more research on interaction between intellectually disabled and non-disabled children inside and outside the classroom is certainly needed. D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 41 Conclusion There can be no doubt that an individual’s full inclusion into the educational system of a mod- ern Western society is crucial for his or her participation in many other function systems, such as economy, politics, science and even art. At the societal level, full inclusion means that grades and certificates provide largely reliable information about the individual’s educational performance. At the organizational level, full inclusion guarantees that the individual is not segregated adminis- tratively from those pupils who are defined as normal. At the interaction level, full inclusion means that the individual is exposed to normal subject matters and a normal secondary socialization. For some time now, politicians and pedagogues have argued that the inclusion of intellectually disabled individuals into society might be improved by way of strengthening their inclusion into the educational system. Underlying this argument, there seems to be the vision of a cascade of inclusion. First, abolishing the distinction between educable/uneducable children would lead to full inclusion of intellectually disabled children at the level of the function system. Then, elim- inating the distinction between normal/special schools as well as normal/special classes would tear down administrative barriers to organizational inclusion of intellectually disabled children. Finally, putting an end to discriminatory treatment of intellectually disabled children during inte- grated lessons would allow these children to participate in normal interaction with non-disabled children. As an overall result, the distinction between intellectually disabled and normal children would cease to matter; both groups would have equal opportunities for participation in society and share respect for each other. In this article, we have tried to show that exclusion prevails at all three levels, although in more subtle ways than visionaries might previously have imagined (or feared). At the societal level, basic inclusion of intellectually disabled children into the educational system comes at the price of their exclusion from one of the central functions of education, that is, exclusion from performance evaluations. At the organizational level, inclusion into normal schools or normal classes is bought at the expense of more individualistic but nonetheless momentous forms of administrative differentiation, such as assignment of a “special status”. At the interaction level, inclusion into normal lessons exposes intellectually disabled children to frequently discriminatory, sometimes even stigmatizing treatment of normal children or even teachers. In sum, this article argues that the idea of “One school for all” and the vision of a cascade of inclusion are illusionary. On the contrary, inclusion of intellectually disabled children into the educational system leads to re-exclusion at all social levels. Even worse, what seems to have emerged deserves being called a cascade of exclusion, as attempts at strengthening inclusion have led to new forms of exclusion at the respective next levels. Thus, basic inclusion at the societal level has triggered new forms of exclusionary differentiation at the organizational level. Elimination of these new differentiations has forced normal and intellectually disabled children to interact more than before, but these interactions hardly deserve being called “inclusive”. It seems fair to ask whether the idea of “One school for all” was consistent in the first place. We believe that it involves a contradiction to identify one group of pupils as different from the rest and to pretend afterwards that the educational system in general and schools in particular are able to apply and ignore this distinction at one and the same time. However, we also realize that while societal and organizational re-inclusion are ultimately paradoxical visions, interactive re-inclusion is not. While the educational system and schools are obliged to treat normal and intellectually disabled children differently, the children themselves – as well as their teachers – are not. However, as we have argued above, co-presence is not a sufficient condition for being included into an interaction system. Furthermore, as intellectually disabled children are organizationally 42 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 marked as abnormal, those children who are not marked as abnormal usually have no reason to ignore the institutionalized abnormality of intellectually disabled children. The current debate on inclusion is – voluntarily or involuntarily – conditioned to respond to the ongoing exclusion of intellectually disabled children from normal interactions with normative arguments. This reflex does not and cannot do anything else than express moral indignation over the current situation. However, indignation “no longer mobilizes any hope, taken for itself, it only expresses dissatisfaction” (Luhmann & Schorr, 2000: p. 19). From a scientific point of view, it is not going to provide us with new solutions. We therefore believe that normative arguments are unsatisfactory. In a functionally differentiated society, morality fulfills residual functions – for instance, securing people’s motivation, synchronizing their commitments, initiating and focusing conflicts. Thus, moral norms are important, but seen from the point of view of how educational communication is structured and organized, moral norms and values play a marginal role. Education is not based on moral norms; it is not integrated on the basis of a consensus regarding values. Rather, it is integrated on the basis of functions that it fulfills despite the fact that those that participate in its communications subscribe to different moral norms. We chose to label the problems that we discussed in this article as “dilemmas” because we do not believe that they can be solved. They are not just practical problems, but products of conflicting ambitions, logical paradoxes resulting from a simultaneous will to exclude and to include. However, while social dilemmas cannot be solved, they can be acknowledged and dealt with – and most importantly, their negative impact on the quality of life of certain individuals can be eased. Perhaps the single most important step toward such reconciliation is for politicians and pedagogues to concede that while disabilities may be a social construction, impairments are not. Sufficiently significant differences in intellectual ability will always be observable, not only for other psychic systems but also for social systems such as schools or commercial businesses. As it is unlikely that the quality of life of individuals with reduced intellectual abilities can be optimized through their total inclusion into the education system, possibly the most important question is what pragmatic mixture of inclusion and selective exclusion is best suited to maximize both the happiness of individuals and the functionality of the educational system. References Aristotle (2001). The Politics. Stalley, R.F. (Ed.), Sir Barker, E. (translator). Oxford World’s Classics. Arnell-Gustavsson, U., & Söder, M. (1979). Särskolans integrering i den vanliga skolan. Sociologiska institutionen, Uppsala Universitet. Barton, L. (1988). The Politics of Special Educational Needs. London: Falmer Press. Börjesson, M. (1997). Om skolbarns olikheter. Diskurser kring’särskilda behov’ i skolan – med historiska jämförelser. Stockholm: Skolverket/Liber. Cederström, J., Qvortrup, L., & Rasmussen, J. (Eds.). (1993). Laering, samtale, organisation – Luhmann og skolen. Unge Paedagoger: Köbenhavn. Clark, H. (1993). Arenas of Language Use. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. Davidson, S. et al. (2003). Motion till Riksdagen 2003/04, p. Ub377, Utbildningsutskottets betänkande 2002/03, p. UbU8. Emmanuelsson, I. (1976). Utbildning för anpassade. Stockholm: Rabén & Sjögren. Emmanuelsson, I. (1995). Integrering och konsekvenser av integreringsideologien. In P. Haug (Ed.), Specialpedagogiske utfordringar (pp. 17–39). Oslo: Universitetsförlaget. Emmanuelsson, I. (1997). En skola för all – en hotad målsättning. In K. Sonnander, M. Söder, & K. Ericsson (Eds.), Forskare om utvecklingsstörning. Pewrspektiv – kunskaper – Utmaningar. En vänbok till Lars Kebbon (pp. 32–56). Uppsala: Uppsala Universitets förlag. Emanuelsson, I., Persson, B., & Rosenqvist, J. (2001). Forskning inom det specialpedagogiska området – en kunskap- söversikt. Stockholm: Liber. D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 43 Emanuelsson, I. (2004). Integrering/inkludering i svensk skola. In Jan Tössebro (Ed.), Integrering och inkludering (pp. 101–120). Lund: Studentlitteratur. Goffman, E. (1967). The Nature of Deference and Demeanor. In E. Goffman (Ed.), Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face- to-Face Behavior (pp. 47–96). New York: Doubleday Anchor. Gustavsson, A. (1998). Inifrån utanförskapet. Stockholm: Johansson & Skyttmo. Gustavsson, A. (2004). På spaning efter det levda medborgarskapet. In J. Tössebro (Ed.), Integrering och inkludering (pp. 141–168). Lund: Studentlitteratur. Göransson, K. (1995). De liknade varandra men inte mer än andra. Begåvningshandikapp och interpersonellt samspel. Stockholm: HSL förlag. Haskell, S. H., & Sparrow, T. (1989). A survey of teacher attitudes towards integration of disabled children into regular schools in Sweden. Göteborgs universitet. Institutionen för pedagogik. Haug, P., & Tössebro, J. (Eds.). (1998). Theoretical Perspectives on Special Education. Kristiansand: Höyskole Forlaget. Haug, P. (1998). Pedagogiskt dilemma: Specialundervisning. Stockholm: Skolverket. Hill, A. & Rabe, T. (1987). Psykisk utvecklingsstörda barn i kommunal förskola: Integrering belyst ur ett socialpsykologiskt perspektiv. Studies in Educational Sciences, 61. Göteborg: Göteborgs universitet. Hill, A., & Rabe, T. (1994). Barns syn på barn: en studie av barns socialisation av attityder och värderingar av andra barn med särskild tonvikt på barn med funktionshinder. Göteborgs universitet. Institutionen för pedagogik. Hill, A., & Rabe, T. (1996). Boken om integrering: Idé, teori, praktik. Malmö: Corona. Högberg, B. (1996). Det handikappade barnet I vuxenvärlden: en reﬂektion over möjligheten att mötas. Doktorsavhan- dlingar från Pedagogiska institutionen. Stockholms universitet. Jensen, L. & Ohlsson, I. (1991). Integrering av särskoleelever i grundskolan. Hur fungerar det? Pedagogisk metodisk utveckling, serie A nr.21. Högskolan i Kristianstad. Lindblad, S. & Popkewitz, T.S. (Eds.), (1999). Education Governance and Social Integration and Exclusion: National Cases of Educational Systems and Recent Reforms. Uppsala reports on Education 34. Department of Education Uppsala University. Luhmann, N. (1991). “Das Kind als Medium der Erziehung” in Zeitschrift für Pädagogik. Nr.1. Luhmann, N. (1995). Social Systems. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Luhmann, N. (1997). Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. Luhmann, N., & Schorr, K.-E. (1982). Das Technologiedefizit der Erziehung und die Pädagogik. In N. Luhmann & K.-E. Schorr (Eds.), Zwischen Technologie und Selbstreferenz. Fragen an die Pädagogik (pp. 11–40). Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. Luhmann, N., & Schorr, K.-E. (2000). Problems of Reﬂection in the System of Education. Waxman Münster. Lööw, L. (2002). Disability Ombudsman in Sweden. “En skola för alla” Sydsvenska Dagbladet, July 2nd. Nagel, T. (1991). Equality and Partiality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Nordström, I. (1997). “Han passer inte in någonstans” Kartläggning av den psykiska hälsan hos lindrigt utvecklingsstörda barn/ungdomar i skolåldern. Rapport 37. Psykiatri och Habilitering. Örebro Läns Landsting. Nordström, I. (2002). Samspel på jämlika och ojämlika villkor. Om lindrigt utvecklingsstörda skolbarns relationer till kamrater. Pedagogiska institutionen. Stockholms universitet. Parsons, T. (1951). The Social System. Glencoe: Free Press. Pijl, S. J., Meijer, C., & Hegarty, S. (1997). Inclusive Education. A Global Agenda. London: Routledge. Plutarch (1989). Moralia. Babbitt, F.C. (translator). Loeb Classical Library. Porter, L. G., & Richler, D. (1991). Changing Canadian schools: Perspectives on disability and inclusion. Toronto: The Roeher Institute. Ravaud, J.-F., & Stiker, H. J. (2001). Inclusion/Exclusion. An Analysis of Historical and Cultural Meanings. In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman, & M. Burry (Eds.), Handbook of Disability Studies (pp. 490–514). London: Sage Publications. Reich, W. (2003). Dialogue and Shared Knowledge: How Verbal Interaction Renders Mental States Socially Observable. Doctoral dissertation, Uppsala University. Rosenqvist, J. (1994). The concept of integration: An etymological scrutiny of current terms and a recommendation of a less restrictive one. Lund: Department of Education, University of Lund. Rosenqvist, J., & Tideman, M. (2000). Skolan, undervisningen och elever med funktionshinder. Ett diskussionsunderlag på väg mot en teori om specialpedagogik. Malmö: Institutionen för pedagogik, Lärarhögskolan, Malmö högskola. Rosenqvist, J. (2001). Aktuell svensk forskning om särskola. Högskolan i Malmö.Skolverket. [The Swedish National Agency for Education] 2002. I särskola eller i grundskola? Skolverkets rapport nr 216. Kalmar. Lenanders. Skollag (1985). Svensk författningssamling. http://www.riksdagen.se/Webbnav/index.aspx?nid=3911&bet=1985:1100, p. 1100 SFS 1985:1100 [accessed on 12 December 2008], SFS 2003:415 [accessed on 12 December 2008]. 44 D. Michailakis, W. Reich / ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 24–44 Skolverket [The Swedish National Agency for Education] (2003). The Swedish School System [On-line]. Available: http://www.skolverket.se [accessed on 12 December 2008]. Skolverket. 2002. I särskola eller i grundskola? Skolverkets rapport nr 216. Stockholm. Liber SOU (1997). Skolfrågor – Om skola i en ny tid. Statens Offentliga Utredningar. Utbildningsdepartementet. Stockholm, p. 121. Stiker, H. J. (1999). A History of Disability. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. Stone, A. D. (1985). The Disabled State. London: Macmillan. Stukát, K.-G. (1986). Svensk specialundervisning: intentioner och realiteter i ett utvecklingsperspektiv. Göteborgs uni- versitet. Institutionen för pedagogik. Söder, M. (1990). “Fördom eller ambivalens? Värderingar och attityder till funktionsnedsättning och handikapp” Social Forskning. Nr. 2. Tideman, M. (1994). Särskolan och de särskilda omsorgerna i Halland 1990–1993. Högskolan i Halmstad. Tideman, M. (1997). Lever som andra? Om kommersialiseringen och levnadsförhållanden för personer med utveck- lingsstörning. Wigforssinstitutet för välfärdsforskning: Halmstad. Tideman, M. (1997b). Lever som andra? Om kommersialiseringen och levnadsförhållanden för personer med utveck- lingsstörning. Rapport nr 3, Wigforssinstitutet, Högskolan i Halmstad. Tideman, M. (2000). Normalisering och kategorisering. Stockholm: Johansson & Skyttmo förlag. Tideman, M. (2004). Social teller isolerat integrerad? In J. Tössebro (Ed.), Integrering och inkludering (pp. 121–140). Lund: Studentlitteratur. The Salamanca Statement and Framework for Action for Special Needs Education. UNESCO 1994. Tössebro, J. (1999). Da tidevannet snudde: Personperspektiver på utviklingshemming og tjenester for utviklingshemmete under framveksten av dagens politik: 1960–1975. In M. Dalen, A. Rygvolt, & R. Tangen (Eds.), Mangfold og samspil – om minoriteter og avvik i familie og samfunn. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. Tössebro, J. (Ed.). (2004). Integrering och inkludering. Lund: Studentlitteratur. Wahlström, K. (2002). I särskola eller i grundskola? Stockholm: Skolverket. Ytterhus, B. (2002). Barns sociala samvaro – Inklusion och exklusion i förskolan. Stockholm: Studentlitteratur. 