ABSTRACT: 
This paper outlines patterns of kin classi® cation and marriage in seven regions of Australia. It considers the implications of differences in those patterns for such features of economy and society as levels of polygyny, the structure and dynamics of country groups, the form of exchange networks and, very brie ̄ y, cosmologies and the roles of religious leaders. The analysis demonstrates certain associations between modes of kin classi® cation and organisational forms such as moieties. Finally, the paper draws conclusions about the environmental and institutional conditions for differences in `levels’ of polygynous marriage, as well as their political and economic consequences. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this paper outlines patterns of kin classi® cation and marriage in seven regionsof Australia . 
 it considers the implications of differences in those patterns for such features of economy and society as levels of polygyny , the structure anddynamics of country groups , the form of exchange networks and , very brie¯ y,cosmologies and the roles of religious leaders . 
 the analysis demonstrates certainassociations between modes of kin classi® cation and organisational forms suchas moieties . finally , the paper draws conclusions about the environmental andinstitutional conditions for differences in l`evels 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Western UniversityScholarship@WesternAboriginal Policy Research Consortium International (APRCi)2002Seven Aboriginal marriage systems and theircorrelatesIan KeenFollow this and additional works at: https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/aprciPart of the Social and Cultural Anthropology CommonsCitation of this paper:Keen, Ian, "Seven Aboriginal marriage systems and their correlates" (2002). Aboriginal Policy Research Consortium International(APRCi). 336.https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/aprci/336This article was downloaded by: [University of Western Ontario]On: 20 December 2012, At: 11:32Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,London W1T 3JH, UKAnthropological Forum:A Journal of SocialAnthropology andComparative SociologyPublication details, including instructions forauthors and subscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/canf20Seven Aboriginal marriagesystems and their correlatesIan KeenVersion of record first published: 09 Jun 2010.To cite this article: Ian Keen (2002): Seven Aboriginal marriage systems andtheir correlates, Anthropological Forum: A Journal of Social Anthropology andComparative Sociology, 12:2, 145-157To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/006646702320622770PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLEFull terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsThis article may be used for research, teaching, and private studypurposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in anyform to anyone is expressly forbidden.The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make anyrepresentation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up todate. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses shouldbe independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall notbe liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs ordamages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly inconnection with or arising out of the use of this material.Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 Anthropological Forum, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2002Seven Aboriginal marriage systems and their correlatesIAN KEENIntroductionThis paper outlines patterns of kin classi® cation and marriage in seven regionsof Australia. It considers the implications of differences in those patterns forsuch features of economy and society as levels of polygyny, the structure anddynamics of country groups, the form of exchange networks and, very brie¯ y,cosmologies and the roles of religious leaders. The analysis demonstrates certainassociations between modes of kin classi® cation and organisational forms suchas moieties. Finally, the paper draws conclusions about the environmental andinstitutional conditions for differences in l`evels’ of polygynous marriage, aswell as their political and economic consequences.Comparative studies of Aboriginal kinship and marriage have been ratherrestricted in scope. In his classic studies, A. R. Radcliffe-Brown (1913, 1930 ± 31)looked for associations between forms of kin classi® cation and marriage rules,while LeÂ vi-Strauss’s (1969) typology of marriage exchange systems de® nesexchange somewhat narrowly. Other comparative studies have concentrated onkinship semantics (Schef¯ er 1978) or modelled systems of kinship and marriageas relations among patri® lial groups (Turner 1980). Hamilton’s (1980) explorationof the wider social implications of differences in marriage systems is limited toa comparison between the eastern Western Desert and Arnhem Land. This paperattempts to broaden the range of comparison.The seven cases (Table 1) display immediate contrasts in a number ofdimensions. First, they relate to very different environments and resources.Second, the cases represent contrasting culture-areas and language families, bothPama-Nyungan and non-Pama-Nyungan. Third, they sample contrasting socialorganisational elements, from patri-moieties and patri-groups to gender totemsand generation moieties. These are not bounded societies, and not all their nameshave the same status, but I use them to identify distinct local s`ystems’.The broader study on which this paper is based shows that, in spite ofdifferences in ecology and technology, the basics of the organisation of produc-tion and distribution were similar in the seven regions, while kinship andmarriage, cosmology, and the ownership of land and waters varied. Differencesin marriage bear a strong relationship to some of the differences in the structureof what Sutton (1999) calls `country groups’ and exchange systems, feeding backinto the organisation of production, as well as exchange.ISSN 0066-4677 print/ISSN 1469-2902 online/02/020145-13 DOI: 10.1080/006646702200001443 5Ó 2002 Department of Anthropology, The University of Western AustraliaDownloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 146 ANTHROPOLOGICAL FORUMTable 1. Peoples and environmentsaPopulationPeople Region Environment densityKuÃ nai (Pama- Gippsland Temperate, high year-round High: c. 1 personNyungan) rainfall; resources of forests, per 2.5 ± 12 km2rivers, lakes, estuaries andcoastYuwaaliyaay and Barwon-Darling Semi-arid, very variable Medium low/neighbours (Pama- River rainfall; resources of low: c. 1 personNyungan) savannah grassland, per 30± 60 km2woodland, rivers and lakesPitjantjatjara and Eastern Western Arid zone; low, unreliable Very low: c. 1neighbours (Pama- Desert rainfall; resources of sandhills person perNyungan) and spinifex 80± 100 km2Sandbeach (Umpila, Eastern Cape Tropical monsoon climate, Very high: c. 1Kuuku-Ya’u, etc.) York Peninsula high summer rainfall; person per 2.5 ± 3(Pama-Nyungan) resources of rainforest, km2rivers, coast and seaWiilman/MinÅong South coast of Mediterranean climate, fairly Medium low: c. 1(Pama-Nyungan) Southwest high winter rainfall; resources person per 25± 50Australia of heathland, rivers, estuaries km2 (hinterland),and coast higher on coastNgarinyin and their Northwest Tropical monsoon climate; Mediumneighbours (non- Kimberley resources of rugged (hinterland) toPama-Nyungan, uplands, woodland, rivers, high (coast): c. 1Worrorran family) grassland, estuaries, coast person per 10± 25and sea km2Yolngu (Pama- Northeast Tropical monsoon climate; High/very high:Nyungan) Arnhem Land resources of forests, rivers, c. 1 person perswamps, lakes, estuaries, 4 ± 6 km2; 0.5 km2coast and sea in some localitiesaThe population estimates are derived from discussions in Hotchin (1990) (KuÃ nai); Allen(1972) (Yuwaaliyaay); Gould (1969, 1980:69) (Pitjantjatjara and their neighbours); Chase(1980:157) (Sandbeach); Bird (1985:126) , Le SoueÈ f (1993:52) (Wiil/MinÅong); Kaberry (1939)(Ngarinyin and neighbours); Thomson (1937 ± 38), Warner (1937:157) (Yolngu).Types of kinship and marriage systemsThe systems of kinship and marriage of the seven case studies sort quite wellinto four types according to the general form of the kin classi® cation, listed inthe following sections. These systems share certain features (Schef¯ er 1978).According to what Radcliffe-Brown referred to as t`he equivalence of siblings’, aparent’s sibling of the same sex is referred to by the same term as that parent,so that one’s mother’s sister is a `mother’ and a father’s brother is one’s f`ather’.Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 SEVEN ABORIGINAL MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 147Consequently, one’s mother’s sister ’s child is one’s `brother’ or s`ister’, and soon. This equivalence rami® es through the system: one’s mother’s mother’s sisteris one’s `mother’s mother’, and so on.A related feature shared among the terminologies is a pattern of `bifurcate-merging’ in the parents’ generations: one’s parent’s same-sex siblings are termino-logically equivalent to that parent, but one’s father’s sister is of a categorydistinct from one’s mother and her sisters, and one’s mother’s brother isdistinguished from one’s father and father’s brothers. However, the systemsdiffered in many other ways.`Hawaiian’ terminologiesKuÃ nai and Yuwaaliyaay shared a relatively simple system of kin classi® cationwith `Hawaiian’ or generational features in Ego’s generation (Ives 1998:100) and,in the KuÃ nai system, the child’s generation as well. All relatives in one’s owngeneration were `brothers’ and `sisters’ , but differentiated by relative age. (OnKuÃ nai kin classi® cation and marriage, see Bulmer 1994, n.d.:18; Fison & Howitt1880:199 ± 204; Howitt 1904; Schef¯ er 1978:111± 112; Smyth 1878:46; Thomas 1860.On Yuwaaliyaay and related systems, see Austin et al. 1980; Fison & Howitt1880:42 ± 49; Howitt 1904:217; Parker 1905:12, 15, 55 ± 56, 81; Ridley 1875; Teulon,in Curr 1886 ± 1887:196.)KuÃ nai and Yuwaaliyaay marriage systems differed, however. A KuÃ nai personwas supposed to marry a distantly related `brother’ or s`ister’, of a differentresidence group and patri® lial guardian totem. While some father± daughter andbrother± sister bestowal was practised, many marriages apparently had the formof institutionalised elopement; a young couple typically took the opportunity ofa large ceremony to abscond. Marriage exchanges sometimes occurred betweenbrother± sister pairs, and it is apparent from the marriage network (reconstructedfrom Howitt’s account of marriages between localities) that reciprocal marriagesoften linked residence groups.Among Yuwaaliyaay people, however, infant betrothal appears to havebeen the norm. Moreover, exogamous totemic matri-groups and matri-moieties(conceived of as having different geographical origins and `blood’) governedmarriage. This appears to have taken the form of reciprocal exchange amongmatri-groups, and may have included sister-exchange between men. Yuwaali-yaay and their neighbours had also adopted a section system, not fully integratedwith matri-group exchange.A`luridja’ terminologyThe kin terminology of Pitjantjatjara and their neighbours was of the A`luridjatype’ in Elkin’s (1938 ± 40) scheme. It bore some similarity to KuÃ nai and Yuwaali-Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 148 ANTHROPOLOGICAL FORUMyaay in that one’s parallel-cousins and close cross-cousins counted as s`iblings’(differentiated by sex and relative age). However, distant cross-cousins weredistinct from siblings. The terminology equated children of one’s same-sexsibling with one’s own child, but distinguished one’s opposite-sex sibling’s childfrom the former. The kin terminology maps neatly on to generation moieties.(On Pitjantjatjara kin terminology and marriage, see Berndt & Berndt 1945:50;Dousset this issue, and pers. comm.; Elkin 1938 ± 40; Long 1970; Munn 1965;Peterson & Long 1986; Schef¯ er 1978:88ff.; Yengoyan 1967.)Marriage was preferred between distant cross-cousins or distant cross-grandkin (see Dousset this issue). Infant bestowal was the norm; it was linkedto relations between male initiand and circumciser, who became a potentialwife’s father, and the exchange of sisters and daughters occurred (Dousset pers.comm.).`Kariera’ terminologiesSandbeach and Wiil/MinÅong people both possessed Kariera-like systems of kinclassi® cation, which merged parallel-cousins with siblings, but distinguishedboth close and distant cross-cousins from siblings. They differed in the classi® -cation of grandkin and children, but they shared the feature in which one’sparents’ siblings’ children were classi® ed by the relative age of the linkingparent’s sibling (so one’s father’s younger brother’s children were of a differentcategory from one’s father’s elder brother’s children). The Sandbeach termino-logy had Omaha features, according to which one’s close matrilateral cross-cousins were treated as equivalent to one’s `mother’ and `mother’s brother’ (seeMcConvell & Alpher this issue). This feature appears to have been linked to theprohibition of marriage with a close cross-cousin. (On Sandbeach kin terminologyand marriage, see Chase 1980:174 ± 177, 399 ± 402; Thomson 1935, 1972; on Wiiland MinÅong kin terminology and marriage, see Bates 1985; Hassell 1936:679 ± 711;Nind 1831:39.)Ideally, at least, Sandbeach kin terms mapped neatly on to patri-moieties; forexample, one would have expected to ® nd one’s parallel grandkin, father, siblingsand brother’s children in one’s own moiety, and one’s mothers, cross-grandkin,and sisters’ children in the opposite one. The Wiil and MinÅong terminology doesnot divide so neatly into two l`ines’; grandkin appear to be sorted into `mother’sside’ and f`ather’s side’.Sandbeach people practised infant bestowal, and the preferred spouse was adistant cross-cousin, but preferably from a geographically close community. Wiiland MinÅong people also practised infant bestowal and preferred marriage withpeople of distant communities. As the terminology distinguished distant cross-cousins from close ones, it seems likely that the preferred spouse was a distantcross-cousin.Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 SEVEN ABORIGINAL MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 149`Karadjeri’ asymmetric systemsNgarinyin and Yolngu terminology both have asymmetric features, linked withmatrilateral cross-cousin marriage, classi® ed by Radcliffe-Brown (1930 ± 31) as`Karadjeri’ . The Ngarinyin terminology possesses some A`randa’ features as well.(On Ngarinyin kin terminology and marriage, see Blundell & Layton 1978; Elkin1932, 1970:698; Love 1936; Lucich 1968; Rumsey 1981; Schef¯ er 1978:387ff. ; Turner1980:99ff . On Yolngu kin terminology and marriage, see Chaseling 1957:61; Keen1982, 1994:80, 108; Morphy 1978; Schef¯ er 1978:278ff. ; Shapiro 1968, 1981; Warner1937.)Certain features of the Yolngu system of kin classi® cation, including theclassi® cation of grandkin, cousins, parents’ cousins, and their children, resultedin a pattern in which kin terms could be sorted into ® ve l`ines’ traced throughmen: those of one’s MMB, MF/FMB, FF, (f.s.)S/ZS, and (f.s.)DS/ZDS. Thepreferred marriage was between a man and his close matrilateral cross-cousin(MBD, MMBDD) (a woman and her patrilateral cross-cousin) or relatives of thesame categories in alternative generations (e.g., MBSSD, MMBSSDD). Marriagesappear to `¯ ow’ one way on the diagram of kin termsÐ those of women fromthe MMB line to the MF/FMB line, from the MF/FMB line to the FF line, andso on. From Ego’s point of view, the kin terms map on to the patri-moieties.People projected kin relations on to patri-groups according to broad marriagerelations between them, so that one group was the `mother’ of one, the `mother’smother’ of another and so on; and patri-groups as wholes bore a kin relation toan individual, so that one group was his or her `mother group’, another his orher `mother’s mother’ group, and so on.Yolngu practised infant and wife’s mother bestowal. While sister and sisters’daughter exchange were not legitimate forms of marriage, the system did makepossible the exchange of sisters’ daughters’ daughters between men related asWMMB (ngathiwalkur) to ZDDH (dhumun.gur). These were distinct categories insome varieties of Yolngu kin classi® cation, forming seven l`ines’.Ngarinyin and their neighbours projected kin relations on to patri-groups ina similar way to Yolngu, but the Ngarinyin mode of kin classi® cation differs ininteresting ways. One difference is that there are distinct MF and FMB l`ines’, sothese grandkin and their patri® lial descendants are not terminologically equiva-lent. In a second, the MM and (f.s.)DCh/ZDCh categories are self-reciprocal (anAranda-like feature). Third, kin terms in the MF line are subject to Omahaskewing, and this skewing rami® es through the system. The form of skewing isdistinct from that of Sandbeach terminologies, for here the same term appliesthroughout the `patriline’.The preferred marriage was between a man and his FMBSD (of the f`ather’smother’ category) and other women of the same category, who could also havebeen his MMBDD. Marriages between ® rst cross-cousins (MBD-FZS), classi® edDownloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 150 ANTHROPOLOGICAL FORUMas `mother’ and `woman’s child/sister’s child’ apparently attracted mild sanc-tions, but did occur. In spite of the self-reciprocal character of WM-DH terms,the exchange of sisters’ daughters seems not to have been practised, at least notas a norm (Alan Rumsey pers. comm.).Levels of polygynyThese varieties of kinship and marriage were broadly correlated with l`evels’ ofpolygyny as recorded in the early ethnography of each region: (i) `Hawaiian’(KuÃ nai and Yuwaaliyaay): low polygyny: men were married to up to two,occasionally three, wives concurrently; (ii) A`luridja’ (Pitjantjatjara and theirneighbours): low to moderate polygyny: up to ® ve wives concurrently; (iii)`Kariera-like’ (Sandbeach, Wiil/MinÅong: low to moderate polygyny: up to fourwives concurrently; (iv) `Karadjeri-like’ (Yolngu, Ngarinyin and their neigh-bours): Ngarinyin and neighbours: high polygyny: up to seven wives concur-rently (Worrorra); (v) Yolngu: very high polygyny: up to 26 wives concurrently.Differences in kinship and marriage had profound effects on social networks,and differences in levels of polygyny affected the structure of groups, andexchange. First, though, I consider the conditions for high levels of polygyny.The conditions for high levels of polygynyA number of distributional features in the case studies stand out. One is thatthe `Hawaiian’ terminologies, associated with low levels of polygyny, occurredboth in the rich environment of Gippsland and the semi-arid environment of theDarling Basin. `Kariera’ kin terminologies, associated with patri® lial countrygroups, and what LeÂ vi-Strauss (1969) called r`estricted’ exchange, are alsowidespread, located at opposite ends of the continent in the case studies(Sandbeach, Wiil/MinÅong). The A`luridja’ terminology was restricted to the aridzone. Societies with asymmetric terminologies and high to very high polygynyappear to have been restricted to the coastal regions and large habitable islandsof the north coast.This distribution suggests that ecological conditions placed constraints onlevels of polygyny (cf. Ives 1998; McConvell & Alpher this issue). High populationdensities and residence groups at the top of the range of variation were necessary(but not suf® cient) to sustain high to very high levels of polygyny, which werenot practicable in arid and semi-arid conditions. Yolngu population densitiesreached about 1 person per km2, while densities in the Western Desert were ofthe order of 1 person per 80± 100 km2 (Table 1). The main reason suggested isthat, with a sparse population and where small residence groups and highmobility were required, high polygyny would have resulted in an inadequatebalance of male and female labour for a proportion of groups (Nicolas PetersonDownloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 SEVEN ABORIGINAL MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 151pers. comm.). It would also have been dif® cult for a highly polygynous male tomaintain the cohesion of his family.The low polygyny of the KuÃ nai shows that rich resources and a highpopulation density were not suf® cient conditions for high polygyny. Populationdensity among KuÃ nai people was probably high, in a region of relatively highrainfall, and rich resources of estuaries, rivers and extensive lakes. A secondcondition was institutional. In these case studies, asymmetric matrilateral mar-riage was required for high levels of polygyny, and this may have been a moregeneral prerequisite.Reported polygyny among Worrorra people (neighbours of Ngarinyinspeakers) (Love 1936:95, 100) lends support to the hypothesis advanced in Keen(1982) that the demographic properties of matrilateral cross-cousin marriage, inconjunction with certain other features, make high levels of polygyny possible.Ngarinyin/Worrorra and Yolngu systems shared the feature of marriage betweena close or distant MMBDD and MFZDS, which tended to replicate the agedifference between potential spouses from generation to generation. Regularmarriage between FMBSD and FFZSS, with which the former was combined,would have had the same tendency. Marriage between MBS and FZD, andbetween certain other varieties of cousin permitted in Kariera-like and Aranda-like systems, do not reproduce appropriate age differences in the same way(Keen 1982; see also Rose 1960a).Combined with patri® lial groups, high levels of polygyny have importantimplications for the demographic structure of groups, and processes of growth,decline, ® ssion and fusion.The structure and dynamics of country groupsLow polygynyThe low polygyny societies of the case studies were associated with non-patri® lial land-holding in the Yuwaaliyaay case, and probably `weak’ patri® lialland-holding among KuÃ nai people. Patri-moieties were absent in both.KuÃ nai combined totemic gender categories with the prohibition of marriagebetween close kin, and exogamous residence groups (Bulmer, in Curr 1886 ± 87:546, 1994:7 ± 8; Fison & Howitt 1880:199; Howitt 1904:148) . People did sharepatri® lial guardian totems, and did have rights in the father’s country as wellas on other grounds, but it is not altogether certain that patri® lial groups `owned’countries in this region (see below), and there is little correlation betweenpatri® lial totems and the totemic signi® cance of country (Bulmer 1994:7 ± 10, n.d.;Howitt 1904:135) .Yuwaaliyaay and their neighbours seem to have been attached to country onthe basis of birth rather than through patri® lial land-holding groups (Allen 1972:Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 152 ANTHROPOLOGICAL FORUM105; Beckett 1967:457; Mathews 1906; Parker 1905:46; cf. Radcliffe-Brown 1954).Instead of the gender totems of KuÃ nai people, Yuwaaliyaay had exogamoustotemic matri® lial groups and matri-moieties (Parker 1905:16).Rather than localised totemic ancestors, in the cosmology of Yuwaaliyaayand their neighbours, common creators associated with the sky (Baiame and hisfamily) were shared across a wide region, and totemic places had associationswith Baiame, his wives or sons, sometimes in conjunction with other totemicidentities. In this way, Yuwaaliyaay cosmology and local totemism brought localgroups together as related to Baiame, although other totemic aspects of sitesdifferentiated them (Parker 1905:101 ± 104). The strongest totemic differentiation,expressed in initiation rituals, belonged to the totemic matri-groups, whoseleaders probably dominated their organisation. Few matri-group totems bore adirect relation to places.Polygyny does nothing to increase the resources of matrilineal groups andcategories; a man cannot increase membership of his matrilineal group throughhaving more daughters, for they belong to his wives’ groups. In any case, onlysome of the institutional requirements for even moderate levels of polygynyseem to have been present among Yuwaaliyaay and their neighbours, andecological factors may have worked against it. The kind of competition andgroup dynamics associated with high levels of polygyny were, therefore, not afeature of Yuwaaliyaay political economy.Moderate polygynyBoth the `Kariera’ and `Karadjeri’ systems coexisted with exogamous patri® lialland-holding groups and patri-moieties (see McConvell & Alpher this issue).Ancestral/totemic associations both differentiated and linked patri-groups andtheir countries in these societies.Sandbeach country groups appear to have been relatively simple patri® lialgroups, divided between the patri-moieties (Chase 1980:132, 138, 140 ± 141). Ifmen of some groups married at the expense of others, then the moderate levelsof polygyny may have enhanced processes of growth and decline. In the eventof a group failing to be reproduced through the male line, succession was to themother’s country (Chase 1980:136; Rigsby & Chase 1998:196; Thomson 1933:501) .Wiil/MinÅong people appear to have owned country through the father andfather’s father as well (Barker 1992:12 January 1830; Le SoueÈ f 1993:36). UnlikeSandbeach, MinÅong countries and country groups seem to have been dividedamong four localised patri® lial semi-moieties (see Barker 1992:3 July 1830; Bates1985:193 ± 194; Green 1989:6, 33; Grey 1841; Nind 1831:42 ± 43). If country groupshad a similar constitution to Sandbeach ones, then the moderate level ofpolygyny had similar implications for the dynamics of MinÅong patri-groups.Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 SEVEN ABORIGINAL MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 153High and very high polygynyYolngu patri-groups and their countries were divided between the patri-moieties,differentiated by totemic associations, and linked (mainly within the moieties)by short and long ancestral journeys (e.g., Morphy 1991). Very high levels ofpolygyny among Yolngu people may in part account for the very complex andvaried structure of Yolngu patri-groups (`clans’). This complexity may have beenthe result in part of the fast growth and decline of patri-groups, together withprocesses of succession, as well as the exchange of sacra and identity betweengroups (Morphy 1997; Peterson 1983; cf. Keen 2000).Among Ngarinyin people and their neighbours, patri® lial groups (dambun)were (and are) divided between exogamous moieties. Patri-groups and theircountries were differentiated totemically, but connected by long ancestral (wan-jina) journeys and by the ubiquitous Wunggurr serpents associated with rainand conception (Redmond 2001; Rumsey 1996). The countries of patri-groups ofthe same moiety clustered together to form swathes of country of the samemoiety (Blundell & Layton 1978; Capell 1972; Rumsey 1996:7). Like Yolngu,country groups as recorded by Blundell exhibited some degree of complexity,for example: the sharing of a dambun name by two t`op’ and `bottom’ groups;the common dambun identity of three Worrorra groups, one said to be ofWunambal origin, having migrated, and with distinct af® nal relations comparedwith the other two groups; and the division of a patri-group into three lineages,each associated with a distinct area, but sharing a wanjina site; the group hadchanged its language identity (Blundell 1975:vol. 1, 87 ± 88, 92, 99, 107, 109, 162;Rumsey pers. comm.).This complexity may have derived in part from the demography of polygynyin conjunction with the several bases of succession. The high level of polygynyrecorded among Worrorra people (Love 1936:95, 100) would have given rise tofast-growing and declining lineages, through similar processes to Yolngu ones.Marriage networksThe main contrast to be drawn is between what I call s`hifting webs’ andmore stable marriage alliances between patri-groups. The `shifting web’, whichMcKinley (1971:411) refers to as `dispersed af® nal alliance’, and HeÂ ritier (1981,2000:29) as a s`emi-complex system’, results from the prohibition of marriagebetween close kin (see McConvell & Alpher this issue). As a result, the af® naland close kin network shifted at each generation, perhaps cycling back everyfew generations. This kind of pattern, complicated in some cases by reciprocalexchanges between kin groups, was likely among KuÃ nai, Pitjantjatjara, Sand-beach, and Wiil/MinÅong people. The nodes of the network can be taken as smallpatrilineages in some cases, as cognatic kin groups in others. HeÂ ritier (2000:29)has shown that this form of network is compatible with sister-exchange.Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 154 ANTHROPOLOGICAL FORUMThe strongly contrasting cases are Ngarinyin and Yolngu, where marriagebetween close cross-cousins reproduced relations between groups down thegenerationsÐ potentially each generation among Yolngu people, and alternategenerations in the case of Ngarinyin wife-yielder/wife-receiver groups (Blundell& Layton 1978; Keen 1982:631) . This potential for repetition led to strong alliancesbetween groups of the same moiety (as wife-yielder/wife-receiver groups) andopposite moieties (as wife/husband groups). Combined with high and very highlevels of polygyny, the result was powerful alliances between groups, includingsome that were fast growing, and which remained large for several generationsat least.Among Yolngu, patri-groups (`clans’) often had reciprocal marriage relationswith others, although they tended to be asymmetrical between lineages (mostconsistently between groups of uterine siblings; Keen 1978:130). Links amongNgarinyin patri-groups of opposite moieties appear to have been primarilyasymmetrical.The preference for FMBSD marriage among Ngarinyin and their neighboursrequires men of one lineage to marry women of at least two other patri-groups(both classi® ed as `mother’ groups), for a man could not follow his father’smarriage. The corollary is that people of one lineage provided wives to men ofa given group in alternate generations, and consequently these women weresupposed to marry men of at least two other patri-groups. However, only onewife’s mother group was required (demographic conditions being equal). Themarriage network was a dense pattern of exchange in which each patri-grouphad most of its marriage links with between two and ® ve other patri-groups(usually four), obtaining wives from one pair of groups, and giving wives to adifferent pair (Blundell & Layton 1978:235, 237).Reciprocal exchange is a feature of all systems at one level or another,between localities (e.g., KuÃ nai), moieties (matrilineal, patrilineal and generation),and some kin groups (e.g., Yuwaaliyaay, Yolngu). Sister-exchange occurredamong Yuwaaliyaay, Pitjantjatjara (Dousset pers. comm.) and perhaps MinÅongpeople. The exchange by men of sisters’ daughters may have been a feature ofWestern Desert marriage (Dousset pers. comm.; Elkin 1938 ± 40:217). Yolnguprohibited this form, but we have seen that the exchange of sisters’ daughters’daughters was a formal possibility, occasionally realised.Exchange in generalDifferences in kinship and marriage seem to have had an effect on the form ofexchange networks (although the data on exchange networks are rather thinfor several case studies). There is direct evidence that peoples of six of theseven case studies were involved in regional exchange networks of some kind,Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 SEVEN ABORIGINAL MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 155involving food, durable goods, and in some regions sacred objects and ceremon-ies. (See McCarthy 1939 ± 40 for an overview.)Exchange networks appear to have been most highly formalised amongNgarinyin and their neighbours. People represented wurnan as a system of`paths’ of exchange, homologous with marriage relations, linking individuals,patri-groups, and adjacent regions. Marriage exchanges were thought of aslinked to wurnan exchange. The goods exchanged included foods such as meatand honey, ochres, stone spear-points wrapped in paperbark, bamboo spears,songs, and sacred objects. Wurnan ordered patri-groups into an institutedsequence or rank-order from t`op’ to `bottom’ group, each section under thecontrol of a senior man of a particular patri-group and country (Blundell 1975;Blundell & Layton 1978; McCarthy 1939 ± 40:436; Redmond pers. comm.; Rumsey1996:6± 7).Yolngu people conceived of the exchange network in terms of directions fromwhich certain goods came and to which others went. Although people did talkof exchange in terms of `paths’ (dhukarr) of exchange, they were less clearlyinscribed in the social landscape (Thomson 1949). The network of marriagesbetween patri-groups here was more complex than Ngarinyin and their neigh-bours, with more reciprocal marriages between larger patri-groups (but asymmet-rical between lineages).It is tempting to suggest that these regionally integrated systems of exchange,with their `paths’ between patri-groups, were in part a product of the marriagenetworks which, as we have seen, linked groups in series as well as cycles, andwhich tended to be reproduced down the generations. Some caution is necessary,however, because of the paucity of information on the form of exchange systemselsewhere.At the local level, high and very high levels of polygyny transformedexchange networks by concentrating marriage prestations through individualpolygynous men. As the recipient of marriage payments from intending andactual daughters’ husbands, and as the donor of gifts to wives’ kin, such a manfound himself at the node of a very extensive exchange network, `channelling’the ¯ ow of gifts in from his own prospective and actual daughters’ husbandsand out to his own wives’ kin (of the younger wives at least). A man in thisposition was likely to be a leader of a large and/or fast-growing patri-group,and of its ritual (Keen 1994:300) .ConclusionsThis brief overview suggests that the seven societies differed systematically intheir overall character, and that some of these differences had an intimateconnection with differences in kinship and marriage.KuÃ nai and Yuwaaliyaay kin terminologies, `Hawaiian’ in Ego’s generation,Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 156 ANTHROPOLOGICAL FORUMseem to have precluded even moderate levels of polygyny, even though marriagepractices and modes of totemic identity differed between the two peoples. Yetthis form of kin classi® cation and the low level of polygyny occurred in verydifferent ecological conditions. Patri® lial land-holding was absent or `weak’.KuÃ nai marriage created a s`hifting web’ with reciprocal exchange betweenlocalities, whereas Yuwaaliyaay marriage may have involved geographicallyclose partners, and reciprocal exchanges between dispersed matri-categories.Among Pitjantjatjara and their neighbours, the level of polygyny seems tohave been low to moderate. The `Aluridja’ terminology probably precluded highlevels of polygyny on a regular basis, and in any case it is likely that the desertecology imposed constraints. Again, patri® lial land-holding was absent. Thebases for land-holding were multiple, including place of birth and of ®` nding’(spirit conception). The marriage network again had the form of a s`hifting web’,in this case between cognatic kin groups.The societies with moderate polygyny (Sandbeach and MinÅong) shared`Kariera’ terminologies and the possibility of reciprocal exchange. (Polygynyamong Wiil people appears to have been lower than MinÅong.) They combinedthese features with moieties (patrilineal or matrilineal), patri® lial country groupswith complementary ® liation to the mother’s group, and, in the MinÅong case,with patri® lial semi-moieties. The two case studies with these forms are aboutas far apart geographically as one can get in Australia.The peoples with high to very high polygyny were con® ned to the better-watered regions of the north, with relatively high population densities. This isconsistent with Harvey’s (2001) ® nding that asymmetric terminologies tend tooccur in well-resourced areas. However, as the low polygyny of the KuÃ nai shows,rich resources and a high population density were not suf® cient conditions, fortheir country was similarly rich in resources and it is likely that the populationdensity was similarly high; institutional conditions were also required. Theliterature on `gerontocratic polygyny’ draws our attention to the authorityrelations and delay of male marriage entailed by initiation practices and thecontrol of religious knowledge (see Hiatt 1985). However, a particular institu-tional requirement seems to have been some form of matrilateral cross-cousinmarriage. I have shown in an earlier work (Keen 1982) that it was the demo-graphic properties of such systems that made high levels of polygyny possible.Among these case studies, Ngarinyin and Yolngu systems shared these proper-ties. This leads me to ascribe a determinate role to kinship terminologies whenallied to marriage rules and practices. Of course, these were not enacted in asocial vacuum, and certain demographic and social conditions had to be met forthem to be practised. (For example, patri-moiety exogamy may have facilitatedthe reproduction of complex chains of Yolngu bestowal relations.)Levels of polygyny profoundly affected the dynamics of Aboriginal politicaleconomy. Combined with patri® lial country groups, high and very high levelsDownloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 SEVEN ABORIGINAL MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 157of polygyny gave rise to the fast growth and decline of groups, and endemicviolent competition over marriage and access to land (Warner 1937:155 ± 158).These kinds of dynamics did not feature in the societies with low polygyny.Indeed, the matri® lial totemic groups of Yuwaaliyaay and their neighbours madeit irrelevant. Yolngu and Ngarinyin marriage networks channelled exchangestowards the camps of multi-married males. Regional exchange networks appearto have been most integrated and formalised where marriage exchanges betweengroups persisted.Styles of male religious leadership reinforce the contrast. Yolngu and Ngarin-yin male leaders were elders of patri-groups that held religious property con-nected to land, waters and localised totemic ancestors. The more in¯ uential menamong the peoples with low polygyny combined roles of magician, healer andsorcerer, and among KuÃ nai people, shaman. These seem to have been achievedstatuses, connected to sky-oriented cosmologies. Such leaders mediated betweenthe living and spirits of the dead. However, another paper is needed to explorethese contrasts in greater depth.NOTEAcknowledgements: I thank Patrick McConvell for inviting me to submit this paper, andfor his comments on the draft; Tony Redmond for advice about Ngarinyin kinship;Laurent Dousset, Alan Rumsey and an anonymous reader for comments and constructivecriticism; and Heather Macdonald for assistance with the research. The research on whichthis paper is based was supported by the Japanese Ministry of Education, the NationalMuseum of Ethnology in Osaka, the Faculties Research Grant Scheme and the School ofArchaeology and Anthropology at The Australian National University.Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 11:32 20 December 2012 