ABSTRACT: 
This article highlights how recent reforms to the auditing and assessment of local public services in England suggest there will be a shift from panoptical to ‘synoptical’ monitoring approaches. This is because the UK Government has abolished its centralised monitoring regime and instead required local authorities to publish a range of financial and performance datasets online, ostensibly so that citizens can hold organisations to account directly. However, the complexity and raw nature of these data, along with the sidelining of professional auditors, will result in most citizens being either unable or unwilling to undertake this task. As such, the proposed ‘synoptical’ approach will not materialise. Indeed, other legislative changes will mean that outsourcing firms effectively become the new, unaccountable observers of local public sector bodies within an enduring panoptical system. In many cases these companies will then assume responsibility for delivering the same services that they have assessed. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this article highlights how recent reforms to the auditing and assessment of local public services in England suggest there will be a shift from panoptical to ‘synoptical’ monitoringapproaches . 
 this is because the UK Government has abolished its centralised monitoringregime and instead required local authorities to publish a range of ﬁnancial andperformance datasets online , ostensibly so that citizens can hold organisations to accountdirectly . 
 however , the complexity and raw nature of these data , along with the sideliningof professional auditors , will result in most citizens being either unable or unwilling toundertake 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirectCritical Perspectives on Accountingjou r nal h o mep ag e: w ww .e ls evier . co m/lo c ate /c paA ‘panoptical’ or ‘synoptical’ approach to monitoringperformance? Local public services in England and thewidening accountability gapPeter Eckersley a,*, Laurence Ferry b, Zamzulaila Zakaria ca School of Geography, Politics and Sociology, Claremont Tower, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UKbDepartment of Accounting and Finance, Newcastle University Business School, 5 Barrack Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4SE, UKcDepartment of Accounting, Kulliyyah of Economics and Management Sciences, International Islamic University Malaysia, P.O. Box 10,50728 Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaA R T I C L E I N F OArticle history:Received 18 July 2012Received in revised form 20 February 2013Accepted 6 March 2013Available online 21 April 2013Keywords:CriticalAccountabilityPublic sectorNew public managementLocal public servicesMots cle´s:CritiqueRedevabilite´, Responsabilite´Secteur publicNouvelle gestion publiqueKeywords:Palabras clave:Crı´ticaRendicio´n de cuentasSector pu´blicoNueva gestio´n pu´blicaA B S T R A C TThis article highlights how recent reforms to the auditing and assessment of local publicservices in England suggest there will be a shift from panoptical to ‘synoptical’ monitoringapproaches. This is because the UK Government has abolished its centralised monitoringregime and instead required local authorities to publish a range of ﬁnancial andperformance datasets online, ostensibly so that citizens can hold organisations to accountdirectly. However, the complexity and raw nature of these data, along with the sideliningof professional auditors, will result in most citizens being either unable or unwilling toundertake this task. As such, the proposed ‘synoptical’ approach will not materialise.Indeed, other legislative changes will mean that outsourcing ﬁrms effectively become thenew, unaccountable observers of local public sector bodies within an enduring panopticalsystem. In many cases these companies will then assume responsibility for delivering thesame services that they have assessed. 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 7771 888790; fax: +44 191 340 9665.E-mail addresses: p.m.eckersley@ncl.ac.uk (P. Eckersley), laurence.ferry@ncl.ac.uk (L. Ferry), zlaila@iium.edu (Z. Zakaria).1045-2354/$ – see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpa.2013.03.003P. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–5385301. IntroductionIn a previous issue of this journal, Vaughan Radcliffe posited that public auditors often collude in ‘public secrets’ bywithholding from their reports the real reasons why organisations may not have achieved optimal outcomes (Radcliffe,2008). Radcliffe’s view was countered by Funnell (2011), who held that auditors should not comment on matters of policyand instead restrict their enquiries to operational issues. Radcliffe responded to Funnell by highlighting that public auditorsin the USA are often directly elected and are therefore explicitly political actors. In contrast, in most Commonwealthcountries they are appointed and therefore potentially more independent (Radcliffe, 2011).This article does not take sides in the debate between Radcliffe and Funnell. Instead, it highlights how their debate will betranscended by the emergence of a new approach to performance auditing in England, which raises signiﬁcant concerns forthe accountability of local public services.1 Using the surveillance metaphor that was developed by Jeremy Bentham andpopularised by Foucault (1977), it illustrates how the UK’s Coalition Government has claimed that decisions such as theabolition of the Audit Commission mean that it is moving away from a ‘top-down’, panoptical approach to monitoring theperformance of English local authorities.Following this line of argument, policy initiatives such as the ‘transparency’ agenda (which requires public bodies to makeﬁnancial and performance data available online) should herald a shift towards what Mathiesen (1997) termed a ‘post-panoptical’ or ‘synoptical’ model of surveillance. For Mathiesen, modern technologies and the mass media have led to thedevelopment of a ‘synoptical’ situation in Western societies, because they allow the wider public to watch and monitor thebehaviour of the powerful few, who are then encouraged to moderate their activities to prevent citizens from identifyingmisconduct. In this way, it is the polar opposite of Bentham’s Panopticon, which encouraged the masses to act ‘normally’ inthe knowledge that someone in power may be observing them.However, the sheer volume and nature of the data that public bodies are being asked to publish, together with the impact ofother policy initiatives that aim to encourage other providers to deliver public services on behalf of the state, mean that this newmodel will be nothing but a mirage. As this article will demonstrate, we are more likely to see private sector companies becomethe observers (the de facto performance auditors of local authorities) within an enduring panoptical system, as publicly fundedwatchdogs such as the Audit Commission are sidelined and/or abolished. These developments run counter to the Government’sclaims that its new approach will enhance the democratic oversight of public services, and exacerbate the existingaccountability concerns of various new public management scholars. They will also result in the debate between Radcliffe andFunnell on auditor independence and upholding ‘public secrets’ taking off in an entirely new direction.As the context used is very current, this paper employs an explanatory study methodology (Scapens, 1990) to set out howa new model of surveillance is likely to develop. It examines government publications such as the Open Public Services whitepaper (Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2011) and Localism Act (HM Goverment, 2011), as well as ministerial announcements, to identifypolicy objectives and how these initiatives are likely to inﬂuence the delivery of public services. In addition, it also reviewsthe extant literature on panoptical control approaches, auditing and accountability, and new public management to inform adiscussion around how these policy initiatives will shape the future scenario.The remainder of this paper discusses the following in turn: theories of visibility, Panopticism and Synopticism; the roleof the public auditor; new public management; the Open Public Services white paper; the requirements and potential impactof the UK Government’s ‘transparency’ agenda; and how the ‘right to challenge’ will provide a bottom-up lever to transformlocal public services.2 These disparate strands are then brought together in the discussion and conclusion to show how thesurveillance model for local public services in England is set to develop, and its implications for accountability.2. Background2.1. Visibility, panopticism and synopticismThe idea of a Panopticon, a disciplinary system that incorporates an agent who can observe others without them knowingthat they are being watched, was ﬁrst publicised by Jeremy Bentham in the late eighteenth century (Bentham, 1995).Bentham argued that prisons and other institutions should be designed so that people in these buildings could be observed atany time, but not be able to see the watcher themselves. He held that if people knew they might be under surveillance, theywould discipline themselves and conform to societal and behavioural norms – regardless of whether someone was watchingthem or not. As such, they could be controlled without using excessive force. Although no prison was ever built that conformsexactly to Bentham’s design, Michel Foucault embraced the concept of the Panopticon as a metaphor for discipline andcontrol in Discipline and Punish (Foucault, 1977).Foucault’s arguments heralded a new interest in the analogy, which has continued until the present day. In particular, theincreasing prevalence of data-capturing technologies such as closed-circuit television, smart cards and the internet has1 The article concentrates on those services for which English local authorities are responsible. The nature of panoptical performance monitoring systemsin other parts of the public sector, such as health and central government, remain largely unchanged.2 Responsibility for local government lies with the devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. As a result, the Localism Act andtransparency requirements, as well as most of the Open Public Services white paper, only apply to authorities in England, despite emanating from the UKGovernment. Therefore this article refers to the UK-wide Government as the source of policy initiatives, but to England as the area in which they take effect.P. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538 531increased the popularity of the Panopticon as a way of describing contemporary life in developed countries. According to thisline of argument, modern technologies can monitor the behaviour of individuals and make it visible. Since people are awarethat their activities may be monitored, they will not wish to be singled out as being somehow abnormal and therefore chooseto act responsibly.In addition, the metaphor of constant surveillance can be extended to organisations as well as individuals. For example,managers can record and measure the activities of their staff, business units and organisations, ostensibly to inform decision-making and improve performance (Covaleski et al., 1998; Brivot and Gendron, 2011). These concepts have provenparticularly popular in accounting literature, because of the way in which quantiﬁcation can make people, business units andorganisations comparable (Mennicken and Miller, 2012). Moreover, in recent decades Western governments haveestablished watchdogs and extensive monitoring frameworks speciﬁcally to oversee the activities of publicly funded bodies.Several scholars have compared these systems to the Panopticon, arguing for example that they monitor public bodies to tryand ensure ‘corruption-free government’ (Anechiarico and Jacobs, 1994), or to improve ﬁnancial management andperformance (Perryman, 2006).However, others have pointed out that the panoptical metaphor is too simplistic to describe Western societies (see Boyne,2000 for a list of ﬁve theoretical arguments in favour of abandoning the concept). In particular, Thomas Mathiesen (1997)turned the concept of the Panopticon on its head. He posited that we are moving towards a post-panoptical, or synoptical,society; that is, Western civilisation is increasingly characterised by lots of people being able to observe the lives of a selectfew, rather than the other way around.To illustrate this, in the era of smartphones, microphones, mass media and the internet, public ofﬁcials and those standing forelection should be aware that their every move could be monitored and publicised. For example, during the 2010 electioncampaign, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown remarked that a member of the public with whom he had spoken was ‘bigoted’.Unbeknown to him, this comment was caught by a microphone and subsequently replayed to him during a radio interview.Other examples, such as citizens ﬁlming the actions of police ofﬁcers during political demonstrations, also show how the‘‘machinery of surveillance is now always potentially in the service of the crowd as much as the executive’’ (Boyne, 2000, p. 301).We shall see later how the UK Government has claimed that this non-hierarchical synoptical model will replace theprevious panoptical approach to public service monitoring and assessment (Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2011). Ministers have argued –albeit implicitly – that a synoptical process is more democratic, and also more effective at improving public services than theprevious centralised regime. In spite of this rhetoric however, the complexity of public data combined with other legislativechanges will mean that this situation will not materialise. Instead, the panoptical system will continue, but privatecompanies will replace publicly funded watchdogs as observers. This will raise signiﬁcant concerns about the accountabilityof public services, as well as how they are audited and assessed.2.2. The role of the auditorTraditionally, auditors are responsible for assessing standards of ﬁnancial management and performance in public bodies,which helps the state to discipline its agencies and achieve political objectives. Audit recommendation is a reﬂection of theindependent judgments of what went wrong and how to rectify them and, if we understand it as a socially constructedpractice, public auditing is a technology that could offer more potential in governing economic and social life than we oftenassociate with its function (Radcliffe, 1999).However, within this context we need to recognise that auditors’ recommendations can be inﬂuenced by how they thinktheir client will respond to suggestions. For example, recent issues of this journal have featured a debate between VaughanRadcliffe and Warwick Funnell about the extent to which public auditors should (or are permitted to) comment on the widerange of factors that may have contributed towards particular outcomes. Radcliffe (2008) highlighted a state auditor’s reportinto public schools in Cleveland, which presented an incomplete picture of the reasons why children attending schools in thecentre of the city achieved poor exam results. He argued that the state auditor deliberately avoided discussing the impact ofsocial deprivation on school achievement, because he knew that the Ohio legislature would not act on this issue. Instead, theauditor modiﬁed his ﬁndings to focus solely on those issues that would be more ‘acceptable’ to politicians in order to maximisehis potential inﬂuence. As a result, the report focused on management issues and completely ignored the socioeconomicreasons why children in the centre of Cleveland did not achieve high exam grades. As such, ‘‘[t]he auditors’ approach can at oncebe seen as pragmatic, in aiming to affect whatever change or improvement is possible, and limiting, in that they are constrainedboth by themselves and others from making observations that may be publicly unpalatable’’ (Radcliffe, 2008, p. 99).Drawing on Taussig (1999), Radcliffe argued that auditors are thus implicated in a public secret – something that ‘‘isgenerally known but cannot be articulated or spoken’’ (Taussig, 1999, p. 5) and therefore cannot present a full interpretationof the facts. Taussig developed this concept after several years in Colombia, where local people were fully aware of the extentto which state employees colluded with drug-running guerrillas, but they knew that the issue could not be mentioned inpublic. Although the notion has roots in an extreme example, Taussig argued that public secrets are essential for the smoothrunning of all societies, not just those characterised by lawlessness and armed guerrillas. To illustrate this, he cites Foucault’s(1980) observation that sex is considered taboo in developed countries and, in Radcliffe’s words, ‘‘knowing what not to knowbecomes a skill that is learned, shared and is in certain ways functional’’ (Radcliffe, 2008, p. 104).Radcliffe does not address explicitly the implications of public secrecy in auditing for democratic accountability.However, assuming that these secrets are indeed widely known, there would be no need for the Ohio state auditor toP. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538532highlight the ‘real’ reasons why schoolchildren in Cleveland do not attain high exam grades: everybody would already beaware of them. Instead, by fulﬁlling the initial aims of the audit (restricting its scope to managerial issues), and therefore hisown construction of how he should be held accountable (Sinclair, 1991), the state auditor has performed his role by holdingthe government to account on behalf of the public.Regular readers of this journal will be familiar with the riposte from Funnell (2011), who argued passionately in supportof auditors’ professional independence, and against the idea that their judgments may be inﬂuenced by the politicalenvironment. At the core of Funnell’s argument was the point that auditors do not comment on matters of policy: theirconstitutional role is to assess and make judgments on operational issues. To place this in the Foucauldian context, Funnell’simplicit argument is that auditors should observe operational and managerial issues very closely, but they must notcomment on the wider political environment. As such, they should act as observers in the panoptical system, but –paradoxically – only within a limited arena. Indeed, it is often beyond their constitutional remit to reveal ‘public secrets’ orpoint out that the emperor has no clothes.Radcliffe (2011) responded by re-iterating that many state auditors in the US are directly elected – rather than appointed,as is the case in the UK and many Commonwealth countries. Indeed, as was the case for Cleveland’s state auditor, they oftenhave higher political ambitions and their judgments are therefore likely to be compromised by the wider political context. Assuch, Radcliffe did not dispute that auditors should consider managerial issues when analysing the outcomes of publicpolicy. Instead, he argued that their inherently political nature compromised their independence and meant that they couldnot consider the whole range of potential factors when making a judgement.Despite their differences, it is important to note that Funnell and Radcliffe agree that performance auditing is an essentialfunction in a democratic state. They both believe that it should provide the public with an independent assessment of whetherpolicies are having their desired effect. They only disagree over the range of factors that auditors should consider when making ajudgement about policy effectiveness, and whether the wider political environment could compromise their independence.2.3. New public management and its implications for audit and accountabilityOver recent decades, public auditors have focused an increasing amount of their work on managerial reforms in publicbodies. These reforms, which are grouped under the general heading of new public management (NPM), are primarily aimedat cutting costs and doing ‘more for less’ through better management, transparency, user choice, contestability and greaterinvolvement of the private sector in delivering public goods and services (Hood, 1991,1995). For several decades now,various UK Government initiatives have sought to use NPM principles to shape public sector practices. Indeed, NPM hasevolved from being a set of ideas about how public services should be managed and delivered to become a practical reality inmost Western countries. These principles were the basis of public sector reforms such as privatisation, public privatepartnerships and the private ﬁnance initiative, all of which were undertaken in the name of greater efﬁciency, value formoney and accountability (Broadbent and Guthrie, 2008; Broadbent and Laughlin, 2003; Hood, 1991,1995; Letza andSmallman, 2001; Ogden, 1995; Shaoul, 1997).While the extant literature is supportive of the public sector’s efforts to promote value for money, efﬁciency and improveaccountability practices (Broadbent and Guthrie, 1992), it is less conclusive as to whether they have actually been successful(Broadbent et al., 2003; Lapsley, 1999, 2009; Mayston, 1999; Shaoul, 1997). In other words, critics of NPM do not dispute thatthe reforms have taken place, or that they had worthwhile objectives. Instead, they focus on issues such as the extent towhich they have improved policy delivery (see for example Rhodes, 1997), their inherent contradictions (Talbot, 2003;Rathgeb-Smith, 2003) or the complexity and problematic nature of entering into long term contracts with suppliers(Broadbent et al., 2003; Demirag and Khadaroo, 2008; English and Baxter, 2010; Froud, 2003).As such, we can conclude that one of the important challenges of NPM is to balance improving public sector efﬁciencywith protecting the interests of the public. Up to now, this role has largely been played by public sector auditors, whose auditreports and recommendations act as technologies to allow them to manoeuvre between the ‘moderniser’ and theindependent appraiser of the efﬁciency of public sector practices (Skaerbaek, 2009). This dual role has been discussedextensively in academic literature, and scholars agree that it is important for auditors to give independent assurance that theinterests of the public are being protected (Free and Radcliffe, 2009; Gendron et al., 2001, 2007), and to highlight thepotential implications for democratic accountability (Pollitt, 1986).However, a key issue here is that, where public services are outsourced, their delivery is shaped by the interests of boththe government and the private or third sector service provider (Schuppert, 2006; Giddens, 2009). Although the supplier mayrepresent the interest of the general public in terms of achieving value for money, transparent information, improvedefﬁciency and competitiveness, it is less clear whether the interests of the government and the general public are carriedthrough in practice (Hood, 1991,1995). This is particularly the case where governments have sought to keep their dealingswith outsourcing companies secret on the grounds of commercial conﬁdence (Funnell, 2000). In these situations we cannever be certain whether the service provider (or indeed the government) is acting in the public interest – and therefore thepublic cannot hold them to account. This has led numerous academics to argue that contracting private companies to deliverpublic services reduces democratic accountability (see for example Pollitt, 1986; Funnell, 2000; Letza and Smallman, 2001;Broadbent and Laughlin, 2003).In spite of these reservations, and partly because it perceived public sector reform through budgeting and governing to benecessary to deal with ﬁnancial austerity (Ferry and Eckersley, 2011, 2012), the UK’s Coalition Government of ConservativesP. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538 533and Liberal Democrats has continued with the NPM agenda since taking ofﬁce in May 2010. The remainder of this section willfocus on three initiatives that are based on New public management principles: the ‘Open Public Services’ white paper, the‘transparency’ agenda, and the ‘right to challenge’ local public service providers. Taken together, these three initiatives willnot only accelerate the trend towards outsourcing the delivery of public services, but they will also result in privatecompanies replacing publicly funded watchdogs as the chief observers within the panoptical system of performanceassessment. The relevant points from each agenda are set out below.2.3.1. The Open Public Services white paperThe Open Public Services white paper developed from a consultation that was launched in late 2010, and an article byPrime Minister David Cameron that featured in the Daily Telegraph in February 2011. In the article Mr Cameron promised to‘‘break open public sector monopolies’’ by introducing a new presumption that all public services would be opened up tocompetition, apart from the judiciary and security services (Cameron, 2011). The Government produced an additionaldocument, entitled ‘‘Open Public Services 2012’’, in March 2012 (Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2012), which re-iterated the principles andobjectives from the earlier paper.The main thrust of the white paper sets out the Government’s vision for a more diverse market in public services, with agreater role for third sector organisations and private companies in delivery. As such, it echoes much of the NPM rhetoric ofvarious UK politicians from recent decades, particularly since the introduction of Compulsory Competitive Tendering in localgovernment. However, in a new twist, the white paper articulates the Government’s view that it cannot (and indeed shouldnot) reform and improve public services directly from Whitehall by pulling particular bureaucratic levers or introducing newregulations and duties. To return to Bentham’s model therefore, it rejects the idea that performance assessment andimprovement should rely on a centralised panoptical approach. Instead, it says that ministers should set out the conditionsthat allow services to be improved from the ‘bottom-up’ through market mechanisms, increased transparency and localaccountability (Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2011). As such, the Government is proposing that a synoptical model, which gives the publicdirect access to more information about local authority performance and ﬁnancial management, would ensure that serviceproviders operate more effectively.The white paper sets out a framework, based on ﬁve principles for reform, in which these bottom-up activities shouldoperate. This subsection addresses the implications of two of these principles: the view that public services should be‘opened up’ to be delivered by a range of providers, and the argument that they should be made more accountable andresponsive. It focuses in particular on those services that the white paper describes as ‘commissioned’: that is, wherepurchasers can be separated from providers and therefore be subjected to competitive tendering and payment-by-resultsmechanisms. This is a key objective of the Government: as the white paper states, ‘‘the principles of open public services willswitch the default from one where the state provides the service itself to one where the state commissions the service from arange of diverse providers’’ (Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2011, p. 29).UK Governments use white papers to set out policy strategy; in most cases the ideas that they espouse need to appear insubsequent legislation. As such, this white paper is short on the details of how Open Public Services can be translated in terms ofdetailed policy and legislative proposals. However, closer examination of the ‘right to challenge’ incumbent service providersthat features in the 2011 Localism Act, as well as the ‘transparency’ agenda, suggests that additional legislation would not benecessary – at least to trigger change at the local level. As a result, these initiatives, which are covered in more detail in the nextsubsections, are likely to herald a signiﬁcant increase in the outsourcing of public services over the coming years.The white paper argues that ‘opening up’ public services so that alternative providers can deliver them will increaseaccountability, because customers would be able to respond to providers through ‘choice and voice’ mechanisms (CabinetOfﬁce, 2011), and market dynamics would ultimately mean poor performers no longer deliver services. It sets out how thesemechanisms would enable individuals to either opt for an alternative provider or complain to elected ofﬁcials or theOmbudsman if performance is poor.However, in most cases individuals will only be able to access services from a single provider, and elected ofﬁcials willalso be relatively powerless to respond to poor performance during the period of a contract. Indeed, as outlined above,outsourcing and privatisation has been criticised for reducing accountability, because it means that elected bodies are nolonger directly responsible for public services and they may not be able to make major changes to service provision withinthe constraints of an outsourcing contract (Broadbent et al., 2003; Broadbent and Laughlin, 2003; English and Baxter, 2010).As Funnell (2000) highlights, the result is often that citizens receive poorer public services, yet are powerless to respondthrough elected representatives.In short therefore, NPM ideas have reduced the accountability of public services, because many of these services are nolonger delivered by democratically elected bodies. Therefore, since implementing the white paper’s proposals will almostcertainly result in a new wave of outsourcing, public services will become even less accountable than is currently the case.More importantly however, this increase in the outsourcing of public service delivery is likely to occur alongside whatamounts to the outsourcing of public service auditing and assessment, which would widen the accountability gap further andraise new questions about the role of the private sector in public services.2.3.2. The ‘transparency’ agendaThe second key agenda to consider is the Government’s programme to replace formal performance assessments with data‘transparency’. Since taking ofﬁce the UK’s Coalition Government has introduced a range of reforms to performanceP. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538534management and auditing that will have signiﬁcant implications for local authorities in England. Most notably, it announcedthe closure of the Audit Commission – a non-departmental public body that carried out performance assessments of localauthorities alongside its audit practice. Although the Commission’s role in overseeing local authority ﬁnancial auditing hasbeen passed to the National Audit Ofﬁce (a body that also monitors central government spending), no public body has takenover responsibility for monitoring the performance of local public services. As a result, frameworks such as ComprehensiveArea Assessment (CAA), which judged how well public bodies in England were delivering a set of agreed policy outcomes inthe local area, are no longer in force. The predecessor to CAA, Comprehensive Performance Assessment, judged localauthorities more explicitly on service performance, assessed how well they used resources, and gave each council a ‘star’rating. In this way, both frameworks ensured that citizens, public ofﬁcials and elected representatives were given anindependent report into how well their authority was performing, which was based on a range of relevant data and sources.This centralised monitoring system, which had the Audit Commission at its heart, can be compared to that of the Panopticon,because local authorities were constantly aware that they may be under surveillance and behaved accordingly. Following theabolition of this architecture of auditing and assessment, it would appear that local authorities are no longer beingmonitored by an all-seeing observer. As such, they might be less likely to conform to expected norms of behaviour and couldallow standards of ﬁnancial and performance management to fall.To ﬁll the vacuum, the Government announced that local public bodies in England would have to publish a range of datasetsand spending information online (Department for Communities and Local Government, 2010), including data on the costs andperformance of their services and details of senior ofﬁcers’ salaries and expenses. This built on previous initiatives to ‘open up’the workings of government, such as the Freedom of Information Act. Ministers argued that publishing these data would allowindividual citizens to act as ‘armchair auditors’ and that they – rather than the professionals in the Audit Commission – would beable to hold public bodies to account for their spending decisions. In this way, the Government argued (albeit implicitly) that anon-hierarchical synoptical approach would be a more democratic way of monitoring local public service bodies than thecentralised panoptical model. This is because data transparency ensures that public auditors are unable to maintain ‘publicsecrets’ with their clients. Indeed, professional auditors will become increasingly irrelevant under this new regime, becausemembers of the public will assume some of their responsibilities for assessing public services.However, the ‘Siamese twins’ of transparency and accountability can exist separately from one another (Hood, 2010). Inthis case, although the reforms have been accompanied by democratic rhetoric, it is questionable whether the published dataare in fact meaningful to the public, and therefore whether the Synopticon analogy actually applies. In response to theGovernment’s initial drive for transparency, some authorities argued that raw spending data should not be published purelyfor its own sake (Nottingham City Council, 2011). Echoing O’Neill (2006), these critics argued that armchair auditors requiresigniﬁcant resources and additional contextual information about how local public services are delivered in order to givethem an indication of how speciﬁc lines of spending may have contributed towards outcomes. After all, their professionalcounterparts base their judgments on far more than just the organisation’s balance sheet: they interpret a range ofinformation for the beneﬁt of elected representatives and – ultimately – citizens. Following Foucault (1977), auditors aim toensure that data that would otherwise be ‘invisible’ (because they cannot be accessed or analysed easily by stakeholders)become ‘visible’ when they enter the public domain through audit judgments and assessments.Since professional public audit has been sidelined however, neither the public nor elected representatives will receivethese independent assessments about supplier performance. As a result, citizens will not necessarily be able to make aninformed judgement about a service provider and hold them to account. Therefore, although ministers may argue thatmoving towards a synoptical model will improve accountability, it is doubtful whether members of the public will be able toaccess enough relevant and accessible data to make an informed assessment of performance. In other words, despite beingpublicly available, the data will remain ‘invisible’ and the Synopticon will only exist at the level of ministerial rhetoric.As an additional point, performance audit is not just a ‘policing’ function: it also aims to suggest ways to improve inpractice. ‘Armchair auditors’ are very unlikely to have enough knowledge about how a service is managed and delivered tomake these recommendations, and therefore will be unable to assume the traditional role of a ‘critical friend’ who cansuggest improvements following an assessment.2.3.3. The Localism Act and the ‘right to challenge’It is at this juncture where the third piece in the puzzle – the ‘right to challenge’ that features in the 2011 Localism Act(HM Goverment, 2011) – completes the picture. This new right, which like the transparency requirement only applies inEngland, was ostensibly introduced to allow voluntary and community organisations, social enterprises and councilemployee groups (or ‘mutuals’) to express an interest in running any service for which the local authority is currentlyresponsible. If one of these groups submits a challenge, the authority is required to consider the proposals and accept orreject them depending on whether the challenger can show that it would deliver the service cheaper or better than theincumbent provider. In keeping with the principles of the white paper therefore, it is likely to mean that more local publicservices are outsourced to alternative providers.The new framework takes the principles of Compulsory Competitive Tendering (CCT) to a new level. CCT was introducedin the 1980s and remained in place until the late 1990s. It required local authorities to assess whether their services could bedelivered more cheaply by private providers and, if this proved to be the case, they had to be put out to tender. Staff in theauthority had to calculate the existing costs of the service through a complex formula (T-Quantum), in order to identifywhether alternative suppliers could deliver it for less.P. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538 535A key part of this arrangement was that local authorities had a statutory responsibility for calculating T-Quantum inprescribed percentages. This assessment was undertaken by council ﬁnance departments. By incorporating accountingarrangements such as central administration recharging into the design of this efﬁciency assessment, these departmentsretained signiﬁcant control over any decision to outsource. In keeping with Radcliffe (1999), these audits became self-constructed and their ﬁndings were quite predictable: many ‘blue-collar’ services (such as waste collection, street cleansingand housing maintenance) were exposed to competition and ultimately outsourced. In contrast, most ‘white-collar’ servicesremained in-house, including the ﬁnance departments that were responsible for calculating T-Quantum in the ﬁrst place.Independent auditors were not involved in this part of the process; they only judged some of the tendering arrangements at alater stage, in order to assess value for money and to ensure compliance with accounting procedures under the UK’sStatement of Recommended Practice (SORP).In contrast, the Open Public Services white paper takes this discretion away from public managers by inviting externalsuppliers to challenge incumbent providers and trigger a procurement process. Although the local elected Council will beable to accept or reject any challenge, it may wish to avoid potential legal disputes by ensuring that any decision to keep aservice in-house is supported by some evidence. This evidence would almost certainly include any transparency data thatsuggest an alternative supplier would not be able to improve the service or deliver it at lower cost. Furthermore, electedrepresentatives are probably more inclined to approve any outsourcing challenges than the ﬁnance directors who would bemore directly affected by them.The right to challenge was initially heralded as a way of helping to deliver the Government’s aim of a ‘Big Society’, inwhich voluntary organisations assume greater responsibility for public services such as parks, sports centres orcommunity buildings. Indeed, the Localism Act more generally was originally viewed as a key mechanism forimplementing many of these Big Society principles. In this way, the right to challenge can be seen as complementingother initiatives that have been aimed at reforming public services from the ‘bottom-up’. Indeed, the legislationstipulates that it can be exercised by voluntary and community bodies, charitable trusts, parish councils or authorityemployees – in addition to any ‘‘other person or body as may be speciﬁed by the Secretary of State by regulations’’ (HMGovernment 2011, 100).However, under European procurement law, the purchasing authority must maintain a neutral stance when consideringbids for public contracts. As such, it will be difﬁcult to restrict this right to third sector organisations, meaning that largeoutsourcing companies could also be able to exercise it, and challenge incumbent providers (Trades Union Congress, 2011).These larger suppliers will have the resources to analyse the data that are published as part of the transparency agenda, andwill be able to identify which services are underperforming or costing above average. This will also be in their ﬁnancialinterest, as suppliers will be keen to ‘cherry pick’ those services that are most likely to fail a challenge, and triggerprocurement processes that could lead to them delivering the services through outsourcing arrangements.As such, these unaccountable private sector suppliers will be the only organisations with sufﬁcient capacity and incentiveto process the transparency data and come to a judgement about ﬁnancial management and performance. Indeed, in theabsence of the Audit Commission, they will probably become the de facto performance auditors of English local authorities. Inaddition, although the white paper promises that there will be a ‘level playing ﬁeld’ to ensure that all bids are judged equally,it does not acknowledge that the teams on this ﬁeld will vary hugely in terms of their available resources and capacity.Consequently, smaller third sector organisations would need to pull off ‘‘giant-killings’’ to win the bigger contracts, as largeoutsourcing companies are much more likely to be successful in any procurement process.Returning to Foucault (1977), transparency data will therefore only become ‘visible’ once they have been processed andpresented by the outsourcing companies that are looking to challenge an incumbent service provider. As such, this dataanalysis would effectively replace performance audits for most local authority services. This would mean that performanceassessments are carried out by organisations that are not independent and have no responsibility to citizens or duty toprovide services in the public interest – in contrast to existing public sector watchdogs. They would also be focusednarrowly on services that are perceived to be either poor-performing or high-cost, and therefore vulnerable to outsourcing.Finally, as Funnell (2000) has identiﬁed, private sector suppliers are much more likely to withhold information on thegrounds of commercial conﬁdence, which could mean that the assessments are incomplete and/or misleading. Such asituation would have signiﬁcant implications for the accountability of public services in general and of public auditing inparticular.It also becomes clear that these developments would run counter to the notion that the monitoring of local public servicebodies is shifting from a panoptical towards a synoptical approach. If the transparency data only become visible afterpotential service providers have analysed and presented them, then we cannot say that public bodies are being heldaccountable through a democratic, transparent, synoptical process – because citizens do not have the means of surveillanceat their disposal. Instead, it is much more likely that the panoptical framework will continue, but private sector ﬁrms willassume the role of watcher within the system. From the public body’s perspective, the threat of a challenge would beanalogous to the risk of being observed in the Panopticon, and authorities are therefore likely to moderate their behaviour inresponse to potential private sector pressure, rather than citizens’ priorities.In addition to these concerns about democratic accountability, there is also a risk that a lack of independent oversight ofpublic spending will result in mismanagement and potentially corruption. As Free and Radcliffe (2009) have shown, theimplementation of NPM ideas in Canada meant that its approach to audit and accountability became fragmented anddecentralised. The result was a major ﬁnancial scandal – the ‘sponsorship scandal’ – which led to the Canadian GovernmentP. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538536resuscitating its Ofﬁce of the Comptroller General and giving it signiﬁcant powers to monitor public spending in order toprevent a reoccurrence. Whether the UK will follow a similar path remains to be seen.3. Discussion and conclusionAs we have seen, prior to losing the 2010 general election, the UK’s Labour Government adopted a panoptical approach tothe management of public bodies. This involved charging central watchdogs with the task of assessing the extent to whichagencies and local authorities were achieving targets that had been set by ministers and civil servants. These watchdogsproduced reports on how well authorities were managing their ﬁnances, improving corporate performance and deliveringservices. Inspectorates formed these judgments on the basis of the authorities’ ﬁnancial and performance reports, site visits(which were sometimes unannounced) and interviews with key stakeholders both inside and outside the Council (AuditCommission, 2010). By the end of the 2000s, and at the behest of Labour ministers, the Audit Commission amalgamated thejudgments of various inspectorates into a single assessment of the extent to which public bodies were improving outcomesat the local level. Several different watchdogs were involved in the assessment process, in most cases because existing bodiesalready had responsibility for monitoring speciﬁc local services. In spite of this, and the fact that audit bodies limitedthemselves primarily to operational issues outside the political arena, we can characterise this approach as being broadlypanoptical because of its centralised nature and the fact that authorities could never be sure what the auditor might ﬁnd.Since then, the new Coalition Government has dismantled most of this institutional architecture and has instead requiredpublic bodies to make a large amount of their ﬁnancial and performance data available online. Assuming that these data areaccurate and paint a genuine picture of how the organisation is functioning, this ‘transparency’ agenda ﬁts much moreclosely with a synoptical model of surveillance – at least at the level of ministerial rhetoric. This is because (theoretically atleast) citizens can access data that will enable them to hold public bodies to account directly through their role as ‘armchairauditors’, and therefore the ‘many’ are able to monitor the activities of the ‘few’. Government ministers have suggested thatthis democratisation of data will improve public accountability (Department for Communities and Local Government, 2010)because citizens would be better informed about standards of ﬁnancial management and performance within their localauthority. Following this line of argument, initiatives set in train by the Open Public Services white paper would then givethem the opportunity to access services from an alternative supplier or complain about service quality to the Ombudsman.As such, accountability is exercised by citizens, from the bottom-up. In addition, removing professional auditors from theprocess would render debates about their independence and perceived collusion in ‘public secrets’ immaterial, becausecitizens would be able to come to their own conclusions about whether public services provide value for money.However, it is very unlikely that this new model of surveillance and accountability will become a reality. Due to the natureand volume of data that will be published, and the fact that suppliers will have the ‘‘right to challenge’’ incumbent serviceproviders, the Coalition’s reforms are much more likely to result in outsourcing ﬁrms (rather than private citizens) becomingthe de facto performance auditors of local public sector bodies. This is because suppliers will be in the best position to makethe relevant data visible and meaningful to the rest of the population, and it may also be in their ﬁnancial interests to do so.As such, rather than heralding a new, democratic, ‘synoptical’ process that will enable individuals to monitor theperformance of public services by analysing publicly available data, these reform initiatives are more likely to result inoutsourcing companies assuming the role of observer within an enduring panoptical system. Unlike their predecessors,these new watchdogs will not be accountable to the public through Parliament. This raises signiﬁcant additional questionsabout the independence of public audit, and exacerbates concerns about the potential undesirable consequences of newpublic management principles.To contrast this situation with Radcliffe and Funnell’s debate about the role of public auditors, neither elected ofﬁcials norstate-funded appointees will be responsible for assessing local authorities in England. Instead, private companies, who willhave no responsibilities other than to their shareholders, will be the most powerful judges of local government performance.In response to Radcliffe, these suppliers will be less inclined to agree compromises and uphold ‘public secrets’ thanprofessional auditors, as they will have a ﬁnancial interest in exposing poor performance by incumbent suppliers. YetFunnell’s defence of the auditor’s independence will also become less relevant, because these private companies will beacting in their own interests, rather than those of the public. Armed with data provided through the transparency agenda andFreedom of Information Acts, suppliers will be extremely well-placed to furnish elected ofﬁcials, the media and wider publicwith their own interpretations of how well local public services are being delivered. Indeed, these suppliers will assume adual role of both the ‘watchdog’ and ‘attack dog’ for local authorities in England – and the most important ‘armchair auditors’will probably be sitting in the boardroom rather than the lounge.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Christine Cooper, editor of Critical Perspectives on Accounting, as well as the two anonymousreviewers, for their comments on previous versions of this article.ReferencesAnechiarico F, Jacobs JB. Panopticism and ﬁnancial controls: the anti-corruption project in public administration. Crime Law and Social Change 1994;22:361–79.P. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538 537Audit Commission. Comprehensive Area Assessment: Guidance for Inspection Staff (version 2.0) 2010. Available online at http://www.audit-commission.gov.uk/SiteCollectionDocuments/MethodologyAndTools/Guidance/CAAGuidancev2-0.pdf [accessed 10.07.12].Bentham J. In: Bozovic M, editor. The Panopticon Writings. London: Verso; 1995.Boyne R. Post-Panopticism. Economy and Society 2000;29:285–307.Brivot M, Gendron Y. Beyond panopticism: on the ramiﬁcations of surveillance in a contemporary professional setting. Accounting Organizations and Society2011;36:135–55.Broadbent J, Gill J, Laughlin R. The Private Finance Initiative in the U.K.: Contracting in the Context of Infrastructure Investment and Control. International PublicManagement Journal 2003;6:173–98.Broadbent J, Guthrie J. Public sector to public services: 20 years of ‘‘contextual’’ accounting research. Accounting Auditing & Accountability Journal 2008;21:129–69.Broadbent J, Guthrie J. Changes in the public sector: a review of recent ‘‘alternative’’ accounting research. Accounting Auditing & Accountability Journal 1992;5:3–31.Broadbent J, Laughlin R. Control and legitimation in government accountability processes: the private ﬁnance initiative in the UK. Critical Perspectives onAccounting 2003;14:23–48.Cabinet Ofﬁce. Open Public Services White Paper. 2011. Available at http://ﬁles.openpublicservices.cabinetofﬁce.gov.uk/OpenPublicServices-WhitePaper.pdf[accessed 29.03.12].Cabinet Ofﬁce. Open Public Services 2012. 2012. Available at http://ﬁles.openpublicservices.cabinetofﬁce.gov.uk/HMG_OpenPublicServices_web.pdf [accessed29.03.12].Cameron, D. How we will release the grip of state control. Daily Telegraph, 20 February 2011. Available online at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/8337239/How-we-will-release-the-grip-of-state-control.html [accessed 11.04.12].Covaleski MA, Dirsmith MW, Heian JB, Samuel S. The calculated and the avowed: techniques of discipline and struggles over identity in big six public accountingﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly 1998;43:293–327.Demirag I, Khadaroo I. Accountability and value for money in private ﬁnance initiative contracts. Financial Accountability & Management 2008;24:455–78.Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) New era of transparency will bring about a revolution in town hall openness and accountability. 4June 2010 (press release). Available at http://www.communities.gov.uk/newsstories/newsroom/1672156 [accessed 29.03.12].English L, Baxter J. The changing nature of contracting and trust in public-private partnerships: the case of Victorian PPP prisons. Abacus 2010;46:289–319.Ferry L, Eckersley P. Budgeting and governing for deﬁcit reduction in the UK public sector: act two – the annual budget. Public Money and Management 2012;32.199-126.Ferry L, Eckersley P. Budgeting and governing for deﬁcit reduction in the UK public sector: act one – the comprehensive spending review. Journal of Finance andManagement in the Public Services 2011;10:14–23.Foucault M. Discipline and Punish.. (A. Sheridan, Trans.) London: Allen Lane; 1977.Foucault M. The history of sexuality – an introduction, vol. I. New York: Vintage; 1980: 1980.Free C, Radcliffe VS. Accountability in crisis: the sponsorship scandal and the ofﬁce of the comptroller general in Canada. Journal of Business Ethics 2009;84:189–208.Froud J. The private ﬁnance initiative: risk, uncertainty and the state. Accounting Organizations and Society 2003;28:567–89.Funnell WN. Government by ﬁat: the retreat from responsibility. Sydney: University of NSW Press; 2000.Funnell WN. Keeping secrets? Or what government performance auditors might not need to know Critical Perspectives on Accounting 2011;22:714–21.Gendron Y, Cooper DJ, Townley B. In the name of accountability: state auditing, independence and new public management. Accounting Auditing andAccountability Journal 2001;14:278–310.Gendron Y, Cooper DJ, Townley B. The construction of auditing expertise in measuring government performance. Accounting Organizations and Society2007;32:101–29.Giddens A. The politics of climate change. Cambridge: Polity; 2009.HM Government. Localism Act 2011. Available at http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2011/20/contents/enacted [accessed 11.07.12].Hood C. A public management for all seasons? Public Administration 1991;69:3–19.Hood C. The ‘‘New Public Management’’ in the 1980s: variations on a theme. Accounting Organizations and Society 1995;20:93–109.Hood C. Accountability and transparency: Siamese twins, matching parts, awkward couple? West European Politics 2010;33:989–1009.Lapsley I. New public management: cruellest invention of the human spirit? Abacus 2009;45:1–21.Lapsley I. Accounting and the new public management: instruments of substantive efﬁciency or a rationalising modernity? Financial Accountability andManagement 1999;15:201–7.Letza S, Smallman C. In pure water there is a pleasure begrudged by none: on ownership, accountability and control in a privatized utility. Critical Perspectives onAccounting 2001;12:65–85.Mathiesen T. The viewer society: Michel Foucault’s ‘Panopticon’ revisited. Theoretical Criminology 1997;1:215–34.Mayston DJ. The Private Finance Initiative in the National Health Service: an unhealthy development in new public management? Financial Accountability andManagement 1999;15:249–74.Mennicken A, Miller P. Accounting, territorialization and power. Foucault Studies 2012;13:4–24.Nottingham City Council. Beneﬁts of transparency rules are not clear. Press release (dated 18 March 2011) available online at http://www.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/pressarchive/index.aspx?articleid=13951 [accessed 29.03.12].Ogden SG. Transforming frameworks of accountability: the case of water privatisation. Accounting Organizations and Society 1995;20:193–218.O’Neill O. Transparency and the ethics of communication. In: Hood C, Heald D, editors. Transparency: the key to better governance?. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress; 2006.Perryman S. Panoptic performativity and school inspection regimes: disciplinary mechanisms and life under special measures. Journal of Education Policy2006;21:146–61.Pollitt C. Democracy and bureaucracy. In: Held D, Pollitt C, editors. New forms of democracy. London: Sage; 1986.Radcliffe VS. Public secrecy in auditing revisited. Critical Perspectives on Accounting 2011;22:722–32.Radcliffe VS. Public secrecy in auditing: What government auditors cannot know. Critical Perspectives on Accounting 2008;19:99–126.Radcliffe VS. Knowing efﬁciency: the enactment of efﬁciency in efﬁciency auditing. Accounting Organizations and Society 1999;24:333–62.Rathgeb-Smith S. Street-level bureaucracy and public policy. In: Peters BG, Pierre J, editors. Handbook of public administration. London: Sage; 2003 . p. 354–66.Rhodes RAW. Understanding Governance: Policy Networks, Governance, Reﬂexivity and Accountability. Bristol: Open University Press; 1997.Scapens RW. Researching management accounting practice: the role of case study methods. British Accounting Review 1990;22:259–81.Schuppert GF. The changing role of the state reﬂected in the growing importance of non-state actors. In: Schuppert GF, editor. Global governance and the role ofnon state actors. Baden-Baden: Nomos; 2006. p. 203–44.Shaoul J. A critical ﬁnancial analysis of the performance of privatised industries: the case of the water industry in England and Wales. Critical Perspectives onAccounting 1997;8:479–505.Sinclair A. The chameleon of accountability: Forms and discourses. Accounting Organizations and Society 1991;20:219–37.Skaerbaek P. Public sector auditor identities in making efﬁciency auditable: The National Audit Ofﬁce of Denmark as independent auditor and modernizer.Accounting Organizations and Society 2009;34:971–87.Talbot C. La Reforme de la Gestion Publique et ses Paradoxes: l‘experience britannique. Revue Francaise d‘Administration Publique 2003;105:11–24.Taussig M. Defacement: public secrecy and the labor of the negative. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press; 1999.Trades Union Congress (TUC) Open Public Services White Paper – TUC response [dated 13 October 2011]. Available online at http://www.tuc.org.uk/economy/tuc-20175-f0.pdf [accessed 18.06.12].P. Eckersley et al. / Critical Perspectives on Accounting 25 (2014) 529–538538Peter Eckersley is a PhD candidate in Politics at Newcastle University, focusing on comparative governance in English and German cities. He is also anindependent researcher and adviser on issues of public policy. Prior to this, between 2001 and early 2012, he worked for the Chartered Institute for Public Financeand Accountancy (the UK’s accountancy body for the public services), which involved researching and advising over one hundred local authorities on theimplications of government policy and recommended management practices.Dr Laurence Ferry is a lecturer in the Department of Accounting and Finance at Newcastle University. He earned his PhD in Management Accounting fromWarwick Business School. His research has focused on accounting and control in the public services. By profession he is a chartered accountant specializing in thepublic services and has held senior positions in both central and local government in the UK, including as Head of Finance and Resources. He has also undertakenengagement activity with international professional accounting bodies and senior ofﬁcials from over a dozen countries on matters of public sector ﬁnancialmanagement and governance.Dr Zamzulaila Zakaria is an assistant professor in the Department of Accounting at the International Islamic University Malaysia, and a Research Fellow at theUniversity of Bath. She earned her PhD in Management Accounting from Warwick Business School, and is also a chartered accountant. Her area of research hasfocused on the role of accounting and accountability in public sector and privatised organisations.