ABSTRACT: 
Energy transitions face multiple barriers, lock-in, path dependencies and resistance to change which require strategic policy efforts to be overcome. In this regard, it has been increasingly recognised that a multiplicity of instruments – or instrument mixes – are needed to foster low-carbon transitions. In addition, over the past few years a broader conceptualization of policy mixes for sustainability transitions has emerged which we adopt in this special issue. Such a broader perspective not only examines the interaction of instruments, but also captures corresponding policy strategies with their long-term targets and pays greater attention to the associated policy processes. It also encompasses the analysis of overarching policy mix characteristics such as consistency, coherence or credibility, as well as policy design considerations. Furthermore, it embraces the analysis of actors and institutions involved in developing and implementing such policy mixes. To explicitly consider these further aspects of policy mixes, this special issue includes fifteen papers with different analytical perspectives drawing on a range of social science disciplines, such as environmental economics, innovation studies and policy sciences. It is our hope that the conceptual and empirical advances presented here will stimulate diverse future research and inform policy advice on policy mixes for energy transitions. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 policy mixes for energy transitions are multi-actor processes , involving alarge variety of social groups . 
 they are characterized by radical shiftsfrom one socio-technical conﬁguration to another ; and are often long-term processes taking several decades . 
 various deﬁnitions for such policy mixes exist , with the most basic ones focusing simply on a number of multiple policyinstruments and how they are combined in instrument mixes . meanwhile , much of the research on policy mixes for energy transitions has so far focused on the analysis of interactions of policy instrumentsdesigned to aﬀect the operation 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirectEnergy Research & Social Sciencejournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/erssOriginal research articleConceptual and empirical advances in analysing policy mixes for energytransitionsKaroline S. Roggea,b,⁎, Florian Kerna, Michael Howlettc,da SPRU-Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex, UKb Fraunhofer Institute Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe, Germanyc Department of Political Science, Simon Fraser University, Canadad Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, National University of Singapore, SingaporeA R T I C L E I N F OKeywords:Policy mixEnergy transitionsPolicy processesPolicy strategyConsistencyCoherenceA B S T R A C TEnergy transitions face multiple barriers, lock-in, path dependencies and resistance to change which requirestrategic policy eﬀorts to be overcome. In this regard, it has been increasingly recognised that a multiplicity ofinstruments – or instrument mixes – are needed to foster low-carbon transitions. In addition, over the past fewyears a broader conceptualization of policy mixes for sustainability transitions has emerged which we adopt inthis special issue. Such a broader perspective not only examines the interaction of instruments, but also capturescorresponding policy strategies with their long-term targets and pays greater attention to the associated policyprocesses. It also encompasses the analysis of overarching policy mix characteristics such as consistency, co-herence or credibility, as well as policy design considerations. Furthermore, it embraces the analysis of actorsand institutions involved in developing and implementing such policy mixes. To explicitly consider these furtheraspects of policy mixes, this special issue includes ﬁfteen papers with diﬀerent analytical perspectives drawingon a range of social science disciplines, such as environmental economics, innovation studies and policy sciences.It is our hope that the conceptual and empirical advances presented here will stimulate diverse future researchand inform policy advice on policy mixes for energy transitions.1. The importance of policy mixes for energy transitionsThe Paris Agreement calls for the rapid decarbonisation of theglobal energy system to limit temperature increases to well below 2 °C.Since fossil fuel use in the energy sector is one of the main contributorsto global carbon emissions, achieving this goal requires a global tran-sition away from carbon-intensive energy systems towards low carbonconﬁgurations. Such transitions can be understood as dynamic pro-cesses of structural change in the way energy is produced and used, andhave historically taken place over long-time horizons [1–3].Over the last 15 years a burgeoning, interdisciplinary literature hasdeveloped on how such transitions occur [4,2,5–10]. The sustainabilitytransitions literature conceptualises transitions as co-evolutionary pro-cesses that involve technological innovations and their use in societalapplications. As such, transitions are multi-actor processes, involving alarge variety of social groups. They are characterized by radical shiftsfrom one socio-technical conﬁguration to another; and are often long-term processes taking several decades ([3,91]).This is because transitions face multiple barriers, including lock-ininto high carbon, fossil fuel based technological trajectories, pathdependencies and resistance to change from incumbent industriesbeneﬁtting from the current socio-technical conﬁgurations. For ex-ample Unruh [11] has powerfully argued how industrial economieshave been locked into fossil fuels based energy systems through aprocess of technological and institutional co-evolution which is drivenby path dependent increasing returns to scale. One form of path de-pendency is cognitive lock in as ﬁrms normally continue innovatingalong established paths (‘normal’ problem solving) rather than tryingsomething radically new (technologies or business models). This pro-cess has been described as technological trajectories [12] which arehard to shift. Also Walker [13] has shown that organisational com-mitments and vested interests in the continuation of systems, evenwhen economically obsolete, can create inertia, causing inferior tech-nologies and technology paths to survive. These obstacles mean thatlow carbon transitions require strategic policy eﬀorts to be overcome[14,15]. Without such policies, these problems enforce the stability ofexisting unsustainable, high carbon energy systems and prevent tran-sitions from occurring [11,5].Public policy is hence key to promoting energy transitions in termsof both their speed and direction [5,16,7,17]. While much of the earlyhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.025Received 9 September 2017; Received in revised form 19 September 2017; Accepted 21 September 2017⁎ Corresponding author at: SPRU - Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex, BN1 9SL Brighton Falmer, UK.E-mail address: k.rogge@sussex.ac.uk (K.S. Rogge).Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–10Available online 24 October 20172214-6296/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).MARKliterature on addressing climate change focused on discussions aboutspeciﬁc instruments suitable for internalising negative externalitiesarising from greenhouse gas emissions (tax versus trading) [18,19], ithas been increasingly recognised that a multiplicity of instruments isneeded to foster successful transitions [20–22].This shift away from striving for one instrument as the silver bulletto a recognition that well designed combinations of instruments areneeded for fostering transitions may still be contested by some. Yet,even economists increasingly acknowledge that tackling climate changemay require not only carbon pricing but also complementary instru-ments [23]. Empirically, even in jurisdiction where an emission tradingsystem (ETS) as one way of pricing carbon has been introduced (such asin the EU), alongside this policy instrument a wide range of other in-struments exist, thereby addressing several market and system failures.For example, the progress of the German electricity transition towardsrenewable energies, arguably largely hinged upon a policy designwhich combined feed-in tariﬀs and priority access to the grid, as well asspeciﬁc long-term expansion targets, under the umbrella of one law, theEEG, thereby complementing the EU ETS [24–26]. This example alsoillustrates that other policy mix considerations played a key role, aswell, such as the simultaneous existence of the nuclear phase out, thepromotion of research and development, or the credibility, consistencyand coherence of the overarching policy mix [27,24,28]. That is, whilesome instruments may be considered as core, such as feed-in tariﬀs forthe promotion of renewable energies or carbon pricing for reducinggreenhouse gas emissions, what matters for achieving the objectivesassociated with ambitious low-carbon energy transitions is not onlytheir design but how well they are embedded in a policy mix [29].Furthermore, any attempt to govern energy transitions does notstart on a bare slate but is always embedded in pre-existing policycontexts with legacies of instruments from earlier policy eras still inplace [30]. It is this complicated, messy reality which inﬂuences policyoutcomes rather than economic textbook considerations around ‘ﬁrstbest’ policy options and ‘optimal’ policy design. The policy mix litera-ture is an attempt to make sense of this empirical complexity whilesimultaneously acknowledging a diverse set of policy rationales callingfor policy mixes rather than single policy instruments. It is thereforeincreasingly important to explicitly study policy mixes, how they can bedesigned and how they can be implemented in order to promote de-liberate sustainability transitions [31,29].Various deﬁnitions for such policy mixes exist (see Table 1), withthe most basic ones focusing simply on a number of multiple policyinstruments and how they are combined in instrument mixes[32,20,23]. Correspondingly, much of the research on policy mixes forimportant sustainability areas such as energy transitions has so farmainly focused on the analysis of interactions of policy instrumentsdesigned to aﬀect the operation of energy systems [35–38]. However,broader understandings of policy mixes pay greater attention to otheraspects of such mixes as well, especially those related to policy pro-cesses and how they aﬀect the characteristics of policy mixes, includingsuch issues as policy integration and coordination across multiple sec-tors and levels of government ([39,29,40,92]).However, given its novelty, empirical applications and analysesapplying such extended policy mix conceptions have so far been limited[28,41,42]. It is therefore the aim of this special issue to collectemerging conceptual and empirical advances adopting such a broaderconceptualization of policy mixes in order to study and assess themeans and mechanisms for energy transitions. The special issues thusincludes papers examining not only interacting instruments, but alsocorresponding policy strategies and their long-term targets, policyprocesses as well as overarching policy mix characteristics such asconsistency, coherence or credibility and policy design considerations.In addition, the special issue engages with the analysis of the actors andinstitutions involved in developing and implementing such mixes in theenergy case. Consequently, the analytical perspectives in this specialissue draw on a range of social science disciplines, such as environ-mental economics, innovation studies and policy sciences to explicitlyconsider further aspects of such policy mixes. These diﬀerent perspec-tives on policy mixes will be brieﬂy introduced in the next section.2. Disciplinary perspectives on policy mixesThe emerging literature on policy mixes for sustainability transi-tions builds on three key disciplinary foundations: environmental eco-nomics, innovation studies, and policy sciences. Unfortunately, thesethree ﬁelds have so far developed largely independently of each other,with little attempts of cross-fertilization. As a consequence, each hasdeveloped its own understanding of what constitutes a policy mix andhow key terms should be deﬁned, thereby rendering interdisciplinarydialogue diﬃcult (see Table 1 and Fig. 1).Table 1Three main ﬁelds addressing policy mixes with exemplary deﬁnitions.Field Examples of policy mix deﬁnitionsEnvironmental economics • Instrument mixes are deﬁned as a situation in which “several – instead of one – policy instruments are used to address a particular environmentalproblem”. ([32], p. 186)• “The need for a policy mix has been recognised by many governments, but experience to date has been that the interactions among multiplepolicies are often not well understood nor well coordinated, which can lead to policy redundancy or policies undermining one another, reducingthe eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of the overall package.” ([20], p. 60)• “Polluting sources may be aﬀected directly or indirectly by several policies addressing the same pollution problem. This is referred to as a policymix [..].” ([23], p. 1)Policy sciences • Limitations in environmental policy “can only be overcome by invoking a broader vision of regulation and by the pursuit of broader policy mixes,utilizing combinations of instruments and actors, and taking advantage of various synergies and complementarities between them." ([33], p. 5)• “Policy mixes are complex arrangements of multiple goals and means which, in many cases, have developed incrementally over many years.” ([30],p. 395)Innovation studies • “A policy mix is deﬁned as: The combination of policy instruments, which interact to inﬂuence the quantity and quality of R &D investments inpublic and private sectors.” ([34], p. 3)• “[..] policy mixes favourable to sustainability transitions need to involve both policies aiming for the ‘creation’ of new and for ‘destroying’ (orwithdrawing support for) the old.” ([31], p. 206)• “[..] we deﬁne the policy mix as a combination of the three building blocks elements, processes and characteristics, which can be speciﬁed usingdiﬀerent dimensions. Elements comprise the (i) policy strategy with its objectives and principal plans for achieving them and (ii) the instrumentmix with its interacting policy instruments. The content of these elements is an outcome of policy processes. Both elements and processes can bedescribed by their characteristics, including the consistency of elements, the coherence of processes, as well as the credibility andcomprehensiveness of a policy mix. Finally, the policy mix can be delineated by several dimensions, including policy ﬁeld, governance level,geography and time.” ([29], p. 1622f.)K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–102Much research focusing on the advantages and disadvantages, orstrengths and weaknesses of diﬀerent combinations of instruments andtheir interactions draws on environmental economics. Here, the rationalefor using multiple policy instruments is said to rest on the existence ofmultiple market failures, each of which can be addressed by a diﬀerenttool [43,32,23]. Therefore, the corresponding analyses of policy in-strument mixes found in this ﬁeld is often concerned with designing anoptimal combination of policy instruments put in place to addressspeciﬁc failures with the idea that (a) some failures can be addressed bymany diﬀerent tools and (b) some combinations of tools are more‘complementary’ than others in that some tools can supplement or re-inforce market corrections [44,45]. The idea that some mixes can besub-optimal poses a range of questions about how such instrumentsinteract with each other and with over-riding market and governmentfailures, and how this impacts the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of policyinterventions singly and as a whole. Much of this work has focused oninteractions between the EU emissions trading system (EU ETS) andother climate and energy policy instruments ranging from producerregulations to individual household consumption incentives and disin-centives [35,36].In contrast, the thinking about policy mixes from the ﬁeld of policysciences includes the analysis of both instruments and the goals they areexpected to achieve, of which correcting market failures is seen at bestas only one among many [46,40]. That is, the assessment of policymixes is based on overall policy mix characteristics such as not just theconsistency of multiple instruments, but also the coherence of multiplegoals, and the congruence between instruments and goals, often in thecontext of multiple governments and governmental actions over time[30,42]. The potential ‘ﬁt’ of proposed new policy programmes or in-struments with their governance context is also considered important[47] and an important issue of interest is “how speciﬁc types of policytools or instruments are bundled or combined in a principled mannerinto policy ‘portfolios’ or ‘mixes’ in an eﬀort to attain policy goals” ().Importantly, one of the main starting points of this literature is that newpolicy developments are almost always constrained by previous policychoices, whereas situations where completely new policy mixes aredeveloped are considered to be quite rare. Thus, an important questionin this ﬁeld is the evolution of policy mixes and the processes throughwhich such change happens. Drawing on institutional theory, Howlettand Rayner [47] for example have suggested that policy mixes typicallyevolve through four processes: layering, drift, conversion and replace-ment ([90]).Finally, the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of innovation studies has also re-latively recently taken a speciﬁc interest in questions around the role ofpolicy mixes in promoting technological and other kinds of innovations,with several contributions published over the last decade in ResearchPolicy [39,48–51,31,29] and other innovation studies journals[52,53,28,54] on these subjects. Some of these contributions mirror theinterest of environmental economists in instrument interactions aroundmarket and government failures seen as barriers to innovation [49,51].However most of this work adopts a broader perspective on mixes inwhich, as with the policy sciences view, the dynamic nature of policymixes, the importance of policy processes, the relevance of long-termtargets and the challenges for policy coordination are all stressed[39,55,56]. Such a broader perspective on policy mixes is argued to beparticularly relevant for innovations required for sustainability transi-tions [29], and includes, among others, the explicit consideration ofpolicies promoting creative destruction [31] and of policy mix char-acteristics, such as the consistency of policy mix elements and the co-herence of policy processes which can allow such policies to developand be implemented successfully [28,41].Given the terminological variety and sometimes conﬂicting deﬁni-tions of some core concepts used within the policy mix literature, and tofacilitate constructive dialogue across diﬀerent ﬁelds, in Table 2 weprovide an overview of selected policy mix components and some of theirkey deﬁnitions, as applied in the contributions of this special issue.1Fig. 1. Exemplary visualizations of a range of policy mix conceptualizations from the three ﬁelds.Source: Own compilation of [29,30,32,37,47,89].1 Listing all deﬁnitions used within the policy mix literature would be beyond the scopeof this SI introduction.K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–1033. Aims of the special issueThe papers in this special issue generally adopt a broad perspectiveon policy mixes governing energy transitions combining the dis-ciplinary perspectives described above. In so doing the authors pursuethe aims of the special issue, which include:1. To increase the visibility of the topic of policy mixes for energytransition studies within the ﬁeld of energy research by showcasingnovel conceptual and empirical approaches to the subject;2. To promote conceptual innovations in the way energy transitionscholars understand and study policy mixes by bringing together amulti-disciplinary collection of authors who draw on diﬀerent dis-ciplinary evidence, cases and approaches to the subject; and3. To provide reﬂections on the state of the emerging literature onpolicy mixes for future research and practice related to energytransitions.The contributions to this special issue were selected through acompetitive process. The guest editors published an open call for con-tributions in July 2016 through relevant mailing lists (e.g. Energy-l,Climate-l, STRN) and other means to identify potential contributions. Inresponse to our call we received 65 extended abstracts (1500 words).2Table 2An overview of key deﬁnitions of policy mix components utilized in this special issue.Term Key deﬁnition(s) of policy mix components found in this special issue (and source)Policy instruments • “[..] are techniques of governance that, one way or another, involve the utilization of state authority or its conscious limitation.”([57], p. 31)• “[..] constitute the concrete tools to achieve overarching objectives. [..] A number of alternative terms are used, such as implementingmeasures [.], programs [.], policies [.], or policies and measures [.].” ([29], p. 1623)Design features of policy instruments • “Design features can be diﬀerentiated by abstract and descriptive features. Descriptive design features, such as an instrument’s legalform, its target actors, and its duration, summarize the content of a policy instrument [.]. A number of abstract design features [.] maybe important to consider: stringency, level of support, predictability, ﬂexibility, diﬀerentiation and depth.” ([29], p. 1624)Instrument interactions • “[..] interactions between instruments might be positive, when the performance of one or both examined instruments against acriterion increases because of their coexistence, or negative when the combined policies lead to negative impacts that would not haveoccurred by either alone.” ([35], p. 421)• “[..] interactions between instruments targeting the same actor or group of actors, interactions between instruments targeting diﬀerentactors/groups involved in the same process, and interactions between instruments targeting points of action which may otherwise seemto be far removed but which interact because the processes or actors targeted prove ultimately to be linked by other processes in abroader ‘system’. To these we would add [.] the possibility that ‘the same’ instruments will interact with each other across one or moreoften possible dimensions (for instance, between diﬀerent levels of governance or over time).” ([39], p. 710)Policy strategy • “[..] composed of the following three building blocks [..]: Strategy content, composed of policy objectives and the measures designedto achieve them; Strategy process, encompassing the process of policy development, implementation and adaptation; Strategiccapacity, including capacities needed for policy development, implementation and learning as well as the engagement ofstakeholders.” ([50], p. 235)• “[..] a combination of policy objectives and the principal plans for achieving them. That is, the deﬁnition puts an emphasis on theoutput – the ends and means – of the strategy process, while the adaptive process of formulating, implementing and revising objectivesand plans is captured by the processes building block [.].” ([29], p. 1623)Policy process • “Policy process research can be deﬁned as the study of the interactions over time between public policy and its surrounding actors,events, and contexts, as well as the policy or policies’ outcomes.” ([58], p. 5)• “[..] political problem-solving process among constrained social actors in the search for solutions to societal problems – with thegovernment as primary agent taking conscious, deliberate, authoritative and often interrelated decisions. As such, these interactive andcontinuous reconciliation processes with various feedback loops involve power, agency and politics.” ([29], p. 1625)Consistency/coherence/congruence • “[.] policy goals are typically considered as coherent if they are logically related to the same overall policy aims and objectives and canbe achieved simultaneously without any signiﬁcant trade-oﬀs. They are incoherent if they contain major contradictions, i.e. goals thatcannot be achieved simultaneously and lead to the attainment of only some or none of the original objectives [.] Policy tools areconsistent when they work together to support a policy goal. They are inconsistent when they work against each other and arecounterproductive, for example, providing simultaneous incentives and disincentives toward the attainment of stated policy goals[.].” ([30], p. 395) “[.] they also suggest the importance of the third element of a policy mix, namely the congruence of goals andmeans in any policy mix.” ([30], p. 401)• “We deﬁne policy coherence as an attribute of policy that systematically reduces conﬂicts and promotes synergies between and withindiﬀerent policy areas to achieve the outcomes associated with jointly agreed policy objectives. [.] Den Hertog and Stroß [59] found alack of delineation between the terms coherence and consistency. Similarly, a potential source of confusion is arguably the lack ofdelineation between policy integration and policy coherence. As seen above, many coherence studies have tended to focus onprocedural aspects [.]. The approach taken in this study to delineate policy coherence analysis is to focus on policy outputs (includingobjectives and associated implementation arrangements), whereas policy integration analysis is primarily concerned with upstreampolicy making processes and the associated institutional arrangements.” ([60], p. 396)• “We suggest that consistency captures how well the elements of the policy mix are aligned with each other, thereby contributing to theachievement of policy objectives. It may range from the absence of contradictions [weak consistency] to the existence of synergies[strong consistency] within and between the elements [policy strategy and instrument mix] of the policy mix. [.] We distinguishbetween consistency of the policy strategy [ﬁrst level consistency], consistency of the instrument mix [second level consistency], andconsistency of the instrument mix with the policy strategy [third level consistency. [.] To characterize policy processes we use the termcoherence, [.] deﬁning policy coherence as referring to synergistic and systematic policy making and implementation processescontributing – either directly or indirectly – towards the achievement of policy objective. [.] may be achieved through a number ofstructural and procedural mechanisms, such as strategic planning, coordinating structures and communication networks [.]. Two majortools for improving policy coherence are policy integration [.] and coordination [.].” ([29], p. 1626f.)2 Because of the large number of high quality abstracts received in response to our CfPwe are also acting as guest-editors for a second special issue which focuses more broadlyon policy mixes for sustainability transitions and is intended to be published in the journalK.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–104Through independent reviews by the three guest editors, who scoredproposals on the basis of their quality as well as their ﬁt with the aimsof the special issue, and through an extended discussion of the abstractsamongst the co-editors, papers which were found to be particularlypromising for achieving the aims of the special issue were selected. Theindividual contributions then went through the normal ERSS peer re-view process before publication here.3In the remainder of this introduction to the special issue we exploreﬁve key research themes on policy mixes for energy transitions whichemerge in these contributions. For each theme we ﬁrst lay out itsmeaning and importance, followed by a summary of the correspondingpapers and their contribution to the theme. The themes are policy mixrationales and interdisciplinary foundations, instrument interactionsand coordination, designing eﬀective policy mixes, policy mixes forcreative destruction, and the role of actors and institutions. In the ﬁnalsection we then summarise the most important implications from theemerging academic work on policy mixes for energy transitions andsuggest avenues for future research.4. Five themes of policy mix research4.1. Policy mix rationalesAs many works in environmental economics and innovation studieshave attested, policies intended to promote transitions towards low-carbon energy systems need to address multiple market and systemfailures [23,16]. While economists tend to focus on traditional marketfailures such as underinvestment in R &D or negative environmentalexternalities of greenhouse gas emissions as justiﬁcations for policyinterventions [61,43], innovation scholars in addition point to the ex-istence of structural and transformational system failures, such as in-stitutional failures or failures regarding the direction of transformationprocesses [16]. Taken together, these sets of failures provide a strongrationale for policy interventions in the form of policy mixes rather thansingle instruments as there are no ‘silver bullet’ instruments which ontheir own could address all the aspects of these failures [23,29,17]. Inthis context, several articles in this special issue provide insights intodiﬀerent policy mix rationales found in diﬀerent energy-related sectorsand analyze them from diﬀerent interdisciplinary perspectives.The ﬁrst contribution, Jacobsson et al. provides a critical assess-ment of the policy rationale underpinning policy interventions of theEU Commission in the context of the decarbonisation of the EU energysystem. The authors argue that the Commission’s approach heavily restson assumptions it has made about market failures, static eﬃciency andtechnology neutrality, which disregard insights from classical econo-mists and others about the non-linear nature of technical change andindustrial dynamics. Based on this literature, the authors identify anumber of weaknesses in the Commission’s approach to policy inter-ventions for transformative changes in energy systems and assess howan innovation system approach with its additional focus on structuraland functional processes could provide a complement to existingthought and practices. Based on this approach, the authors draw lessonsfor how eﬀective mixes of policy instruments can be identiﬁed whichpay greater attention to dynamic eﬃciency and the structural build-upof innovation systems. This is illustrated using the case of oﬀshore windin Sweden for which eight system weaknesses – instead of only thethree based on the approach utilized by the EU Commission – wereidentiﬁed, thereby leading to a diﬀerent mix of policy instruments tothat proposed by the commission is required if a transition is to occur.In the second contribution, Grubb et al. bridge the lack ofengagement between mainstream innovation economics and evolu-tionary innovation system approaches. For this, the authors propose aframework that is introduced in three steps: ﬁrst, three domains ofsocio-economic decision-making regarding technology innovation andadoption choices are outlined and related to three policy pillars; second,an innovation chain approach is proposed as a simplifying frameworksupporting the explanation of radical diﬀerences in innovation in-tensities between diﬀerent sectors; and third, based on this analysis amultiple journeys approach is used to capture the processes which arerequired for successful innovation in this ﬁeld – ordered according tolevels of decision-making domains. The authors conclude by discussingimplications for policy makers regarding instrument mixes for energytransitions, including a recognition of diﬀerences in mix designs arisingfrom drawing on the diﬀerent bodies of literature to inform the ana-lysis.Finally, Burke and Stephens argue that thinking about policymixes for energy transitions from a very broad energy democracy per-spective oﬀers better prospects for achieving transitions compared totraditional energy innovation or climate mitigation eﬀorts because ofthe explicit focus on desirable social change contained in this per-spective. They ﬁrst derive a set of desired policy goals and intendedoutcomes from a survey of the literature generated by the energy de-mocracy movement. They then describe and categorise the policy in-struments proposed by this literature into a set composed of those af-fecting regulatory context, ﬁnancial inclusion measures, economicinstitutions and new energy system institutions, and assess the extent towhich the individual instruments are congruent with the goals of en-ergy democracy. Lastly, they assess whether the instruments constitutea comprehensive policy mix which can be expected to support outcomesconsidered to be constitutive of an energy democracy vision leading toa sustainable transition. They conclude that the energy democracy ap-proach of resist-reclaim-restructure energy systems oﬀers a compre-hensive agenda for advancing renewable energy transitions whichbrings together moves to push back dominant energy regimes whileencouraging their replacement through alternative socio-technicalconﬁgurations such as locally-owned, distributed generation. They alsoconsider their approach as helpful in informing the design and eva-luation of policy mixes for energy transitions.4.2. Interactions and coordination of policy instrumentsThe second research theme concerns better understanding andanalysis of the speciﬁc modalities and outcomes from the interactionand coordination of policy instruments which can be traced back toGunningham et al.’s [33] seminal work on smart regulation. Researchon such instrument interactions has developed into a key line of policymix research, with energy and climate policy as those policy ﬁeldscovered most intensively in early work, particularly since the in-troduction of the EU emission trading system (EU ETS) as a novel,market-based climate policy instrument [35]. Studies in this traditionhave analyzed the interaction eﬀects, particularly between the EU ETSand policy instruments promoting renewable energies and energy eﬃ-ciency [36,37,62,45]. A number of methodological approaches andanalytical frameworks have been developed for such interaction ana-lysis [63,64,38] with much of this work focusing on the EU [65,66].Key questions raised in this research concern how instruments interact,how this can be analyzed, and which recommendations arise for moreconsistent bundles of instruments which reinforce rather than under-mine each other in the pursuit of policy objectives [47]. Two papers inthis special issue expand the scope of existing research on such in-strument interactions.In the ﬁrst contribution del Rio and Cerdá provide an assessment ofthe negative impact of speciﬁc instruments and their design features forthe promotion of electricity from renewable energy sources (RES-E) onCO2 prices. For this purpose, the authors propose an analytical frame-work for evaluating the impact of diﬀerent instruments (e.g. feed-in(footnote continued)Research Policy in 2018.3 To avoid a conﬂict of interest all submissions with author aﬃliations of the Universityof Sussex, including those by two of the three guest editors, were handled by guest editorMichael Howlett.K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–105tariﬀs, auctions) and design features (e.g. target setting, ﬂexible de-gression) on the interactions between RES-E support and CO2 mitiga-tion instruments (emissions trading or carbon tax). Two main evalua-tion criteria used: the adaptability of targets and instruments (in termsof being able to take into account the expected outcomes of one policyon the design of the other, and make adjustments accordingly) and theeﬀectiveness of the policy intervention (in terms of RES-E deploymentand CO2 emission reductions). The qualitative results show that, whilenegative interactions can be mitigated through coordination, adapt-ability depends on the choice of instruments and design features of eachtool. The alleged negative impact on CO2 prices is found to be morelikely under quantity-based than under price-based CO2 mitigation in-struments. In contrast, they are more likely with price-based than withquantity-based RES-E support instruments. The authors remind us thatthe choice of design features critically aﬀects this result, thereby un-derlining the importance of analysing not only instrument types in amix but also the speciﬁc design of instruments themselves.While much of the literature on instrument interactions has focusedon climate and energy policies in Europe, the contribution by Duanet al. moves beyond this limited geographical focus by analysing ex-pected interactions of China’s novel national greenhouse gas emissionstrading system with other climate and energy policies found in thatcountry. Their empirical analysis rests on expert interviews and pro-vides in-depth insights into the policy processes associated with thedesign and implementation of China’s national ETS as well as othermitigation, energy conservation and renewable energy policies. Theanalysis ﬁnds that mandatory consultation processes have not been ableto provide a suﬃcient degree of coordination between emissionstrading and other policies, resulting in a loss of eﬀectiveness and eﬃ-ciency of policy instruments. A main reason for this observed lack ofcoordination is shown to be the vested interests of relevant departmentsand individuals reluctant to reduce their functions in the interests ofoverall system level eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, and/or transitions.They argue that addressing the coordination challenges involved insuch transitions requires strong political support and leadership at le-vels higher than those of the organizations that are to be aﬀected bymaking the instrument mix more consistent. However, the authorsargue that since the opportunity for a more systematic coordination ofChina’s ETS and other relevant policies was missed, for the time beingcoordination at a technical rather than political level may only bepossible for achieving the urgently needed improvements in the policymix. Duan et al. conclude that the ongoing elaboration of the ﬁnaldesign of China’s national ETS may oﬀer another chance to reducepotentially negative interactions and thus improve the eﬀectiveness andeﬃciency of China’s climate policy mix.4.3. Designing eﬀective policy mixesAs these articles suggest, while the analysis of instrument interac-tions remains an important issue in future research, energy transitionscall for much greater attention to be paid to the design of policy mixesand their characteristics [46,30,67,68]. Contemporary policy designstudies have placed a great emphasis on better understanding toolportfolios themselves and the processes that create them [69–71,29].The components of such mixes include policy goals and policy means atvarious levels of generality [72,73,30].As set out above, in the policy sciences such portfolios are combi-nations of policy instruments that are expected to achieve a variety ofspeciﬁc policy objectives [33]. Some instruments may work well withothers – as is the case with “self-regulation” set within a regulatorycompliance framework [74,75] – while other combinations may not,such as, notably, independently developed subsidies and regulation ifthey work at cross-purposes to simultaneously reward and constraincertain types of activities or behaviours [76].Studies in the policy sciences and elsewhere have all increasedawareness of the many dilemmas that can appear in the path ofeﬀective policy tool or ‘toolkit’ designs and signiﬁcantly advancedpolicy design studies in so doing. These works have, among otherthings, articulated several principles for policy design to guide policypractice [77–79] and noted that mixes have both a ‘horizontal’ aspect –having to do with the number of tools and goals being addressed by onelevel of government – as well as often having a multi-level or ‘vertical’governance component [71,40]. Eﬀectively optimizing the choice ofinstruments in the more complex multi-dimensional mixes requires anadditional level of knowledge of instrument-goal interactions andgovernmental contexts requiring an understanding of both long andshort-term processes of policy change.These subjects became a major topic of investigation within com-parative policy studies [80–82] over the past several years. Evidenceconcerning renewable energy and energy eﬃciency policy, for example,has revealed that policy packages combining voluntary compliancewith command-and-control regulation can be inherently inconsistent,bringing out contradictory responses from targets of these policycombinations [83,84]. This raises several key questions on the design ofpolicy mixes which four papers in this special issue address.Imbert et al. conduct a comparative analysis of bioeconomy stra-tegies in Germany and Italy with a focus on the bioplastics sector. Theyargue that the transition away from ﬁnite fossil fuels does not onlyinvolve changes towards a bio-based economy in the energy sector butalso in the manufacturing sector. Their analysis builds on a wide-ran-ging policy strategy concept which combines attention to both the ar-ticulation of policy goals as well as policy instruments with an interestin the processes of policy development and the institutional capacitiesfor policy development and implementation. The paper draws up acontinuum of policy strategy formation which ranges from emergent,bottom-up processes of incrementally emerging policy mixes to delib-erate, top down strategies formulated by bureaucrats. The authors ﬁndthat while both countries are considered frontrunners with regard to thedevelopment of the bioeconomy, their policy strategies are fundamen-tally diﬀerent. Germany is found to have pursued a deliberate, for-malized, top-down government strategy with a focus on knowledgedevelopment and innovation, while Italy’s policy strategy can be con-sidered a more emergent, bottom-up, industry stakeholder driven pro-cess with a focus on market development. With regard to the verticalpolicy mix dimension, the authors argue that linkages between theGerman and the Italian strategies via policy making processes at the EUlevel have helped to reinforce the emerging transition to a bio-basedeconomy in Europe. This work shows that it is often possible to haveseveral routes to change and what works in one case may not in an-other, requiring analysts and designers to have a ﬁne appreciation ofthe nuances of the policy and governance contexts in which mixes aredeveloped and implemented.Purkus et al. analyse trade-oﬀs between policy ﬂexibility and sta-bility in the European and German bioenergy mix. They note thatpromoting innovation in the context of sustainability transitions, em-phasizes the importance of combining technology- push and demand-pull instruments in a coordinated policy mix. The design of such policymixes, however, remains challenging, due to path dependencies, in-teracting market failures, and uncertainty regarding eventual eco-nomic, environmental and societal impacts of innovations. This resultsin the need for an adaptive and ﬂexible policy design, but at the sametime, stable political framework conditions are required to bring aboutlasting changes in production and consumption behaviour. This paperundertakes an economic assessment of how this trade-oﬀ betweenﬂexibility and stability has been addressed in practice in the Europeanand German bioenergy policy mix. Based on the theory of second bestand new institutional economics, they identify dimensions for assessingwhether relevant uncertainties, interactions between market failuresand other constraints on ﬁrst-best policy making have been handled in arational manner. From the case study, they derive lessons for devel-oping bioeconomy policy mixes, as a further example of a dec-arbonisation policy mix faced by high uncertainty and complexity.K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–106Rosenow et al. explore the purpose of speciﬁc instrument typeswithin the instrument mix regarding speciﬁc levels of technologicalcomplexity and cost-eﬀectiveness, compared across Europe. The paperuses an existing dataset produced as part of a pan-European eﬀort tounderstand instrument mixes in 14 EU Member States in the area ofenergy eﬃciency. They argue that to meet global climate goals an en-ergy transition is needed. However, energy transitions are complex andlong-term processes which require a variety of public policy interven-tions to steer their direction and speed in order to achieve global cli-mate change mitigation targets. One area where policy support is re-quired is energy eﬃciency, which oﬀers a high potential for carbonsavings. It is widely acknowledged that energy eﬃciency improvementsneed to be faster and deeper than is currently the case requiringchanges to existing policy instrument mixes to support both those en-ergy eﬃciency measures that are simple and cost-eﬀective as well asmore complex and costly technologies. In other words, policy mixesneed to be well-targeted and comprehensive. The issue of comprehen-siveness is addressed in terms of technology-speciﬁcity and the level ofcomplexity and costliness of energy eﬃciency measures. Based on theempirical analysis and a segmentation of instrument types and theirrole in the overall mix, Rosenow et al. illustrate the need for using acomprehensive instrument mix rather than single instruments to pro-mote energy eﬃciency.Falcone et al. then contribute to discussions about how to designeﬀective policy mixes for energy transitions by presenting an empiricalanalysis which identiﬁes the most eﬀective policy combinations to steera sustainable energy transition. They do so under two alternative crisisscenarios: one in which the economic crisis is worsening with biofuelproduction dropping signiﬁcantly, and a second in which the economiccrisis is improving. Empirically the authors focus on the Italian biofuelsector and in terms of methodology, use a fuzzy inference simulationand two-step investigation. First, they identify the concepts sur-rounding the biofuel sector by means of a speciﬁcally designed ques-tionnaire and review of the relevant literature. Second, they interviewexperts to map the casual eﬀect relationships among the concepts. Onthe basis of this map, they then develop two alternative scenarios andthe related most suitable instrument mixes to foster the development ofthe Italian biofuel sector. Not surprisingly, their ﬁndings show that themost eﬀective policy mixes vary across the scenarios and goals pursuedby policy makers. Therefore, their contribution supports the need to gobeyond a simple one-size-ﬁts-all approach to ‘optimal’ policy mix de-sign and argues that policy mixes are sensitive to feedback and reboundeﬀects that are very context dependent.4.4. Policy mixes for creative destructionMuch of the existing work on policy action for fostering energytransitions has focussed on how to promote innovation in low carbontechnologies, the deployment of renewable energy or energy eﬃcienttechnologies or the role of economic instruments such as carbon taxesor trading. This work focuses on innovation and deployment of newtechnologies but there has been too little work on simultaneouslypursuing instruments disincentivising existing high carbon technolo-gies. As set out above, it has been argued in the innovation literaturethat in the context of transitions, policy mixes aiming at structuralchange within a sector may need to pursue simultaneously the ‘crea-tion’ of new energy innovations as well as the ‘destruction’ of incum-bent sociotechnical systems in order to speed up processes of ‘creativedestruction’ [31]. This reﬂects the initial focus on innovation processesin the work on energy transitions, with less attention being paid topotential destabilisation of existing industries or industrial decline.More recent literature has started to pay more attention to processes ofregime destabilisation [85–87] but has not speciﬁcally addressed howpolicy can contribute to such destabilisation processes. With manycountries now considering the phase out of carbon-intensive technolo-gies such as internal combustion engines or coal ﬁred electricitygeneration plants, this topic is also receiving increasing interest frompolicy makers. The three contributions to this theme in the issuetherefore add to an emerging strand of work on the question of whichrole policies aimed at phasing out undesired high carbon energy tech-nologies or practices can play as part of wider policy mixes to promoteenergy transitions.Kivimaa et al. connect the literatures of policy evaluation, policymixes and sustainability transition. They utilize client-oriented eva-luation to examine national policies in Finland from the perspective ofthe low-carbon buildings transition. They note that in Finland, energyeﬃciency has traditionally received less focus in energy and climatepolicy strategies compared to renewable energy. However, since 2007,energy eﬃciency policies addressing buildings gained force. Sixteennew policy instruments were implemented during 2007–2014 andseveral revisions were made to the building code energy eﬃciency re-quirements. They conduct a client-oriented evaluation of the policy mixfrom the perspective of a boundary actor—integrated energy servicecompanies—to analyse its potential for facilitating a zero-carbon tran-sition. The ﬁndings show a divergence of opinions regarding the policymix's disruptive inﬂuence. Where potentially disruptive policy instru-ments can be found, their impact is reduced due to incoherence inpolicy implementation processes. The usability of client-oriented eva-luation for policy mix analysis is found to be useful in complementingtop-down evaluations of policy mixes.The contribution by Rogge and Johnstone then addresses a gap inanalyzing the eﬀect of phase-out policies on the development and dif-fusion of low-carbon technologies by taking the case of the transition ofthe German electricity generation system towards renewable energies –the so-called Energiewende. Based on a survey of innovation activitiesof German manufacturers of renewable power generation technologiesconducted in 2014 the authors explore the impact such destabilizationpolicies – most prominently Germany’s nuclear phase-out policy – hadon technological change in renewable energy technologies. Drawing ondescriptive statistics and combining insights from earlier regressionanalyses the authors ﬁnd evidence that Germany’s nuclear phase-outpolicy had a positive inﬂuence on manufacturers’ innovation ex-penditures for renewable energies and was by far the most inﬂuentialpolicy instrument for the further expansion of renewable energy inGermany. The insights resulting from this analysis have important im-plications for the literature on policy mixes and sustainability transi-tions regarding the ‘ﬂip sides’ of innovation and the crucial importanceof destabilization policies for unleashing ‘destructive creation’.The ﬁnal contribution to this theme is by Martin who critiques thework of Kivimaa and Kern [31] on creative destruction and introducesthe concept of “exnovation” into policy mix analysis. The starting pointof the argument is an agreement with Kivimaa and Kern that addressingthe ﬂip side of innovation is important for facilitating a move awayfrom fossil fuel based energy systems. However, Martin argues thatKivimaa and Kern’s focus on the concept of creative destruction and thedestabilisation of current regimes is insuﬃcient, and instead proposesto use the concept of exnovation, deﬁned as the ending of technologicaltrajectories in a deliberate fashion by removing their physical infra-structure. A successful policy mix for energy transitions is argued torequire attention to processes of innovation as well as exnovation andtheir dynamic interplay over time, as also illustrated by Rogge andJohnstone in the case of the German nuclear phase-out. The authorargues that this is important as otherwise climate friendly innovationscan co-exist alongside unsustainable technologies rather than replacingdominant regimes. Martin applies this innovation-exnovation policymix concept to an analysis of the German Energiewende where thesuccess of renewable energy deployment is partly overshadowed by thepersistence of lignite fuelled power stations with high carbon emissions.The analysis aims to assess what a policy mix equally addressing in-novation and exnovation would look like and what barriers designingsuch a mix might face.K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–1074.5. The role of actors and institutions in shaping energy transition policymixesFinally, the last theme in this special issue focuses on the inﬂuenceof institutions and actors in the development of policy mixes for energytransition. In contrast to the policy design literature which often focuseson ‘optimal’ policy mixes design considerations and ignores the politicsof such design processes, the focus of this theme is on the actors andinstitutions which inﬂuence policy mix development processes. It istherefore closely linked to the literature on the messy, everyday politicsof policy processes [58] and the emerging literature on the politics oftransition processes [14,88]. Rogge and Reichardt [29] already pointedto the importance of analysing policy processes as part of policy mixanalyses but without speciﬁc considerations as to how to incorporateactors and institutions into the analysis of such processes. The threecontributions on this theme therefore poses the question how a focus onactors and institutional contexts can enable insight into the processes ofdeveloping policy mixes for energy transitions and their impacts.Johnstone et al. focus on the United Kingdom’s (UK) ‘new policydirection’ that has weakened support for renewables and energy eﬃ-ciency schemes while strengthening promotion of nuclear power andhydraulic fracturing for natural gas (‘fracking’). The authors argue thata ‘policy apparatus for incumbency’ is emerging which strengthens keyregime-based technologies while arguably damaging emerging nicheinnovations. Basing the discussion around the three technology-basedcases of renewable energy and eﬃciency, fracking, and nuclear power,this contribution refers to this process as “destructive recreation”. Theauthors raise questions over the extent to which policymaking in theenergy ﬁeld is not so much driven by stated aims around sustainabilitytransitions, as by other policy drivers such as electoral and partisanpolitics. Their contribution investigates diﬀerent ‘strategies of incum-bency’ including ‘securitization’, ‘masking’, ‘reinvention’, and ‘capture.’Based on this analysis, Johnstone et al. suggest that analytical frame-works should extend beyond a particular sector, with notions of whatcounts as a relevant ‘policy maker’expanded in order to explore a widerrange of nodes and critical junctures as entry points for understandinghow relations of incumbency are forged and reproduced in existingpolicy designs.The contribution by Bahn-Walkowiak and Wilts focuses on thepotential impact of diﬀerent institutional settings on the consistencyand coherence of resource eﬃciency policy mixes across 32 Europeancountries. The analysis draws on Rogge and Reichardt’s (2016) con-ceptualisation of policy mix characteristics and analyses the scope, foci,instruments and institutional responsibilities for resource eﬃciency as across-cutting and multi-facetted policy challenge. They argue that thenature of this policy challenge is such that tackling it requires a mix ofdiﬀerent strategies and instruments at diﬀerent governance levels andcoordination across several policy ﬁelds. The analysis points to thediﬃculties of ensuring horizontal as well as vertical policy coherence inthis policy ﬁeld given the often very dispersed institutional responsi-bilities for resource eﬃciency (e.g. 20 out of 32 countries have 4 ormore involved agencies and 12 out of 32 countries have additionalregional structures). The authors argue that signiﬁcant diﬀerences be-tween countries and their approaches in the ﬁeld of resource eﬃciencyunderlines that a stronger emphasis on the institutional set-up is neededto explain why many policy mixes lack strategic coordination.In the ﬁnal contribution of this special issue, Jorgensen et al. dis-cuss transition dynamics towards a Danish low carbon energy system –and the role of policy mixes therein – through an actor-centred Arena ofDevelopment approach. This approach focuses on how path de-pendencies of socio-technical systems may be challenged when con-troversies and matters-of-concern produce ‘arenas' where establishedgovernance conﬁgurations and the policies of a socio-technical systemare challenged. The authors discuss the historic transitions in relation tofour focal areas of Danish attempts to become independent of fossilenergy: wind power integration in the energy system, energy savings,biomass, and sustainable means of transport and ﬁnd that re-organisingactor-constellations is central for such arenas and deﬁnes theirboundaries and the policies employed. The analysis demonstrates theconﬂicts and mixes of policy actors that have moved transition pro-cesses forward, but sometimes also stalled them.5. ConclusionsBy showcasing ﬁfteen novel conceptual and empirical contributionson policy mixes for energy transitions this special issue aims at in-creasing the visibility of policy mix thinking and analysis in this criticalpolicy ﬁeld. Given the diversity of contributions we close by discussingsome overarching reﬂections on the most important research implica-tions derived from the emerging academic work on policy mixes forenergy transitions and implications for policy mix studies more gen-erally.First, the contributions to the issue show how existing policy mixresearch employs diﬀerent terminologies and concepts drawing ondiﬀerent disciplinary traditions, including environmental economics,policy sciences and innovation studies. As such, fruitful dialogue be-tween the diﬀerent approaches calls for an explicit positioning of re-search work in this emerging literature, conceptual clarity and theprovision of unambiguous deﬁnitions, for example regarding the deﬁ-nition and operationalization of the particularly problematic terms ofconsistency and coherence [29]. While we see great potential for fur-ther interdisciplinary policy mix research, we want to stress that it re-quires an awareness of potential diﬀerences in meanings of key termsand an explicit choice of the most appropriate concepts to use for therespective tasks at hand.Second, methodologically the contributions also draw on a varietyof qualitative and quantitative research methods such as expert inter-views, process tracing, case studies and surveys. However, the majorityof studies in the ﬁeld so far still tend to rest on qualitative researchmethods or are of a conceptual nature. We propose that future researchshould expand its use of quantitative methods – ideally in mixedmethod designs – for analysing policy mixes, including novel ap-proaches how to do so. Furthermore, while many studies conduct anelaborate mapping of an existing policy mix and explaining its devel-opment, this can leave important questions about the actual real worldimpacts of such mixes unaddressed. As these impacts are crucial foraccelerating energy transitions, future policy mix research should paygreater attention to covering the full range of policy making and im-plementation processes all the way to uncovering system impacts.Third, the large majority of empirical policy mix research, includingthe sectors and topics covered in this special issue, has focused onEurope. While some of the insights generated within these studies canarguably also be of relevance beyond this narrow geographical scope,this transferability is limited due to diﬀerent contexts in other regionsof the world. Therefore, future research should expand its geographicalscope. In addition, while many of the contributions here, and else-where, focus on national policy mixes, several studies pointed to therelevance of paying greater attention to other governance levels, suchas to policy mixes of regions or interaction between national andEuropean policy mixes. Therefore, multi-level policy mixes should be agreater subject of interest for future research in this area.Finally, we note that the studies presented in this special issue fol-lowed a broader conceptualization of policy mixes than has often beenthe case in past work. This enabled novel insights into the complexinterplay of policy mixes and energy transitions to be uncovered. Forexample, several contributions explored the relevance of a number ofpolicy mix characteristics, such as credibility, coherence or adapt-ability, in their analysis, thereby enabling insights which go beyondstudies pursuing narrow policy mix conceptualizations linked to elim-inating or correcting market failures in environmental economics.Another example concerns initial attempts to better understand policymixes for creative destruction and how they may impact energyK.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–108transitions which transcends the more processual work done on policymixes in the policy sciences. However, the contributions of this specialissue only begin to address these phenomena and showcase severalpromising avenues for future research on policy mixes for governingenergy transitions, and for policy mix research more generally. It is thusour hope that this special issue will stimulate diverse future researchwithin the emerging ﬁelds of policy mix studies and energy transitions,thereby enabling better informed policy advice.AcknowledgementsThe guest-editing of this special issue has been enabled through theCentre on Innovation and Energy Demand which is funded by theResearch Council UK’s EUED Programme (grant number EP/K011790/1). This funding is gratefully acknowledged. No new data were createdduring this study. We sincerely would like to thank all reviewers in-volved in this special issue for their thoughtful and timely commentswhich have helped to substantially improve this introduction and allcontributions to this special issue.References[1] F.W. Geels, Technological transitions as evolutionary reconﬁguration processes: amulti-level perspective and a case-study, Res. Policy 31 (8–9) (2002) 1257–1274.[2] R. Fouquet, The slow search for solutions: lessons from historical energy transitionsby sector and service, Energy Policy 38 (11) (2010) 6586–6596.[3] J. Grin, J. Rotmans, J.W. Schot (Eds.), Transitions to Sustainable Development: NewDirections in the Study of Long Term Transformative Change, Routledge, London,XIX, 397 s, 2010.[4] J. Meadowcroft, What about the politics? Sustainable development, transitionmanagement, and long term energy transitions, Policy Sci. 42 (4) (2009) 323–340.[5] G. Verbong, D. Loorbach, Governing the Energy Transition: Reality, Illusion orNecessity? Routledge, New York, 2012.[6] K. Araújo, The emerging ﬁeld of energy transitions: progress, challenges, and op-portunities, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 1 (2014) 112–121, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2014.03.002.[7] F. Kern, K.S. Rogge, The pace of governed energy transitions: agency, internationaldynamics and the global Paris agreement accelerating decarbonisation processes?Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 22 (2016) 13–17, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.08.016.[8] C. Kuzemko, M. Lockwood, C. Mitchell, R. Hoggett, Governing for sustainable en-ergy system change: politics, contexts and contingency, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 12(2016) 96–105, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.12.022.[9] B.K. Sovacool, How long will it take?: conceptualizing the temporal dynamics ofenergy transitions, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 13 (2016) 202–215, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.12.020.[10] B.K. Sovacool, F.W. Geels, Further reﬂections on the temporality of energy transi-tions: a response to critics, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 22 (2016) 232–237, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.08.013.[11] G.C. Unruh, Understanding carbon lock-in, Energy Policy 28 (12) (2000) 817–830.[12] G. Dosi, Technological paradigms and technological trajectories. A suggested in-terpretation of the determinants and directions of technological change, Res. Policy11 (3) (1982) 147–162.[13] W. Walker, Entrapment in large technology systems: institutional commitment andpower relations, Res. Policy 29 (7–8) (2000) 833–846.[14] J. Meadowcroft, Engaging with the politics of sustainability transitions, Environ.Innovation Societal Transitions 1 (1) (2011) 70–75, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2011.02.003.[15] F.W. Geels, Regime resistance against low-carbon transitions: introducing politicsand power into the multi-level perspective, Theory Cult. Soc. 31 (5) (2014) 21–40,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0263276414531627.[16] K.M. Weber, H. Rohracher, Legitimizing research, technology and innovation po-licies for transformative change: combining insights from innovation systems andmulti-level perspective in a comprehensive ‘failures’ framework, Res. Policy 41 (6)(2012) 1037–1047, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015.[17] J.C.J.M. van den Bergh, Disagreement on sustainability policy within the socialsciences? Eur. Rev. 24 (01) (2016) 83–88, http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1062798715000460.[18] R. Green, Carbon tax or carbon permits: the impact on generators' risks, Energy J.29 (3) (2008) 67–89.[19] A.L. Bristow, M. Wardman, A.M. Zanni, P.K. Chintakayala, Public acceptability ofpersonal carbon trading and carbon tax, Ecol. Econ. 69 (9) (2010) 1824–1837,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.04.021.[20] IEA, Summing up the Parts, Combining Policy Instruments for Least-Cost ClimateMitigation Strategies, Paris, France, (2011) 1 p..[21] K.S. Gallagher, A. Grübler, L. Kuhl, G. Nemet, C. Wilson, The energy technologyinnovation system, Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 37 (1) (2012) 137–162, http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-060311-133915.[22] A.J. Wieczorek, M.P. Hekkert, Systemic instruments for systemic innovationproblems: a framework for policy makers and innovation scholars, Sci. Public Policy39 (1) (2012) 74–87, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scr008.[23] P. Lehmann, Justifying a policy mix for pollution control: a review of economicliterature, J. Econ. Surv. 26 (1) (2012) 71–97, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00628.x.[24] S. Jacobsson, V. Lauber, The politics and policy of energy system transformation –explaining the German diﬀusion of renewable energy technology, Energy Policy 34(3) (2006) 256–276, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2004.08.029.[25] E. Bruns, D. Ohlhorst, B. Wenzel, J. Köppel, Renewable Energies in Germany’sElectricity Market: A Biography of the Innovation Process, Springer, Netherlands,Dordrecht, 2011.[26] E. Gawel, S. Strunz, P. Lehmann, Germany's energy transition under attack: is therean inscrutable German Sonderweg? Nat. Cult. 8 (2) (2013) 121–133, http://dx.doi.org/10.3167/nc.2013.080201.[27] K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone, this issue. Exploring the role of phase-out policies for low-carbon energy transitions: the case of the German Energiewende. Energy Res. Soc.Sci.[28] K. Reichardt, K. Rogge, How the policy mix impacts innovation: ﬁndings fromcompany case studies on oﬀshore wind in Germany, Environ. Innovation SocietalTransitions 18 (2016) 62–81, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.08.001.[29] K.S. Rogge, K. Reichardt, Policy mixes for sustainability transitions: an extendedconcept and framework for analysis, Res. Policy 45 (8) (2016) 1620–1635, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.04.004.[30] F. Kern, M. Howlett, Implementing transition management as policy reforms: a casestudy of the Dutch energy sector, Policy Sci. 42 (4) (2009) 391–408, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11077-009-9099-x.[31] P. Kivimaa, F. Kern, Creative destruction or mere niche support?: innovation policymixes for sustainability transitions, Res. Policy 45 (1) (2016) 205–217, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.[32] N.A. Braathen, Instrument mixes for environmental policy: how many stones shouldbe used to kill a bird? Int. Rev. Environ. Resour. Econ. 1 (2) (2007) 185–235.[33] N. Gunningham, P.N. Grabosky, D. Sinclair, Smart Regulation: DesigningEnvironmental Policy, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998.[34] C. Nauwelaers, P. Boekholt, B. Mostert, P. Cunningham, K. Guy, R. Hofer,C. Rammer, Policy Mixes for R & D in Europe, UNU-MERIT, University of Maastrichtand United Nations University, 2009.[35] S. Sorrell, J. Sijm, Carbon trading in the policy mix, Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 19 (3)(2003) 420–437.[36] Pablo del Río González, The interaction between emissions trading and renewableelectricity support schemes: an overview of the literature, Mitig. Adapt. Strateg.Glob. Change 12 (6) (2006) 1363–1390.[37] IEA, Interactions of Policies for Renewable Energy and Climate, Paris, (2011).[38] N.-A. Spyridaki, A. Flamos, A paper trail of evaluation approaches to energy andclimate policy interactions, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 40 (2014) 1090–1107,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.08.001.[39] K. Flanagan, E. Uyarra, M. Laranja, Reconceptualising the ‘policy mix’ for innova-tion, Res. Policy 40 (5) (2011) 702–713, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.02.005.[40] M. Howlett, J. Vince, P. del Río, Policy integration and multi-level governance:dealing with the vertical dimension of policy mix designs, PaG 5 (2) (2017) 69,http://dx.doi.org/10.17645/pag.v5i2.928.[41] V. Costantini, F. Crespi, A. Palma, Characterizing the policy mix and its impact oneco-innovation: a patent analysis of energy-eﬃcient technologies, Res. Policy 46 (4)(2017) 799–819, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.02.004.[42] F. Kern, P. Kivimaa, M. Martiskainen, Policy packaging or policy patching?: thedevelopment of complex energy eﬃciency policy mixes, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 23(2017) 11–25, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.11.002.[43] A.B. Jaﬀe, R.G. Newell, R.N. Stavins, A tale of two market failures: technology andenvironmental policy, Ecol. Econ. 54 (2–3) (2005) 164–174, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.12.027.[44] C. Fischer, Combining policies for renewable energy: is the whole less than the sumof its parts? Int. Rev. Environ. Resour. Econ. 4 (1) (2010) 51–92, http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/101.00000030.[45] D. Antonioli, S. Borghesi, A. D’Amato, M. Gilli, M. Mazzanti, F. Nicolli, Analysingthe interactions of energy and climate policies in a broad policy ‘optimality’ fra-mework: the Italian case study, J. Integr. Environ. Sci. 11 (3–4) (2014) 205–224,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1943815X.2014.962549.[46] M. Howlett, J. Rayner, Design principles for policy mixes: cohesion and coherencein ‘new governance arrangements’, Policy Soc. 26 (4) (2007) 1–18, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1449-4035(07)70118-2.[47] M. Howlett, J. Rayner, Patching vs packaging in policy formulation: assessing policyportfolio design, Polit. Gov. 1 (2) (2013) 170–182, http://dx.doi.org/10.12924/pag2013.01020170.[48] E. Magro, J.R. Wilson, Complex innovation policy systems: towards an evaluationmix, Res. Policy 42 (9) (2013) 1647–1656, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.06.005.[49] M. Guerzoni, E. Raiteri, Demand-side vs. supply-side technology policies: hiddentreatment and new empirical evidence on the policy mix, Res. Policy 44 (3) (2015)726–747, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.10.009.[50] R. Quitzow, Assessing policy strategies for the promotion of environmental tech-nologies: a review of India's National Solar Mission, Res. Policy 44 (1) (2015)233–243, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.09.003.[51] U. Cantner, H. Graf, J. Herrmann, M. Kalthaus, Inventor networks in renewableenergies: the inﬂuence of the policy mix in Germany, Res. Policy 45 (6) (2016)1165–1184, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.03.005.[52] S. Borrás, C. Edquist, The choice of innovation policy instruments, Technol.K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–109Forecasting Soc. Change 80 (8) (2013) 1513–1522, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.03.002.[53] K. Reichardt, S.O. Negro, K.S. Rogge, M.P. Hekkert, Analyzing interdependenciesbetween policy mixes and technological innovation systems: the case of oﬀshorewind in Germany, Technol. Forecasting Soc. Change 106 (2016) 11–21, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.01.029.[54] E. Uyarra, P. Shapira, A. Harding, Low carbon innovation and enterprise growth inthe UK: challenges of a place-blind policy mix, Technol. Forecasting Soc. Change103 (2016) 264–272, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2015.10.008.[55] E. Magro, M. Navarro, J.M. Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, Coordination-mix: the hiddenface of STI policy, Rev. Policy Res. 31 (5) (2014) 367–389, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12090.[56] K. Reichardt, K.S. Rogge, S.O. Negro, Unpacking policy processes for addressingsystemic problems in technological innovation systems: the case of oﬀshore wind inGermany, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 80 (2017) 1217–1226, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.280.[57] M. Howlett, What is a policy instrument? Tools, mixes and implementation styles,in: P. Eliadis, M.M. Hill, M. Howlett (Eds.), Designing Government – FromInstruments to Governance, McGill-Queen's University Press, Canada, 2005, pp.31–50.[58] P.A. Sabatier, C.M. Weible, Theories of the Policy Process, 3rd ed., Westview Press,Boulder, CO, 2014.[59] L. Den Hertog, S. Stroß, Policy coherence in the EU system: concepts and legalrooting of an ambiguous term, Paper Presented at the Conference The EU as GlobalPlayer 7–8 April 2011, University Institute for European Studies, Madrid, 2011.[60] M. Nilsson, T. Zamparutti, J.E. Petersen, B. Nykvist, P. Rudberg, J. McGuinn,Understanding policy coherence: analytical framework and examples of sector-en-vironment policy interactions in the EU, Environ. Policy Gov. 22 (6) (2012)395–423, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eet.1589.[61] K. Rennings, Redeﬁning innovation – eco-innovation research and the contributionfrom ecological economics, Ecol. Econ. 32 (2) (2000) 319–332, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(99)00112-3.[62] K. Palmer, A. Paul, M. Woerman, D. Steinberg, Federal policies for renewableelectricity: impacts and interactions, Energy Policy 39 (7) (2011) 3975–3991.[63] V. Oikonomou, C. Jepma, A framework on interactions of climate and energy policyinstruments, Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Change 13 (2) (2008) 131–156, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11027-007-9082-9.[64] P. del Río, On evaluating success in complex policy mixes: the case of renewableenergy support schemes, Policy Sci 47 (3) (2014) 267–287, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11077-013-9189-7.[65] P. del Río, Interactions between climate and energy policies: the case of Spain, Clim.Policy 9 (2) (2009) 119–138.[66] J. Rosenow, T. Fawcett, N. Eyre, V. Oikonomou, Energy eﬃciency and the policymix, Build. Res. Inf. 44 (5-6) (2016) 562–574, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2016.1138803.[67] M. Howlett, R.P. Lejano, Tales from the Crypt: the rise and fall (and rebirth?) ofpolicy design, Adm. Soc. 45 (3) (2013) 357–381, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0095399712459725.[68] M. Howlett, From the ‘old’ to the ‘new’ policy design: design thinking beyondmarkets and collaborative governance, Policy Sci. 47 (3) (2014) 187–207, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11077-014-9199-0.[69] C. Hood, H. Margetts, The Tools of Government in the Digital age, PalgraveMacmillan, Basingstoke, 2007.[70] M. Howlett, Designing Public Policies: Principles and Instruments, Routledge,Abingdon, Oxon, New York, 2011.[71] M. Howlett, Y.P. How, P. del Rio, The parameters of policy portfolios: verticalityand horizontality in design spaces and their consequences for policy mix formula-tion, Environ. Plann. C 33 (5) (2015) 1233–1245, http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/147084414X13992869118596.[72] B. Cashore, M. Howlett, Punctuating which equilibrium?: understanding thermo-static policy dynamics in Paciﬁc Northwest Forestry, Am. J. Polit. Sci. 51 (3) (2007)532–551, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2007.00266.x.[73] M. Howlett, Governance modes, policy regimes and operational plans: a multi-levelnested model of policy instrument choice and policy design, Policy Sci. 42 (1)(2009) 73–89, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11077-009-9079-1.[74] M.J. Trebilcock, C.J. Tuohy, A.D. Wolfson, Professional Regulation: A Staﬀ Study ofAccountancy, Architecture, Engineering and Law in Ontario Prepared for theProfessional Organizations Committee, Ministry of the Attorney General, Toronto,1979.[75] P.N. Grabosky, Green markets: environmental regulation by the private sector, LawPolicy 16 (4) (1994) 419–448, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9930.1994.tb00132.x.[76] H. Yi, R.C. Feiock, Policy tool interactions and the adoption of state renewableportfolio standards, Rev. Policy Res. 29 (2) (2012) 193–206, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-1338.2012.00548.X.[77] H. Doremus, A policy portfolio approach to biodiversity protection on private lands,Environ. Sci. Policy 6 (3) (2003) 217–232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1462-9011(03)00036-4.[78] T. Sterner, J. Coria, Policy Instruments for Environmental and Natural ResourceManagement, RFF Press, 2011.[79] E.-H. Klijn, J. Koppenjan, Governance network theory: past, present and future,Policy Polit. 40 (4) (2012) 587–606, http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/030557312X655431.[80] Y. Hou, G.A. Brewer, Substitution and supplementation between co-functionalpolicy instruments: evidence from state budget stabilization practices, Public Adm.Rev. 70 (6) (2010) 914–924, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02223.x.[81] B. Kiss, C.G. Manchón, L. Neij, The role of policy instruments in supporting thedevelopment of mineral wool insulation in Germany, Sweden and the UnitedKingdom, J. Clean. Prod. 48 (2013) 187–199, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.12.016.[82] O. Lecuyer, P. Quirion, Can uncertainty justify overlapping policy instruments tomitigate emissions? Ecol. Econ. 93 (2013) 177–191, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2013.05.009.[83] P.G.M. Boonekamp, Actual interaction eﬀects between policy measures for energyeﬃciency – a qualitative matrix method and quantitative simulation results forhouseholds, Energy 31 (14) (2006) 2848–2873.[84] P. del Río, A. Calvo Silvosa, G. Iglesias Gómez, Policies and design elements for therepowering of wind farms: a qualitative analysis of diﬀerent options, Energy Policy39 (4) (2011) 1897–1908, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.12.035.[85] K. Karltorp, B.A. Sandén, Explaining regime destabilisation in the pulp and paperindustry, Environ. Innovation Soc. Transitions 2 (2012) 66–81, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2011.12.001.[86] B. Turnheim, F.W. Geels, Regime destabilisation as the ﬂipside of energy transi-tions: lessons from the history of the British coal industry (1913–1997), EnergyPolicy 50 (2012) 35–49, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.04.060.[87] B. Turnheim, F.W. Geels, The destabilisation of existing regimes: confronting amulti-dimensional framework with a case study of the British coal industry(1913–1967), Res. Policy 42 (10) (2013) 1749–1767, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.04.009.[88] F. Avelino, J. Grin, B. Pel, S. Jhagroe, The politics of sustainability transitions, J.Environ. Policy Plann. 18 (5) (2016) 557–567, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2016.1216782.[89] S. Sorrell, A. Smith, R. Betz, R. Walz, C. Boemare, P. Quirion, J. Sijm,D.M.P. Konidari, S. Vassos, D. Haralampopoulos, C. Pilinis, Interaction in EUClimate Policy: Final Report, SPRU, Brighton, 2003.[90] K. Thelen, How institutions evolve: Insights from comparative historical analysis,in: J. Mahoney, D. Rueschemeyer (Eds.), Comparative historical analysis in thesocial sciences, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003, pp. 208–240Chapter 6.[91] J. Markard, R. Raven, B. Truﬀer, Sustainability transitions: An emerging ﬁeld ofresearch and its prospects, Res. Policy 41 (6) (2012) 955–967.[92] M. Howlett, Y.P. How, P. del Rio, The parameters of policy portfolios: verticalityand horizontality in design spaces and their consequences for policy mix formula-tion, Environ. and Planning C: Government and Policy 33 (5) (2015) 1233–1245.K.S. Rogge et al. Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 1–1010