ABSTRACT: 
Recent evidence for an evolved fear module in the brain comes from studies showing that adults, children and infants detect evolutionarily threatening stimuli such as snakes faster than non-threatening ones. A decisive argument for a threat detection system efficient early in life would come from data showing, in young infants, a functional threat-detection mechanism in terms of “what” and “where” visual pathways. The present study used a variant of Posner’s cuing paradigm, adapted to 7–11-month-olds. On each trial, a threat-irrelevant or a threat-relevant cue was presented (a flower or a snake, i.e., “what”). We measured how fast infants detected these cues and the extent to which they further influenced the spatial allocation of attention (“where”). In line with previous findings, we observed that infants oriented faster towards snake than flower cues. Importantly, a facilitation effect was found at the cued location for flowers but not for snakes, suggesting that these latter cues elicit a broadening of attention and arguing in favour of sophisticated “what–where” connections. These results strongly support the claim that humans have an early propensity to detect evolutionarily threat-relevant stimuli. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 recent studies have demonstrated that humans areremarkable snake detectors . here 
 we report the existence of a threat-dependent functional link between the “what” and “where” visual subsystems . specifically , we examined whether the detec-tion of unfamiliar , non-social threat-relevant stimuli like snakes(whose processing bears on the “what” subsystem ) at specific loca-tions modulates the subsequent processing of stimuli appearingeither at the same or different locations ( those processes belongto the “where” subsystem ) . 
 this was indeed a purer measure of infant 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Keywordsattention, cuing paradigm, infancy, snake, threatSnakes and primates co-exist for millions of years, with snakesbeing the first of the major predators of primates (Isbell, 2006,2009). Effective processes of snake detection may have thus beenfostered through natural selection in primates as such ability wouldallow a better defensive behaviour. A fear module could haveevolved in mammals’ brain to assist them in responding adequatelyto recurrent survival threat (O¨hman & Mineka, 2003), in particularto threats represented by reptiles, of which snakes are a prototypicalexemplar. Going one step further, it has been suggested that thisevolutionary ancient predator–prey relationship played a significantrole in the evolution of the primates’ visual system. The SnakeDetection Theory posits that the vital need to rapidly detect snakesshaped primates’ brain such that they developed acute perceptualabilities (Isbell, 2006, 2009).Recent studies have consistently demonstrated that humans areremarkable snake detectors. Using a visual search task, O¨hman,Flykt, and Esteves (2001) were the first to report that adults arefaster to detect a picture of a snake in an array of flower picturesthan vice versa, supporting the claim that snakes capture attentionalresources. This finding has been replicated many times (e.g., Lipp,Derakshan, Waters, & Logies, 2004; LoBue & Mathews, 2014;LoBue, Mathews, Harvey, & Stark, 2014; Soares, Lindstro¨m,Esteves, & O¨hman, 2014), and extended to young children whoin all likelihood have at the very most little experience and knowl-edge about the dangerousness of snakes (Hayakawa, Kawai, &Masataka, 2011; LoBue & DeLoache, 2008, 2011; Masataka,Hayakawa, & Kawai, 2010; Penkunas & Coss, 2013a, 2013b).Although preschool children are admittedly less experienced withsnakes than adults, a stronger and more decisive argument for aninborn threat (and snakes in particular) detection system wouldcome from infants and lab-reared monkeys. A few recent studiespoint in that direction.Lab-reared macaque monkeys with no prior experience withsnakes have the same propensity as humans to faster detect asnake among flowers than a flower among snakes (Shibasaki &Kawai, 2009). Crucially, Van Le et al. (2013) recently reportedthat pulvinar neurons in the macaque brain respond selectivelyto images of snakes, supporting the existence of a neurobiolo-gical substrate for the rapid detection of snakes in primates. Inorder to investigate the predisposition to rapidly detect snakes inhuman infants, in two recent studies, 7–18-month-olds werepresented with pairs of pictures, one threat-relevant (e.g., asnake) and the other threat-irrelevant (e.g., a flower), shownside by side (DeLoache & LoBue, 2009; LoBue & DeLoache,2010). Supporting the claim that human infants detect snakesrapidly, infants turned faster toward the snake than the threat-irrelevant picture of the pair. These results provide a first sup-port for the existence of an attentional bias toward snakes ininfancy. Together with the findings in lab-reared macaque mon-keys, they strongly suggest that enhanced visual detection ofsnakes would not depend on prior experience with these1 ULBabyLab, Consciousness, Cognition and Computation Group (CO3),Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences (CRCN), Universite´libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium2 Centre Nationnal de la Recherche Scientifique, De´partement Parole etCognition, Gipsa-Lab, Grenoble Universite´, Grenoble, France3 University of Plymouth, School of Psychology, Plymouth, UKCorresponding author:Julie Bertels, Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences (CRCN),Universite´ libre de Bruxelles, Avenue F.D. Roosevelt, 50 – CP 191, Brussels,Belgium.Email: jbertels@ulb.ac.beInternational Journal ofBehavioral Development1–7ª The Author(s) 2017Reprints and permissions:sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.navDOI: 10.1177/0165025417693955journals.sagepub.com/home/jbdanimals, and support the existence of an inborn mechanism forthe rapid detection of an evolutionary threat.The underlying explanation for these detection mechanisms isthat primates would have evolved visual templates for recognizingthreatening animals such as snakes and spiders (Rakison &Derringer, 2008). These templates would integrate low-level fea-tures and forms of these threatening animals, and attract infants’attention to their real-world counterparts. While the critical low-level perceptual feature for detecting snakes would be their curvi-linear and coiled shape (LoBue, 2014; LoBue & DeLoache, 2011),the oval body connected to curved legs characteristic of spiderswould be crucial for rapidly detecting these arachnids (Rakison &Derringer, 2008). Interestingly, it has been recently suggested thathumans would also have evolved auditory templates to rapidlydetect threats signalled by sound features (Erlich, Lipp, & Slaugh-ter, 2013). The evolved predisposition to detect threat would thusnot be limited to the visual modality.Importantly, while human infants would detect snakes particu-larly rapidly, they would not innately fear them. Several studiesusing behavioural and physiological measures demonstrated thatinfants do not show actual fear when exposed to movies displayingsnakes in motion (DeLoache & LoBue, 2009; Thrasher & LoBue,2016). Nevertheless, humans, and more generally primates, wouldbe prepared to develop responses of fear towards snakes (DeLoache& LoBue, 2009; O¨hman & Mineka, 2001, 2003). In fact, the detec-tion bias towards snakes in primates would facilitate learning of anassociation between the presence of a snake and a fearful reaction(O¨hman & Mineka, 2001, 2003; Rakison & Derringer, 2008).To be fully functional, threat detection would bear on the twoparallel streams of processing composing the visual system: the“what” and the “where” subsystems (Milner & Goodale, 1995).The “what” subsystem is involved in the recognition and identi-fication of visual objects. Also referred to as the “ventral stream”,it extends from the primary visual cortex (V1) to portions of thetemporal cortex. The “where” subsystem subtends the processingand attending to the objects’ spatial location. This is also calledthe “dorsal stream”, and it projects from V1 to regions of theparietal cortex. Both subsystems develop early in life, althoughdifferent aspects emerge at different ages (Johnson, Mareschal, &Csibra, 2008).Evidence for an early development of the “what” visual pathwaycomes, for instance, from face processing studies: newborns looklonger at face-like than non-face-like stimuli (Johnson, Dziurawiec,Ellis, & Morton, 1991), and at their mother’s face than at anotherwoman’s (Bushneil, Sai, &Mullin, 1989). Infants’ faster processingof a snake than of a non-threatening picture (DeLoache & LoBue,2009; LoBue & DeLoache, 2010) also supports the functionality ofthe “what” visual pathway.Regarding the “where” pathway, many studies using spatialcuing paradigms have documented infants’ ability to shift attentionfrom one location to another from birth onwards (Valenza, Simion,& Umilta`, 1994). Cuing of visual attention seems effective by 4months of age, with infants (like adults) showing both facilitationand inhibition of response to a cued spatial location depending onthe Stimulus Onset Asynchrony (SOA, Johnson, 1994). Timingparameters and the distribution of attention across the visual field(linked to cue/target eccentricity) are nevertheless highly decisivein eliciting such shifts. Their influence depends on the infant’s age(Harman, Posner, Rothbart, & Thomas-Thrapp, 1994; Johnson &Tucker, 1996). In fact, the ability to orient attention in the visualspace develops in the first year of life, in parallel with the ability toprogram eye movements (Harman et al., 1994; Johnson, 1994). Inparticular, the preference for novel, uncued locations developsbetween 3 and 6 months of age (Harman et al., 1994) and dependson the target eccentricity: while 3-month-olds demonstrate such apreference only for short target eccentricities, 6-month-olds, whoare better able to program eye movements, orient their attentionpreferentially to uncued locations also at higher target eccentricities(Clohessy, Posner, Rothbart, & Vecera, 1991).Some degree of integration between both subsystems arealready present in early infancy (Johnson et al., 2008). Coherently,the two pathways are richly interconnected in the developing brain(Stiles, Paul, & Ark, 2008). The existence of an early functionallink between them is supported by recent studies demonstrating thatsocial cues affect the orientation of spatial attention. For instance,the direction of an adult’s eye gaze can bias 4-month-old infants’attention towards the corresponding location, and cause enhancedprocessing of any object presented thereon (Reid, Striano,Kaufman, & Johnson, 2004). Threat-relevant facial expressionshave also been found to hamper infants’ attentional disengagementprocesses (Peltola, Leppanen, Palokangas, & Hietanen, 2008).In the present study, we wanted to establish further the existenceof a threat-dependent functional link between the “what” and“where” subsystems. Specifically, we examined whether the detec-tion of unfamiliar, non-social threat-relevant stimuli like snakes(whose processing bears on the “what” subsystem) at specific loca-tions modulates the subsequent processing of stimuli appearingeither at the same or different locations (those processes belongto the “where” subsystem). As argued elsewhere (Bertels, Kolinsky,& Morais, 2010), an effective interaction between subsystemswould improve the ecological adaptation of any organism. Threatdetection would modulate the orientation of attention towards therelevant locations in the environment and therefore foster properreactions to the to-be-attended stimuli. The existence of such afunctional link was investigated in infants from 7 months old, sincesnake detection biases have been documented from this age on(DeLoache & LoBue, 2009; LoBue & DeLoache, 2010). Moreover,at this age infants’ attentional orienting abilities are well devel-opped (Johnson, 1994).We used the spatial cuing paradigm in which, originally, a per-ipheral cue is followed by a target presented either in the same or inanother, opposite location (Posner, 1980). This paradigm has beenwidely used to study attentional orienting. Attention allocationmight indeed be inferred based on response latencies to targetspresented at cued or uncued locations. We adapted the paradigmin two ways. First, the cue may have a threat-related content, toexamine whether cue facilitation effects (i.e., faster responses totargets presented at the same location as the preceding cue than atthe opposite location) are modulated by the nature of the cue (Stor-mark, Nordby, & Hugdahl, 1995). In the present study, cues werepresented peripherally and consisted of pictures of either snakes (inthreat-relevant trials) or flowers (in threat-irrelevant trials).Second, we adapted the task to infants so as to study theirattentional shifts through saccades in response to a stimulus (Clo-hessy et al., 1991). In each trial, we presented a central attentiongetter (a blinking star) between the cue and the target in order toreorient their attention to the centre of the screen. We also used abilateral target (two checkerboard patterns, one on the left and oneon the right) to be able to record (1) the latency of the first saccadefollowing the targets’ presentation and (2) the direction of the firstsaccade, depending on the location and nature of the preceding cue.Cue facilitation effects could then result in faster saccades and more2 International Journal of Behavioral Developmentfirst looks oriented toward the cued than toward the uncuedtarget location.We had two main predictions derived from the “what–where”connection hypothesis. First, in line with previous studies suggest-ing that infants preferentially allocate their attention to threat-relevant than to threat-irrelevant stimuli (DeLoache & LoBue,2009; LoBue & DeLoache, 2010), we expected faster orientingtowards snake than flower cue locations. First looks should thenbe faster when directed towards snake than towards flower cues.Second, we predicted that the presentation of a snake vs. a flowerwould modulate cue facilitation effects. Specifically, we expectedfacilitation effects when threat-irrelevant flower cues were pre-sented, namely faster and more frequent first looks toward thecued than toward the uncued target. In contrast, the presentationof snake cues might result in two different types of cuing effects.First, facilitation effects observed with flower cues may be can-celled, if not reversed, after a snake cue. Indeed, from an evolu-tionary point of view, it would not be adaptive for infants’attention, after having been disengaged from the snake location,to keep on shifting back to that location. Rather, new locationsshould be explored to detect the presence of additional danger andconsider escaping. Such an abolition of cuing effects by threaten-ing stimuli has been observed previously in adults (Bertels,Kolinsky, Bernaerts, & Morais, 2011). Another possibility is thatfacilitation effects would be enhanced when a snake cue is pre-sented. Looking back at the snake location would indeed be rel-evant as to monitor the snake. Preferential processing of targetsappearing at previous snake locations has been reported before,but only when attention was not driven back to a central locationbefore the onset of the target (Lipp & Derakshan, 2005).MethodParticipantsNineteen 7–11-month-old healthy full term infants1 (5 boys)with no prior experience of snakes made up the final sample(mean age ¼ 284 days, range ¼ 223–361). Three additionalinfants were excluded from the study due to a looking bias:their first gaze was directed towards the left (n ¼ 2) or righttarget (n ¼ 1) on every trial.ApparatusStimulus presentation and timing were controlled using the Psy-chophysics Toolbox software (Brainard, 1997). Stimuli were pre-sented through a 55’’ LCD digital TV screen. Infants’ lookingbehaviour was monitored with a video camera located above thescreen. Infants’ looking behaviour as well as the specific experi-mental display presented to each participant were recordedand synchronized for off-line analyses by Media Recorder 2.5(Noldus, The Netherlands).Stimuli and procedureEach infant was tested individually while seated on the parent’s lap100 cm from the TV screen, in a separate 3-sided enclosure of adimly lit room.Each trial began with the presentation of an attention getter onthe centre of the screen, consisting of a blinking star (20.3 22.8 cm) accompanied by an attractive sound (Figure 1). Once theinfant’s attention focused on the star, the experimenter initiated thepresentation of the cue. The cue consisted of one amongst eightbrightly coloured pictures of snakes and flowers in their naturalbackground used in a previous study (LoBue & DeLoache, 2008)for 400 ms, peripherally presented on the left or right with the samelikelihood, at an eccentricity of 30 visual angle. Each cue mea-sured 29.9  22.8 cm. The duration and the eccentricity of the cueswere chosen as to foster eye movements towards their location (i.e.,overt attentional orienting, see e.g., Clohessy et al., 1991). Then, thecentral blinking star was presented again for 1200 ms,2 silently. Itaimed at reorienting the infant’s attention to the centre of the screenbefore the 2000-ms presentation of the bilateral target consisting oftwo checkerboard patterns (one on the left and one on the right, bothmeasuring 29.9  22.8 cm and presented at 30) flickering byalternating their contrast polarity at a 10-Hz frequency.Each infant was presented with four 8-trial blocks. In eachblock, a different cue (either a snake or a flower) was presentedon every trial, which resulted in four threat-relevant and four threat-irrelevant trials, half on the left and half on the right (counter-balanced across cue types). Trials were randomly presented.CodingLooking times for each infant were coded frame-by-frame (i.e.,25 ms intervals) by a graduate student trained by the first author,using The Observer XT11 (Noldus, The Netherlands). Coding wasblind since it was made separately on videos of the infant’s faceand on videos of the experimental display he/she was presentedwith. The videos of the infant’s face and of the experimentaldisplay were synchronized after the coding. The first author inde-pendently coded about 10% of the data. Inter-coder reliability was96%.Three variables of interest, corresponding to three differentlooking-behaviours occurring in sequence, were measured: (1) thelatency to look at the cue, namely the amount of time from the onsetof the cue to the infant’s first look toward the cue;3 (2) the latency tolook at the target, namely the amount of time from the onset of theFigure 1. Time course of a trial. Each trial begins with the presentation ofan attention-getter (a centrally presented blinking star accompanied by anattractive sound). Once the infant is looking at it, a cue is presented for400 ms, either on the right (as depicted here) or on the left of the screen.The cue is either a picture of a flower (threat-irrelevant trials) or a snake(threat-relevant trials). The central blinking star is presented again for1200 ms and followed by the bilateral target, consisting of twocheckerboard patterns (one on the left and one on the right of the screen)flickering at a 10-Hz frequency.Bertels et al. 3bilateral target to the infant’s first look toward one of the target; and(3) the percentage of first gaze oriented toward the “cued” over the“uncued” target, namely the proportion of trials in which infantslooked first at the target presented at the cue location.In each trial, each variable of interest was measured only ifthe prior variables of interest could also be measured within thesame trial.ResultsLatencies to look at the cueTrials in which infants did not look at the cue were not consideredin the following analysis (68 trials out of 608, i.e., 11.18% of thedata). Out of the 540 remaining data points, five were identified asoutliers (i.e., they were more than three standard deviations abovethe overall mean latency) and removed from the analysis.In accordance with our prediction that snake pictures wouldimprove attentional capture, a paired-sample t test on the latenciesto look at the cue revealed that infants oriented their gaze fastertowards snake than flower cues, t(18) ¼ 2.57, p ¼ .019, Cohen’sd ¼ .59 (for snake cues: M ¼ 284 ms, SD ¼ 53, for flower cues:M ¼ 304 ms, SD ¼ 51).The average latency difference did not correlate with age,r ¼ .264, p > .10.Latencies to look at the targetTrials in which infants did not look at the cue (see prior analysis),did not look back at the subsequent central star, were not looking atthe central star at the onset of the target, and trials in which eyemovements were not made directly towards a target were not con-sidered in the two following analyses (together, 128 trials out of608, i.e., 21.05% of the data). Out of the 474 remaining data points,seven were identified as outliers and removed from the analyses.Table 1 displays the mean latencies of the first looks at the cuedand the uncued targets as a function of the preceding cue.A 2 (Cue: flower vs. snake)  2 (Gaze direction: cued vs.uncued target) repeated measures ANOVA was performed on thefirst look latencies toward the target. No effect or interaction weresignificant, all p > .10. Hence, contrary to our predictions, no cuefacilitation effect was observed at the level of gaze latency.Proportion of orienting to the cued and uncued targetsTable 2 displays the mean proportion of gaze orienting towards thecued and the uncued targets, as a function of the preceding cue.A 2 (Cue) 2 (Gaze direction) repeated measures ANOVA wasperformed on the proportion of orienting toward the targets. Thisanalysis revealed a main effect of Gaze direction, F(1, 18) ¼ 9.43,p ¼ .007, partial 2 ¼ .34: infants’ first look was more oftendirected toward the cued than toward the uncued target (in 59%vs. 41% of the trials, SD ¼ 12.7). In addition, the interactionbetween Gaze direction and Cue was also significant, F(1, 18) ¼4.91, p ¼ .04, partial 2 ¼ .21. Bonferroni-adjusted comparisonsrevealed that these proportions differed as a function of the preced-ing cue: When flower cues were presented, the proportion of firstgaze oriented toward the cued target was significantly higher thanthe frequency of first gaze oriented toward the uncued target, t(18)¼ 4.694, p < .001; this was not the case when snake cues werepresented, t < 1. Moreover, although infants’ first looks weredirected toward the cued target in 63.7% of the trials in which aflower cue was presented (SD ¼ 12.6), this proportion dropped to54.1% of the trials in which a snake cue was presented (SD¼ 18.3),p ¼ .04 (see Figure 2).The mean difference between the proportion of first looksdirected to the cued target when flower and snake cues were pre-sented did not correlate with age, r ¼ .222, p > .10.In accordance with our predictions, the presentation of a snakemodulated the cue facilitation effects observed when flowerswere presented.DiscussionUsing a variant of the Posner’s cuing paradigm (Posner, 1980), weinvestigated the existence of a threat-dependent functional linkbetween the “what” and the “where” visual subsystems in infancy.Specifically, we examined whether and how spatial orienting isinfluenced by the detection of snakes in the visual environment.Table 1. Mean latencies of the first look to the target as a function of thedirection of this first look and of the type of cue presented just before.Direction of first lookCued target Uncued targetFlower cue 427 [391, 464] 437 [402, 472]Snake cue 414 [366, 462] 456 [410, 502]Note. n ¼ 19. 95% CIs are in brackets.Table 2. Mean percentages of gaze orienting towards the cued and theuncued targets as a function of the type of cue presented before.Direction of first lookCued target Uncued targetFlower cue 63.7 [57.6, 69.8] 36.3 [30.2, 42.5]Snake cue 54.1 [45.3, 62.9] 45.9 [37.0, 54.7]Note. n ¼ 19. 95% CIs are in brackets.Figure 2. Proportion of orienting toward the cued target separately forthreat-irrelevant (flower cues) and threat-relevant trials (snake cues).4 International Journal of Behavioral DevelopmentWe observed that, when presented with peripheral cues, 7–11-month-old infants turned more quickly towards snakes than flow-ers. These findings add to the body of evidence showing attentionalcapture by pictures of snakes in infancy (DeLoache & LoBue,2009; LoBue & DeLoache, 2010). They also extend these resultsby demonstrating that this grabbing of attention occurs underdifferent presentation conditions. Specifically, although previousstudies used pairs of pictures made up of one threat-relevant andone threat-irrelevant pictures (i.e., competing for attentionalresources), pictures were presented in isolation in the currentstudy and elicited exogenous overt attentional shifts towards theirperipheral location, be they flowers or snakes. The present resultsthus show that the detection of a snake in the visual peripherywould speed up the automatic engagement of attention towards itslocation.In addition to these effects on attentional capture, central to thecurrent study is the finding that the presentation of peripheralsnake cues modulated spatial orienting towards the subsequentbilateral targets. While infants oriented their first gaze preferen-tially towards the cued than the uncued target after flower cues(i.e., facilitation effects4), when cues were pictures of snakes,infants oriented as much towards the cued than the uncued target(i.e., no facilitation effect). Detecting a snake (an ability linked tothe “what” subsystem) would thus influence attentional orientingin the visual space (relying on the “where” subsystem) in such away that subsequent stimuli would be differentially attended todepending on their location.Although at first sight it might seem counterintuitive that infantsorient less towards the cued location after having detected a threat-relevant stimulus rather than a neutral one, this can be explained intwo ways. First, these data could reflect an avoidance reaction whendetecting a snake, so that attention would be automatically divertedfrom that location. However, in that case one would have expectedthat infants orient their attention preferentially towards the oppositeside of space. Rather, we observed that, when a snake was detected,infants oriented their attention as much towards the cued thantowards the uncued location. This pattern of results is more com-patible with an interpretation in terms of a broadening of attention.Detecting the snake in the grass would force us to enlarge ourattentional focus in order to consider ways to escape from the threatand check for the presence of other potential dangers in the vicinityof the detected snake. This would lead to attention being directed asmuch to the threat location as to other locations.It is worth noting that these facilitation effects were observedwhen considering the orienting behaviour as a dependent variable,not when examining gaze latencies (though these data were in thesame direction). The absence of cuing effects on gaze latencies isnot an isolated phenomenon in infant studies (Harman et al., 1994).In fact, these would not be an optimal dependent measure fordetecting differences between cued and uncued targets since infantsusually show slow and variable responses (Varga, Frick, Kapa, &Dengler, 2010), even more so when SOAs are long. It may not besurprising then that the threat-dependent functional link betweenthe “what” and “where” infants’ visual subsystems was notobserved at the level of gaze orienting latency. Further studiesshould nevertheless confirm the lack of cuing effect on saccadelatencies in a larger group of infants.Hence, together with studies in lab-reared monkeys (Shibasaki& Kawai, 2009), the current and previous infant studies convin-cingly demonstrate that no prior experience with snakes or knowl-edge about the danger they may represent are required to showattentional biases linked to pictures of snakes. Our results are there-fore in line with the claim that primates would have an evolved biasfor the rapid detection of threat-relevant stimuli, and snakes inparticular. They are consistent with the Snake Detection Theorypositing that snake detection by the human visual system improvedthrough natural selection as these animals have been preying onmammals for tens of millions of years (Isbell, 2006, 2009). They arealso in line with the proposal of an evolved, relatively encapsulatedfear module in the brain that would be selectively sensitive to andautomatically activated by evolutionary threat-relevant stimuli,allowing their rapid detection (O¨hman & Mineka, 2001, 2003).Although it is tempting to consider such biases as innate given thatthey are present early in life, similar studies should be run in new-borns (who truly have no experience of their visual world) beforeany conclusion can be drawn.What are the mechanisms underlying these biases in infancy?While the threat value assigned to fear-relevant stimuli would be acritical factor to activate the fear module in adults (O¨hman et al.,2001), 7–11-month-old infants have likely not yet labelled snakesas being threatening. This assumption is supported by the fact thatinfants do not show any evidence of actual fear when exposed tovideos of moving snakes (DeLoache & LoBue, 2009; Thrasher &LoBue, 2016). Most probably, in the current study, infants’ atten-tion was rather captured by low-level visual features characterizingsnakes (LoBue, Rakison, & DeLoache, 2010; Rakison & Derringer,2008). Natural selection would indeed have fostered the evolutionof the primates’ visual system such that it rapidly detects perceptualfeatures that are associated with phylogenetically threat-relevantstimuli (Cave & Batty, 2006; Isbell, 2006, 2009). Accordingly, inO¨hman’s model of fear activation, external stimuli would first passthrough a “features detector” module, which would automaticallyand unconsciously detect threat based on simple perceptual features(O¨hman, 1993). For snakes in particular, such a perceptual featurewould be their curvilinear, often coiled shape (LoBue, 2014; LoBue& DeLoache, 2011). Snakes’ curvy shape would indeed determinesnake detection in children and adults, while their bright colora-tion, specific natural backgrounds and facial traits would have noimpact (LoBue & DeLoache, 2011), at least under the conditionsand in the age ranges tested. What features drive this perceptualbias in the first years of life remains unstudied. Still, it is possiblethat the underlying mechanisms and specific features follow adevelopmental trajectory. For instance, although the coiled shapewould be sufficient to elicit an attentional bias in toddlers andadults, infants could be sensitive to a combination of features suchas curvy shape, bright colours and contrasts (three attributes of ourset of stimuli). Moreover, cognitive factors could play an increas-ing role in the occurrence of the effects of snake features presen-tation across development (for evidence in adults, see LoBue,2014). Putting aside the threat value children will learn to assignto snakes at one point in their development (probably after havingentered school), the mere familiarity with the stimuli, both threat-relevant and threat-irrelevant, presented in these studies (acquiredthrough picture books for instance) could determine the occur-rence of the bias. Further studies should carefully control theseparameters in order to determine which specific features infantsare sensitive to, and how their day-to-day experience might influ-ence the occurrence of the bias.In conclusion, the present study provides compelling evidencethat human infants are biased for the fast detection of snakes, andthat the connection between the “what” and “where” visual sub-systems is efficient in 7–11-month-old infants for the processing ofBertels et al. 5threat-relevant stimuli. Indeed, detecting snakes in their visualenvironment modulates infants’ gaze behaviour, most probablyby enlarging their attentional focus. Further studies should confirmthe perceptual nature of this bias and aim at identifying the specificfeatures that are crucial for the detection of snakes and other evolu-tionary threat-relevant stimuli.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Vanessa LoBue for providing us with the pictures offlowers and snakes that were used in this experiment. We thankEmeline Boursain and Julia Spreer for having coded the videos ofthe present study and its preliminary version.FundingThe authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support forthe research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Thiswork was supported by a FRS – FNRS grant (F.4524.10). The firstauthor was a Post-Doctoral Researcher of the Fonds de laRecherche Scientifique-FNRS.Notes1. We considered this age range reasonable since previous studiesreported no age effect on the detection of threat-relevant stimuliin this age group (DeLoache & LoBue, 2009; LoBue &DeLoache, 2010; LoBue, Buss, Taber-Thomas, & Pe´rez-Edgar, 2016).2. Pilot testing showed that these stimuli durations were the mostsuitable in order to foster overt attentional shifts to the cue and toensure that attention was back to the centre of the screen whenthe bilateral target was presented.3. Latencies to look at the cue and at the target were calculatedfrom the onset of the stimulus to the infant’s first look (i.e., firstsaccade) toward it rather than to the infant’s first fixation on it.This was indeed a purer measure of infant’s attentional orientingfrom the centre of the screen to the peripheral stimulus given (1)the use of video coding that prevents any precise informationabout where (and when) exactly the baby is looking at, and given(2) the fleetingness of the cue that had most of the time disap-peared when the baby’s gaze reached its location.4. One might wonder why we did not observe inhibition instead offacilitation effects when emotionally neutral, threat-irrelevantcues were presented. Indeed, the use of long SOAs and a centralstimulus between the cue and the target in order to disengageattention from the location of the cue typically favour the occur-rence of the Inhibition of Return phenomenon (IOR; Posner &Cohen, 1984), namely the propensity to preferentially orienttowards uncued than cued (i.e., recently attended) targets. How-ever, given the eccentricity of our cues (30), infants’ eye move-ments were clearly multisaccadic, and it has been argued thatIOR occurs following cues to which single and accurate sac-cades have been made (Butcher, Kalverboer, & Geuze, 1999;Rafal, Calabresi, Brennan, & Sciolto, 1989). Moreover,although long SOAs would favour inhibition over facilitationeffects, no IOR would be observed in infants for inter-trial inter-vals (ITIs) beyond 3.5 seconds (Clohessy, Posner, Rothbart, &Vecera, 1991). Clearly, ITIs exceeded this limit in our experi-mental design. Hence, range of eccentricity and long ITIs couldbe responsible (at least partially) for the absence of IOR in thepresent study.ReferencesBertels, J., Kolinsky, R., Bernaerts, A., & Morais, J. (2011). Effects ofemotional spoken words on exogenous attentional orienting. Jour-nal of Cognitive Psychology, 23(4), 435–452.Bertels, J., Kolinsky, R., & Morais, J. (2010). Emotional valence ofspoken words influences the spatial orienting of attention. ActaPsychologica, 134(3), 264–278.Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10,433–436.Bushneil, I., Sai, F., & Mullin, J. (1989). Neonatal recognition of themother’s face. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 7(1),3–15.Butcher, P. R., Kalverboer, A. F., & Geuze, R. H. (1999). Inhibition ofreturn in very young infants: A longitudinal study. Infant Behaviorand Development, 22, 303–319.Cave, K. R., & Batty, M. J. (2006). From searching for features tosearching for threat: Drawing the boundary between preattentiveand attentive vision. Visual Cognition, 14(4–8), 629–646.Clohessy, A. B., Posner, M. I., Rothbart, M. K., & Vecera, S. P. (1991).The development of inhibition of return in early infancy. Journal ofCognitive Neuroscience, 3(4), 345–350.DeLoache, J. S., & LoBue, V. (2009). The narrow fellow in the grass:Human infants associate snakes and fear. Developmental Science,12(1), 201–207.Erlich, N., Lipp, O. V., & Slaughter, V. (2013). Of hissing snakes andangry voices: Human infants are differentially responsive to evolu-tionary fear-relevant sounds. Developmental Science, 16(6),894–904.Harman, C., Posner, M. I., Rothbart, M. K., & Thomas-Thrapp, L.(1994). Development of orienting to locations and objects in humaninfants. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48(2),301–318.Hayakawa, S., Kawai, N., & Masataka, N. (2011). The influence ofcolor on snake detection in visual search in human children. Scien-tific Report, 1, 80.Isbell, L. A. (2006). Snakes as agents of evolutionary change in primatebrains. Journal of Human Evolution, 51(1), 1–35.Isbell, L. A. (2009). The fruit, the tree, and the serpent: Why we see sowell. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Johnson, M. (1994). Visual attention and the control of eye movementsin early infancy. In C. Umilta` & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Attentionand performance XV: Conscious and nonconscious informationprocessing (pp. 291–310), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.Johnson, M. H., Mareschal, D., & Csibra, G. (2008). The developmentand integration of the dorsal and ventral visual pathways in objectprocessing. In C. A. Nelson & M. Luciana (Eds.), Handbook ofdevelopmental cognitive neuroscience (2nd ed., pp. 467–478). Cam-bridge, MA: The MIT Press.Johnson, M. H., Dziurawiec, S., Ellis, H., & Morton, J. (1991). New-borns’ preferential tracking of face-like stimuli and its subsequentdecline. Cognition, 40(1), 1–19.Johnson, M. H., & Tucker, L. A. (1996). The development and temporaldynamics of spatial orienting in infants. Journal of ExperimentalChild Psychology, 63(1), 171–188.Lipp, O. V., & Derakshan, N. (2005). Attentional bias to picturesof fear-relevant animals in a dot probe task. Emotion, 5(3),365–369.Lipp, O. V., Derakshan, N., Waters, A. M., & Logies, S. (2004). Snakesand cats in the flower bed: Fast detection is not specific to picturesof fear-relevant animals. Emotion, 4, 233–250.6 International Journal of Behavioral DevelopmentLoBue, V. (2014). Deconstructing the snake: The relative roles ofperception, cognition, and emotion on threat detection. Emotion,14(4), 701–711.LoBue, V., Buss, K. A., Taber-Thomas, B. C., & Pe´rez-Edgar, K.(2016). Developmental differences in infants’ attention to socialand nonsocial threats. Infancy. Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/infa.12167LoBue, V., & DeLoache, J. S. (2008). Detecting the snake in the grass:Attention to fear-relevant stimuli by adults and young children.Psychological Science, 19(3), 284–289.LoBue, V., & DeLoache, J. S. (2010). Superior detection ofthreat-relevant stimuli in infancy. Developmental Science, 13(1),221–228.LoBue, V., & DeLoache, J. S. (2011). What’s so special about slither-ing serpents? Children and adults rapidly detect snakes based ontheir simple features. Visual Cognition, 19(1), 129–143.LoBue, V., & Matthews, K. (2014). The snake in the grass revisited: Anexperimental comparison of threat detection paradigms. Cognitionand Emotion, 28, 22–35.LoBue, V., Matthews, K., Harvey, T., & Stark, S. L. (2014). Whataccounts for the rapid detection of threat? Evidence for an advan-tage in perceptual and behavioral responding from eye movements.Emotion, 14, 816–823.LoBue, V., Rakison, D. H., & DeLoache, J. S. (2010). Threat perceptionacross the life span evidence for multiple converging pathways.Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(6), 375–379.Masataka, N., Hayakawa, S., & Kawai, N. (2010). Human young chil-dren as well as adults demonstrate ‘superior’ rapid snake detectionwhen typical striking posture is displayed by the snake. PLoS One,5(11), e15122.Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A. (1998). The visual brain in action.Oxford: Oxford University Press.O¨hman, A. (1993). Fear and anxiety as emotional phenomena: Clinicalphenomenology, evolutionary perspectives, and information-processing mechanisms. In M. H. Lewis & J. M. Haviland (Eds.),Handbook of emotions (pp. 511–536). New York, NY: The GuilfordPress.O¨hman, A., Flykt, A., & Esteves, F. (2001). Emotion drives attention:Detecting the snake in the grass. Journal of Experimental Psychol-ogy: General, 130(3), 466–478.O¨hman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and preparedness:Toward an evolved module of fear and fear learning. PsychologicalReview, 108(3), 483–522.O¨hman, A., & Mineka, S. (2003). The Malicious Serpent: Snakes as aprototypical stimulus for an evolved module of fear. CurrentDirections in Psychological Science, 12(1), 5–9.Peltola, M. J., Leppanen, J. M., Palokangas, T., & Hietanen, J. K.(2008). Fearful faces modulate looking duration and attentiondisengagement in 7-month-old infants. Developmental Science,11(1), 60–68.Penkunas, M. J., & Coss, R. G. (2013a). A comparison of rural andurban Indian children’s visual detection of threatening and non-threatening animals. Developmental Science, 16, 463–475.Penkunas, M. J., & Coss, R. G. (2013b). Rapid detection of visuallyprovocative animals by preschool children and adults. Journal ofExperimental Child Psychology, 114(4), 522–536.Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal ofExperimental Psychology, 32(1), 3–25.Posner, M. I., & Cohen, Y. (1984). Components of visual orienting.Attention and performance X: Control of language processes, 32,531–556.Rafal, R. D., Calabresi, P. A., Brennan, C. W., & Sciolto, T. K. (1989).Saccade preparation inhibits reorienting to recently attended loca-tions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception andPerformance, 15, 673–685.Rakison, D. H., & Derringer, J. (2008). Do infants possess an evolvedspider-detection mechanism? Cognition, 107(1), 381–393.Reid, V. M., Striano, T., Kaufman, J., & Johnson, M. H. (2004). Eyegaze cueing facilitates neural processing of objects in 4-month-oldinfants. Neuroreport, 15(16), 2553–2555.Shibasaki, M., & Kawai, N. (2009). Rapid detection of snakes by Japa-nese monkeys (Macaca fuscata): An evolutionarily predisposedvisual system. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 123(2), 131–135.Soares, S. C., Lindstro¨m, B., Esteves, F., & O¨hman, A. (2014). Thehidden snake in the grass: Superior detection of snakes in challen-ging attentional conditions. PLoS one, 9, e114724.Stiles, J., Paul, B., & Ark, W. (2008). The development of visuospatialprocessing. In C. A. Nelson & M. Luciana (Eds.), Handbook ofdevelopmental cognitive neuroscience (2nd ed., pp. 521–540).Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.Stormark, K. M., Nordby, H., & Hugdahl, K. (1995). Attentional shiftsto emotionally charged cues: Behavioural and ERP data. Cognition& Emotion, 9(5), 507–523.Thrasher, C., & LoBue, V. (2016). Do infants find snakes aversive?Infants’ physiological responses to “fear-relevant” stimuli. Journalof Experimental Child Psychology, 142, 382–390.Valenza, E., Simion, F., & Umilta`, C. (1994). Inhibition of return innewborn infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 17(3), 293–302.Van Le, Q., Isbell, L. A., Matsumoto, J., Nguyen, M., Hori, E., Maior,R. S., . . . Nishijo, H. (2013). Pulvinar neurons reveal neurobiologi-cal evidence of past selection for detection of snakes. Proceedingsof the National Academy of Sciences of the United States ofAmerica, 110(47), 19000–19005.Varga, K., Frick, J. E., Kapa, L. L., & Dengler, M. J. (2010). Develop-mental changes in inhibition of return from 3 to 6 months of age.Infant Behavior and Development, 33(2), 245–249.Bertels et al. 7