ABSTRACT: 
Dr Thomas Stockmann, the protagonist of Ibsen's play, An Enemy of the People, discovers a serious health threat in the Baths of his Norwegian town. The Baths have been marketed as a health resort to lure visitors. Dr Stockmann alerts officials about the problem and assumes that they will close the Baths until it is corrected. He is met with fierce resistance, however. His brother, the town's mayor, favors keeping the Baths open and correcting the problem gradually. He advances multiple arguments that appeal to the economic interests of the town and Thomas's role-related obligation as a citizen. His wife, Katherine, wants him to cooperate with the mayor. She marshals several arguments that appeal to his obligations as a father. This paper reconstructs and examines the competing arguments, shows how Ibsen's play has both contemporary relevance and moral depth, and demonstrates how Dr Stockmann's responses can be interpreted as an argument that complying with his duties to protect the public health do not force him to renege on his core commitments as a parent and as a citizen. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 Dr Thomas Stockmann , the protagonist of Ibsen’s play , discovers a serious health threat in the Baths of his Norwegian town. The Baths have been marketed as a health resort to lure visitors . Dr Stockmann alerts authorities about the problem and assumes that they will close the Baths until it is corrected . He is met with ﬁerce resistance , however. His brother , the town’s mayor , favors keeping the Baths open and correcting the prob- lem gradually . He advances multiple arguments that appeal to the economic interests of the town and Thomas’s role-related 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 PUBLIC HEALTH ETHICS VOLUME 3 • NUMBER 1 • 2010 • 80–86 80 Moral Combat in AnEnemyofthePeople: Public Health versus Private Interests Terrance McConnell∗, University of North Carolina at Greensboro ∗Corresponding author: Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402-6170, USA. Email: tcmcconn@uncg.edu. Dr Thomas Stockmann, the protagonist of Ibsen’s play, AnEnemyofthePeople, discovers a serious health threat in the Baths of his Norwegian town. The Baths have been marketed as a health resort to lure visitors. Dr Stockmann alerts oﬃcials about the problem and assumes that they will close the Baths until it is corrected. He is met with ﬁerce resistance, however. His brother, the town’s mayor, favors keeping the Baths open and correcting the prob- lem gradually. He advances multiple arguments that appeal to the economic interests of the town and Thomas’s role-related obligation as a citizen. His wife, Katherine, wants him to cooperate with the mayor. She marshals sev- eral arguments that appeal to his obligations as a father. This paper reconstructs and examines the competing arguments, shows how Ibsen’s play has both contemporary relevance and moral depth, and demonstrates how DrStockmann’sresponsescanbeinterpretedasanargumentthatcomplyingwithhisdutiestoprotectthepublic health do not force him to renege on his core commitments as a parent and as a citizen. Introduction HenrikIbsen’splay,AnEnemyofthePeople(1882),1 isset in the nineteenth century in a Norwegian coastal town. The town has recently opened its Baths, a kind of health resort designed to attract ‘visitors’ and ‘convalescents’. The Baths are expected to bring great economic beneﬁts to the town and enable its citizens to ﬂourish in ways they have not previously. The protagonist of the play is Thomas Stockmann, a physician. His brother, Peter Stockmann, is the town’s mayor. Thomas and Peter have an intense sibling rivalry, a force that is present throughout the play. Early in the play (Act I, p. 6) readers learn that they often quibble about whose idea the Baths were. Though all of the townspeople are excited about what the Baths will do for their standard of living, early on readers are alerted that Dr Stockmann may have uncov- ered a problem (Act I, pp. 10–11). Because some of the previous patrons had become more ill, Dr Stockmann had taken a sample of the water and requested that a local university test it. The results are back. Dr Stock- mann declares that the Baths are a ‘cesspool’, ‘poisoned’ and a ‘serious danger to health’ (Act I, p. 18). The pipes must be re-laid in order to purify the water. Though this willbeinconvenient,DrStockmannexpectstobetreated as a hero (Act I, pp. 19–20). Dr Stockmann’s expectations prove to be na¨ ıve, how- ever. The press—represented by Hovstad, editor of the People’s Herald, Billing, a journalist, and Aslaksen, a printer—claim that they will give Dr Stockmann full support. When Mayor Stockmann questions the report’s accuracy and points out how costly it will be to re- lay the pipes, however, the press’s allegiance changes. DrStockmannbecomesanobjectofridiculeandiseven- tually declared ‘an enemy of the people’ (Act IV, p. 85). Givenhowquicklythepressandthetownspeopleturn against Dr Stockmann, and given that they do so based on little or no evidence, one suspects that this play is a critique of one aspect of democracy. Arthur Miller sug- gests that a central theme of the play ‘is the question of whether the democratic guarantees protecting polit- ical minorities ought to be set aside in times of crises’ (Miller (1950): 8). This seems correct, and such a theme gives the play much contemporary interest. But there is another theme at work that is also of consequence to contemporary readers. The three main characters in this play—Thomas Stockmann, Peter Stockmann and Thomas’s wife, Katherine—each has special obligations in virtue of his or her role. But these special obliga- tions are not jointly dischargeable. The moral success of one agent seems to require the moral failure of another. These agents are in what Heidi Hurd calls ‘moral com- bat’ (Hurd, 1999).2 Dr Stockmann’s role as a physician giveshimaspecialobligationtolookoutforthehealthof people. But correcting the problem with the Baths may have an adverse effect on his community. Such a conﬂict may be similar to those faced by other physicians who doi: 10.1093/phe/php029 Advance Access publication on 6 November 2009 C The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.MORAL COMBAT IN ANENEMYOFTHEPEOPLE • 81 occupy dual roles, such as those asked to assist the state in carrying out the death penalty, or by doctors who are serving in the military. The Interests of the Town Thomas Stockmann believes that exposure to the Baths will harm patrons and it is wrong to do so. No special obligations are needed to endorse this position. But he is also a physician committed to promoting the health of people.Assuch,heisapttofeelastrongobligationtothe patrons, even if he is not the cause of the harm. Thomas is also a member of the board governing the Baths. So he might reasonably think that he is doubly responsible were he to lure people into a situation that will cause them harm. No doubt there is a general obligation—one borne by all moral agents—not to harm others. But it is easy to see why Thomas Stockmann also feels the force of special obligations to those who might become ill as a result of using the Baths. Indeed, the town is making a pitch to those who are sick to use these facilities. As mayor, Peter Stockmann has an obligation to do what is best for the town. Even if all citizens of the town have such an obligation, Peter has a special moral re- quirement that goes beyond those of the others. It is not surprising, then, that even before he learns about the speciﬁc nature of the problem, Peter insists that Thomas and all others subordinate themselves ‘to the authori- ties charged with the welfare of that community’ (Act I, p. 10). This immediately tilts the debate Peter’s way; the standard to be used is the welfare of the town. Thomas Stockmann shared the report detailing the Baths’pollutionwithPeter.Havingreadthereport,Peter marshals multiple arguments against shutting down the Baths and re-laying the pipes. His ﬁrst argument appeals to the citizens’ economic interests. The town is currently prosperingandthereiseveryreasontobelievethatitwill continue doing so. If the Baths are closed, the principal source of income for the town will be shut off. And if the pipes must be re-laid, that will be costly (Act II, pp. 34–35). The Mayor later supplements this argument bypointingouttoHovstadandAslaksenthatthecostsof re-layingthepipeswillfallontownspeopleintheformof higher taxes. So both the town as a whole and individual citizens in particular will be worse off if Dr Stockmann’s solution is adopted. Even though the Mayor may have self-interested rea- sons for suppressing the report, we can concede that he wants to do what is in the best interests of the town and that he believes that shutting down the Baths is contrary to those interests. In order to prevail, the Mayor needs for others to see the issue in this way. So he tells Thomas that this matter is not just a scientiﬁc one; instead, ‘it is a combination of technical and economic factors’ (Act II, p. 39). The strategy here is to disarm Dr Stockmann by removing the issue from his area of expertise. This ap- proach need not be seen as totally disingenuous. Earlier Hovstad had warned Thomas that things might be more complicated than he realized; ‘it probably hasn’t struck you that it’s tied up with a lot of other things’ (Act II, p. 25). It is certainly true that closing the Baths will have an impact on the welfare of the townspeople. Peter’s second argument may be disingenuous. He says, ‘I am not entirely convinced by your report that the state of the Baths is as serious as you make out’ (Act II, p. 35). This, in effect, denies that there is a prob- lem, or at least a serious one. Contemporary readers might expect the Mayor to say that the report is based on ‘junk science’. There are two reasons to suspect Peter of duplicity here. First, whether the Baths are polluted is a scientiﬁc matter, and Peter is not an expert in this area nor has he cited reports of experts. Peter seems to be doing nothing more than denying what is for him an inconvenient truth. Second, the Mayor later proposes a solution of his own. But a solution is not needed unless there is a real problem. Peter advances a third argument, one that appeals to Thomas’sobligationsasamemberofthegoverningboard of the Baths. The Mayor is the head of this board, and so he is the ﬁnal authority about all that it does. He says, ‘But as a subordinate member of the staff of the Baths, you have no right to express any opinion that conﬂicts with that of your superiors’ (Act II, p. 39). Earlier, even before he was aware of the nature of the problem, Peter had expressed the same principle: ‘The individual must be ready to subordinate himself ... to the authorities chargedwiththewelfareofthatcommunity’(ActI,p.10). Thisargument,ifcorrect,doesnotestablishsubstantively what ought to be done regarding the Baths; instead, it shows who ought to make the decision. Peter alludes to a fourth argument, though it is not fully developed. In this case, he appeals to Thomas’s obligations to his own family. ‘Did you never think what consequences this might have for you personally?’ ‘For you and your family’ (Act II, p. 37). And later, he adds, ‘Try to realize what you owe to yourself and family’ (Act II, p. 41). This can be perceived either as a mere threat or as a moral argument. Seen as the former, the MayorissimplywarningThomasthathewilllosehisjob if he tells the public about the alleged problem. Viewed as the latter, Peter is reminding his brother that he has obligations as a husband and a father, and his ability to carry out those obligations will be compromised if he follows through with his plan.82 • MCCONNELL If Mayor Stockmann is a sincere moral combatant, he believes that he ought to do whatever is necessary for the community’s best interests. Convincing Thomas nottoannouncetothepublicthattheBathsaretaintedis therefore necessary. Peter’s second argument denies that thereissuchaproblem.Hisﬁrstargument—theonethat ismosthonest—asksThomastolookatthewelfareofall potentiallyaffectedparties.Ifhegoespublic,peopleinhis own town will be harmed. The issue is economic as well as technical. When the overall calculations are done, the Mayor’s proposal will be best for all. The third argument is procedural rather than substantive—Dr Stockmann has no right to speak publicly about this issue. And the fourth argument urges Thomas to focus on another of his roles, that of husband and father. This kind of ‘shot- gun’ approach makes sense when we consider that Peter believes that as a moral combatant he must prevail. SowhatdoesPeterrecommend?First:‘Itwilltherefore be necessary for you to make a public denial of these ru- mours’ (Act II, p. 38). This is designed to keep the Baths open and thus preserve the town’s economic interests. But what about the interests of future patrons? ‘The ex- isting water-supply for the Baths is now an established fact, and must be treated as such. But it is reasonable to suppose that ...it would be possible to initiate certain improvements’ (Act II, p. 35). The Mayor can thus say thathisproposallooksoutforthewelfareofall.Iftheru- morscanbesquashed,thetownwillcontinuetoﬂourish economically.Ifappropriateimprovementsaregradually introduced, the Baths eventually will be safe for all. It is truethatintheshorttermsomepatronsmaybeharmed; but the best outcome for all is the gradualist approach. Thefewest people willbeharmedtheleastifthis isdone. Familial Obligations Peter is not Thomas’s only moral opponent. His wife, Katherine, also has a moral stake in the situation. Katherine sees clearly that Thomas is likely to lose his job and she knows what that will do to the welfare of their children. Katherine points out that if Thomas con- tinues his ﬁght with Peter, he will probably lose his job. Thomasretortsthat‘atleastIshallhavedonemydutyby the public ...and by society’. Katherine makes the obvi- ous reply: ‘But what about your family, Thomas? What a b o u tu sa th o m e ?W i l ly o ub ed o i n gy o u rd u t yb yt h e ones you should provide for ﬁrst?’ (Act II, p. 42) Mrs Stockmann believes that she has an obligation to promote the welfare of her children, and that Dr Stockmannisboundbythissamerequirement.Sheneed not believe that these are their only moral requirements, though in the passage quoted she implies that their du- tiestothechildrentrumpallothers.Whatshesuggeststo Thomasisthathisﬁrstdutyistoprovideforhisfamily.If she convinces him of this, it will enable her to discharge her duties that are imperiled by the moral combat. But readers need not doubt her sincerity here. We may pre- sume that she believes that Thomas’s ﬁrst duty too is to his family. Katherine advances two other arguments, more prag- maticinnature,designedtoconvinceThomastocomply with Peter’s request. She says that Peter, as Mayor, is far more politically powerful than Thomas. The doctor repliesthathehasrightonhisside.Katherine’sresponse: ‘Right! Yes, of course. But what’s the use of right without might?’ (Act II, p. 41) The point of this argument is that even if Thomas’s position is morally the best, he is likely not to prevail. Thus, he will exert energy and sacriﬁce his own interests, and still fail to achieve the desired end. This seems to render his sacriﬁces fruitless. Katherine’s other pragmatic argument is a critique of Thomas’s idealism. When Thomas complains that he has been treated unjustly by Peter, Hovstad, Billing and Aslaksen, Katherine agrees. ‘Yes, they’ve treated you dis- gracefully, I will say that. But heavens! Once you start thinking of all the injustices in this world people have to put up with ...’ (Act II, p. 43). Katherine is mak- ing the familiar point that one must pick one’s battles. Fightingallinjusticesintheworldisnotpossible.Thera- tional person will determine where his efforts will make a difference and direct his energies there. But, as Kather- ine has already argued, Thomas is not going to prevail against Peter. So in terms of making a positive impact on the world, Thomas should give up this ﬁght and devote himself to more feasible causes. If he agrees to this, that willenablehimandKatherinetodowhatisbestfortheir children. So, according to Katherine, it is foreseeable that Thomas’s struggle to have the Baths closed and the pipes re-laidwillfail.Inaddition,thisﬁghtwillcostThomashis job and his standing in the town. Though I earlier char- acterizedKatherine’slattertwoargumentsas‘pragmatic’, that may not be accurate. For she may be appealing to the principle that ‘ought’ implies ‘can’. If it is not within Thomas’spowertobringitaboutthattheBathsareclosed until the problem is corrected, he is not obligated to do so. But if he continues to pursue this course in vain, the consequences for his family will be horrible. So under- stood, Katherine is portraying Thomas’s idealism as not only na¨ ıve but also unethical.3 There are similarities in the positions of Peter and Katherine. Each appeals to a role that Thomas occupies and argues that there are important obligations attached to that role. The Mayor reminds Thomas that he is aMORAL COMBAT IN ANENEMYOFTHEPEOPLE • 83 citizen and as such has an obligation to do what is best for the town; or, more properly, to obey those who have the authority to determine what is best for the town. Re- vealing the alleged problems with the Baths is contrary tothetown’sinterests,andsoisforbidden.Katherinein- siststhatparentshaveanobligationtodowhatisbestfor their children, and if Thomas deﬁes Peter he will render himself unable to discharge that requirement. Peter and Katherine each points to consequences that will ensue if Thomas does what he threatens, but each focuses on the consequences for a different population. Thomas Stockmann is not persuaded by either his brother or his wife. But in rejecting their arguments, does he reject the role-related morality to which they appeal? The answer to this is complicated. First, Do No Harm We can imagine at least four different answers that Dr Stockmann might give to the arguments just explained. He might agree with Peter that he ought to be a good citizen, but claim that releasing the report and correct- ing the problem is exactly what a good citizen should do. He might agree with Katherine that he ought to be a good parent, but assert that being honest and living ac- cording to one’s principles is what a good parent should do. Yet a third response is to claim that his obligations as doctor require him to protect the health of would-be patrons, and that in this situation these obligations take precedence over his obligations as a citizen and as a par- ent. Finally, he might argue that role-related obligations either are irrelevant or do not prevail here. There is a general obligation—one borne by all moral agents—not to cause harm to others. That obligation will be vio- lated unless the problem with the Baths is corrected. There is some evidence that Thomas makes all of these points in defending his position. This suggests that he believes that his various role-related obligations are in harmony. During one of the disputes with Peter, Thomas says, ‘I’mtheonewiththerealwelfareofthetownatheart.AllI wanttodoisexposecertainthingsthatareboundtocome o u ts o o n e ro rl a t e ra n y w a y ’( A c tI I ,p .4 0 ) .I ft h eB a t h s arepolluted,asthereportshows,theneventuallyenough patrons will become ill and people will realize the source of the problem. That will be worse, in the long run, for thetown’sintereststhaniftheyacknowledgetheproblem anddealwithit.Losseswilloccureitherway;butapolicy of honesty will minimize those losses. Here Thomas is accusing Peter of being na¨ ıve. The gradualist approach of correcting the problem before patrons discover it is b o u n dt of a i l . When, at the end of Act II, Katherine pleads with Thomas to focus on what is best for his children, he says, ‘I want to be able to look my boys in the face when they growupintofreemen’(ActII,p.43).Thesuggestionhere is that one cannot be a good parent unless one exhibits moral integrity. To do that, agents must abide by their principles.IfThomasweretogiveupthisﬁght,hewould besettingabadexampleforhischildren.Towardtheend of the play, when Petra, his daughter, has lost her job, when his sons, Morten and Ejlif, have been permanently dismissed from school, and when his family has been evicted from their home, Thomas says to the boys, ‘I’ll makedecentandindependent-mindedmenofyouboth’ (Act V, p. 105). Readers need not assume here that Dr Stockmann is completely oblivious to the basic needs of hisfamily.Indeed,hesaystotheentirefamily,‘Well,you’ll just have to skimp and scrape a bit on the side—we’ll manage all right. That’s my least worry’ (Act V, p. 104). Evenifwithregardtothesenecessitiesthechildrenarenot as well off as previously, their basic needs will be fulﬁlled and their moral development will have been advanced. Contemporary readers might expect Thomas to emphasize his obligations as a physician; but there is comparatively little of that in the text. In one exchange, however, the issue seems to arise. In a discussion with Hovstad, Billing and Katherine, Thomas points out that the Baths are being commended ‘for the sick’. This tells us that the town is promoting the Baths as a panacea for various illnesses. Yet Thomas has observed over the past year ‘a number of curious cases of sickness among the visitors’. Based on this and the report, he concludes that the Baths are ‘extremely dangerous to health’ (Act I, pp. 17, 18 and 19). While there are several ways to un- derstand this exchange, one natural reading is this. As a physician,Thomashasaspecialobligationtoprotectand promote the health of people. The Baths are being ad- vertised as helpful for the sick. Yet Thomas believes that they actually cause illness. So he has a special obligation to intervene in order to protect the health of potential p a t r o n s .M o r e o v e r ,a sam e m b e ro ft h eb o a r d ,h ew i l lb e complicit in the harm that ensues. All of these responses work within the framework of role-related morality. Dr Stockmann tries to convince interlocutors that releasing the report to the public and correcting the problem with the Baths are obligations supported by their relevant roles. But it seems plausi- ble to think that role-related obligations are not the key to Thomas’s position. Instead, he seems to hold that all agentsoughttobehonestandtopreventharmwhenthey can. Recall that the Mayor proposed that Thomas pub- licly deny that there were any problems with the Baths. If Thomas would do this, then Peter would implement his84 • MCCONNELL gradualist approach and ‘take some suitable precaution- ary measures and treat any noticeable injurious effects’. Thomas has a rather sharp description of Peter’s pro- posal: ‘A swindle, a fraud, an absolute crime against the public and against society!’ (Act II, p. 35) It is wrong to deceive people, wrong to lure the sick to the Baths, and wrong to put others in harm’s way, regardless of one’s role in society. Later, toward the end, Thomas tells Katherinethatoneofhismotivesistoshow‘thatpolicies of expediency are turning all our standards of moral- ity and justice upside down, so that life’s just not going to be worth living’ (Act V, p. 104). Thomas thinks that there is something rotten in the town—that it, like the Baths, is polluted—and that a morality of expediency is onesourceofthecorruption.Sometimesindividualsand even whole societies must sacriﬁce their own interests in order to do what is right. An ethics of expediency, as Thomas understands it, is one that calculates the impact of policies on various parties and then chooses policies based on which has the mostfavorableimpactonaselectedgroup.ForPeter,that group is the townspeople; for Katherine, her family. In rejecting an ethics of expediency, Thomas is saying that it is wrong to promote the welfare of some at the direct expense of others. How are we to evaluate Thomas’s position? Contra Expediency OneofThomas’srepliestoPeterinitiallyseemsplausible. Thomassaysthattheproblemwilleventuallyberevealed, and so ﬁxing it now is the least costly solution. Today, with information ﬂow as rapid as it is, we readers are apt to nod in agreement. But perhaps we should examine this closer. Three factors suggest that Peter’s deceitful gradualistapproachmaybeonethathecanpulloff.First, inthistownatthistime,theexchangeofinformationwill be slow. Second, many who use the Baths will already be ill. So the fact that they become sicker will not be a surprise and so will not be immediately attributed to the Baths. Third, the patrons are mostly visitors. So after using the Baths, they will scatter about the country, and even the Continent. Even if many of them experience problems after using the Baths, it will likely take a long time to see the common link. There is no one individual or group who will have enough information to draw the pertinentconclusion.Wehaveseenthisoftenthroughout history.Theproblemwiththalidomideinthe1950sisone such example. So working within Peter’s own ‘ethics of expediency’ may not be Thomas’s best strategy. WhatabouttheargumentwithKatherine?Herpredic- tion that Thomas could not prevail in a political battle with Peter proved correct. Not only did Thomas lose his job, but Petra lost her teaching position, the boys were dismissed from school, and the entire family was evicted fromthehousetheywererenting.Eveninthenineteenth century,whistleblowersdidnotfarewell.Butforanoffer fromCaptainHorster(ActV,p.103)—amanwhoisapo- liticalbutsuspiciousofmajorities—tostaywithhim,the family would have been homeless. The bigger question, however, is which interests of the children Thomas and Katherine should be promoting. With respect to basic necessities—food, shelter and education—there can be little doubt that the Stockmann children are worse off at the play’s end than before their father was declared ‘an enemy of the people’. But if the children have additional interestsandiftheireconomic interestsdonotfallbelow what is acceptable, then perhaps Thomas is right. He be- lieves that his children’s moral development and moral education are seriously compromised if he accedes to Peter’s ethics of expediency. Thomas’s position need not assume that economic interests and moral interests are commensurable. He may instead hold that as long as the children are well off enough with respect to economic interests, then good parents will promote other interests as well. If this is his view, then it suggests that he thinks that the familiar ‘best interests’ principle is too simple. Katherine did eventually switch sides: ‘I’ll stick by you, Thomas!’ (Act III, p. 65) It is not clear, however, if this is because she is morally persuaded by his argument or if she is merely playing the role of a supportive wife. Even if Thomas converted Katherine by ‘playing on her turf’—appealing to the interests of the children—a comparable strategy will not work in his dispute with Peter. The Mayor will not be convinced that it is in the town’s interests or in his own interests to tell the public about the problem with the Baths. Here Thomas must reject the ethics of expediency. And so he does. His ﬁrst reaction is that it is wrong to harm others knowingly; to do so is a violation of their rights. After Dr Stockmann explains to the newspaper men that the Baths are ‘dan- gerous to health’, Hovstad asks him what he is going to do. He replies, ‘To see the matter put right, of course.’ (Act I, p. 19) There is no hesitation on his part and no calculation of the impact on the interests of the townspeople. There is another way to put Thomas’s position. It is simplymorallyinappropriatetocomparethelossofben- eﬁts for the town with the harm done to the patrons, as does Peter’s ethics of expediency. If the Baths remain open, the patrons are being harmed; if the Baths are temporarily closed, the townspeople are being denied a beneﬁt. The losses of the two parties are on a different moral plane. The obligation not to harm takes priorityMORAL COMBAT IN ANENEMYOFTHEPEOPLE • 85 over the obligation to provide beneﬁts, even if one has a role-related obligation to provide for the welfare of the town.WhenPeterurgesThomastothinkaboutthelosses that the townspeople will incur if the Baths are closed, Thomas’s reply is straightforward: ‘We live by peddling ﬁlth and corruption! The whole of the town’s prosperity is rooted in a lie.’ (Act II, p.41) The core mistake in the Mayor’s position is that loss of beneﬁt is morally equiv- alent with harm and that these must be weighed each against the other. Thomas denies this. Prosperity that is rooted in the deliberate inﬂiction of harm compromises the integrity of those who are prospering. Thomas’s re- sponseanticipatesBernardWilliams’criticismofutilitar- ianismnearlyacenturylater(Williams(1973):108–118). Lessons Learned Peter’s two-pronged attack in response to the problem raised by the report should be familiar to contemporary readers. One prong—the ethics of expediency—appeals to the overall interests of all affected parties. The eco- nomicinterestsofthetownspeopleareonaparwithand are to be weighed against the harm that will come to future patrons of the Baths. Moreover, if the problem is corrected, not only will the townspeople be denied the income from the Baths, but they will also have to pay for the repairs in the form of additional taxes. This is ingeniously designed to convince people that the overall good happens to coincide with what is best for them. The second prong of Peter’s attack is to deny that thereisaseriousproblem.Minortinkeringwillmakethe Baths safe. This is a common strategy. For years cigarette companies played the role of the skeptic by challenging claims that their product had a negative impact on the health of its users. And the campaign to convince the public that global warming is a hoax is legendary.4 This second prong is important. The public, represented by those from the People’s Herald, is not willing to side with Peter until he raises doubts about the report’s veracity. It seems to say something good about people that they are not willing to approve of a policy or action when it beneﬁts them at the expense of the welfare of others. On the other hand, it is disappointing that they are so easily convinced that what they are doing is not really harmful to others. Hovstad, Billing and Aslaksen were convinced that the report about the Baths was false merely because Peter said that it was; he offered no evidence. Thomas too delivered a multi-pronged attack. He ar- gued that acknowledging the problem and repairing the Baths was in the best interests of the town, and that his action of exposing the problem was best for his fam- ily because it taught the children not to abandon their principles. His core position, however, was that know- ingly exposing people to harm is wrong, even if doing so would reap proﬁts for the town. As a moral com- batant, it was important to Thomas to win. For winning wouldmeanthatthepublichadbeenalertedtotheBaths’ contamination, and thereby had their health and rights protected.Thomasneednotdenythattheinterestsofthe town and the interests of his children are important. But these interests may not be advanced by harming others. In one sense, Thomas is an idealist urging others to sacriﬁce at least their short-term interests in order to do what is right. One message of the play is that those with vested interests will try to silence the idealist. When the People’s Herald refuses to print Thomas’s article about the problem with the Baths, he calls a meeting of the townspeople.Hisplanistoexplaintheproblemstothem in a speech. But Peter prevents him from speaking by appealing to fear. The version of Peter’s argument in Arthur Miller’s adaptation of An Enemy of the People is powerful. ‘[I]n ordinary times I’d agree a hundred per cent with anybody’s right to say anything. But these are notordinarytimes.Nationshavecrises,andsodotowns’ (Miller (1950): 89). Peter goes on: Now this is our crisis...Today we’re just on the verge of becoming internationally known as a re- sort. I predict that within ﬁve years the income of every man in this room will be immensely greater.... I predict that if we are not defamed and maliciously attacked we will someday be one of the richest and most beautiful resort towns in the world. (Miller (1950): 90)5 ‘Crisis ethics’ is one tool that is used to silence idealists. Asecondmessageintheplayconcernshowtheidealist is portrayed by others. When Thomas tells Peter that he will proclaim the truth about the Baths on every street corner, the Mayor calls him ‘absolutely crazy’ (Act III, p. 65). When Morten Kiil tries to force Dr Stockmann to recant by tying all of Katherine’s inheritance to stocks in the Baths, Thomas nevertheless refuses. This prompts Kiil to say, ‘But you couldn’t be so stark, staring mad as allthat,notwhenitaffectsyourwifeandchildren’(ActV, p.97).WhenHovstadthreatenstoaccuseDrStockmann of conspiring with Kiil to drive down the cost of stock in the Baths so that they could gain a monopoly, again he will not budge. This prompts Hovstad to ask, ‘Have you gone completely mad?’ (Act V, p. 101) All of this is designed to marginalize Thomas. At the play’s end, after the Stockmanns have lost most of their worldly posses- sions, Thomas declares, ‘I’m one of the strongest men in the whole world’ (Act V, p. 105). Does he not recognize how utterly ineffective he has been? But Thomas is not insane for he goes on to explain what he means: ‘The86 • MCCONNELL thing is, you see, that the strongest man in the world is the man who stands alone’ (Act V, p. 106). He is assert- ing that agents should not abandon their principles even ifthereisapricetopay,aslongasthefamily’sbasicneeds are met. One conclusion that might be reached after reading this text is that the role-related obligations of politicians to their constituents and of parents to their children are limited by the rights of others. Whenever what is best for one’s constituents or what is best for one’s children involves putting innocent third parties at risk, one may not pursue the best for those individuals. As long as the options remaining are ‘good enough’—meet the basic needsoftheconstituentsorthechildren—thensituations of moral combat may be limited, though not necessarily eliminated completely. Notes 1. Henrik Ibsen, An Enemy of the People (New York: Oxford University Press, 1960). ‘Introduction’, ‘Select Bibliography’ and ‘Chronology of Henrik Ibsen’ by JamesMcFarlane.Pagereferenceswillbegivenparen- thetically in the text. 2. Elsewhere this same phenomenon has been dubbed ‘interpersonal moral conﬂicts.’ See McConnell (1988). 3. The need to make this clariﬁcation of Katherine’s po- sitionwaspointedouttomebybothDavidLefkowitz and Sandra Shapshay. 4. For a recent account of the role that scientists have played in such campaigns, see Michaels (2008). 5. InMiller’sadaptation,thisoccursinActII,Scene2;in Ibsen’s play, the comparable speech is in Act IV (pp. 70–71). Acknowledgements I thank David Lefkowitz and Sandra Shapshay for exten- sive comments and suggestions on an earlier version of this paper. I also thank readers for Public Health Ethics for guidance. References Hurd, H. (1999). Moral Combat.N e wY o r k :C a m b r i d g e University Press. Ibsen, H. (1960/1882). An Enemy of the People.N e w York: Oxford University Press. [“Introduction,” “Se- lectBibliography,”and“ChronologyofHenrikIbsen” by Mcfarlane, J.]. McConnell, T. (1988). Interpersonal Moral Conﬂicts. American Philosophical Quarterly, 25, 25–35. Michaels, D. (2008). Doubt Is Their Product: How Indus- try’s Assault on Science Threatens Your Health.N e w York: Oxford University Press. Miller, A. (1950). Adaptation of An Enemy of the People. New York: Penguin Books.