ABSTRACT: 
In global health initiatives, particularly in the context of private philanthropy and its ‘business minded’ approach, detailed programme data plays an increasing role in informing assessments, improvements, evaluations, and ultimately continuation or discontinuation of funds for individual programmes. The HIV/AIDS literature predominantly treats monitoring as unproblematic. However, the social science of audit and indicators emphasises the constitutive power of indicators, noting that their effects at a grassroots level are often at odds with the goals specified in policy. This paper investigates users' experiences of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems in the context of HIV interventions in western India. Six focus groups (totalling 51 participants) were held with employees of 6 different NGOs working for government or philanthropy-funded HIV interventions for sex workers in western India. Ten donor employees were interviewed. Thematic analysis was conducted. NGO employees described a major gap between what they considered their “real work” and the indicators used to monitor it. They could explain the official purposes of M&E systems in terms of programme improvement and financial accountability. More cynically, they valued M&E experience on their CVs and the rhetorical role of data in demonstrating their achievements. They believed that inappropriate and unethical means were being used to meet targets, including incentives and coercion, and criticised indicators for being misleading and inflexible. Donor employees valued the role of M&E in programme improvement, financial accountability, and professionalising NGO-donor relationships. However, they were suspicious that NGOs might be falsifying data, criticised the insensitivity of indicators, and complained that data were under-used. For its users, M& E appears an ‘empty ritual’, enacted because donors require it, but not put to local use. In this context, monitoring is constituted as an instrument of performance management rather than as a means of rational programme improvement. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 this paper investigates the impact of the on-the-ground users of M&E systems in HIV interventions in western India. Six focus groups ( totalling 51 participants ) were held with employees of 6 different NGOs workingfor government or philanthropy-funded HIV interventions for sex workers in western India. Ten donoremployees were interviewed. Thematic analysis was conducted. NGO employees described a major gapbetween what they considered their � “real work�s and the indicators used to monitor it. They could explainthe official purposes of M&E systems in terms of programme improvement and financial accountability . more cynically , they valued 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Empty rituals? A qualitative study of users’ experience of monitoring & evaluationsystems in HIV interventions in western IndiaShukla, Anuprita; Teedon, Paul; Cornish, FloraPublished in:Social Science and MedicineDOI:10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.041Publication date:2016Document VersionPublisher's PDF, also known as Version of recordLink to publication in ResearchOnlineCitation for published version (Harvard):Shukla, A, Teedon, P & Cornish, F 2016, 'Empty rituals? A qualitative study of users’ experience of monitoring &evaluation systems in HIV interventions in western India', Social Science and Medicine, vol. 168, pp. 7–15.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.041General rightsCopyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright ownersand it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.Take down policyIf you believe that this document breaches copyright please view our takedown policy at https://edshare.gcu.ac.uk/id/eprint/5179 for detailsof how to contact us.Download date: 29. Apr. 2020lable at ScienceDirectSocial Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e15Contents lists avaiSocial Science & Medicinejournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/socscimedEmpty rituals? A qualitative study of users’ experience of monitoring& evaluation systems in HIV interventions in western IndiaAnuprita Shukla a, *, Paul Teedon a, Flora Cornish ba Glasgow Caledonian University, City Campus, 70 Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow G4 0BA, United Kingdomb London School of Economics and Political Science, Department of Methodology, Houghton St, London WC2A 2AE, United kingdoma r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 16 September 2015Received in revised form5 May 2016Accepted 25 August 2016Available online 26 August 2016Keywords:IndiaNew managerialismMonitoringPhilanthropyHIV/AIDSSex workersAvahanNGO management* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: Anuprita.Shukla@gcu.ac.uk (A.uk (P. Teedon), f.cornish@lse.ac.uk (F. Cornish).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.0410277-9536/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elseviera b s t r a c tIn global health initiatives, particularly in the context of private philanthropy and its ‘business minded’approach, detailed programme data plays an increasing role in informing assessments, improvements,evaluations, and ultimately continuation or discontinuation of funds for individual programmes. TheHIV/AIDS literature predominantly treats monitoring as unproblematic. However, the social science ofaudit and indicators emphasises the constitutive power of indicators, noting that their effects at agrassroots level are often at odds with the goals specified in policy. This paper investigates users' ex-periences of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems in the context of HIV interventions in westernIndia. Six focus groups (totalling 51 participants) were held with employees of 6 different NGOs workingfor government or philanthropy-funded HIV interventions for sex workers in western India. Ten donoremployees were interviewed. Thematic analysis was conducted. NGO employees described a major gapbetweenwhat they considered their “real work” and the indicators used to monitor it. They could explainthe official purposes of M&E systems in terms of programme improvement and financial accountability.More cynically, they valued M&E experience on their CVs and the rhetorical role of data in demonstratingtheir achievements. They believed that inappropriate and unethical means were being used to meettargets, including incentives and coercion, and criticised indicators for being misleading and inflexible.Donor employees valued the role of M&E in programme improvement, financial accountability, andprofessionalising NGO-donor relationships. However, they were suspicious that NGOs might be falsifyingdata, criticised the insensitivity of indicators, and complained that data were under-used. For its users,M& E appears an ‘empty ritual’, enacted because donors require it, but not put to local use. In thiscontext, monitoring is constituted as an instrument of performance management rather than as a meansof rational programme improvement.© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).1. BackgroundRecent decades have seen a rapid increase in the breadth andintensity of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) practices in healthand development systems. For ‘New Public Management’, ‘Results-Based Management’ and ‘Payment by Results’, the collection ofaccurate monitoring data is seen as essential to the pro-fessionalisation and rationalisation of health interventions(Binnendijk, 2000; Hood, 1995). Progress towards highly-specifiedtargets can be monitored, and good performance rewarded (Earle,2003; Kilby, 2004). The advent of major global health initiativesShukla), Paul.Teedon@gcu.ac.Ltd. This is an open access article ufunded by philanthropic organisations such as the Gates Founda-tion has brought a ‘business minded’ shift to New Public Manage-ment in the 21st century. The Gates Foundation-funded Avahanprogramme, for instance, emphasises its ‘data driven businessapproach’ and ‘effective management model’ (Avahan, 2008; Rau,2011), in which the management of performance through thecompilation of data is central.According to evaluation literature, the major purposes of M&Eare threefold: (i) assessing programme effectiveness (ii) preventingmisappropriation of funds (iii) feedback and learning to improveprogramme performance (Green and South, 2006; Rossi et al.,2003; Shadish et al., 1991). While M&E policies presume arational model in which accurate information leads to better per-formance, critics have cautioned that monitoring systems (forexample using key performance indicators) should not be simplynder the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).A. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e158assumed to ‘mirror’ reality (Power, 1999; Strathern, 2000). In-dicators are partial, capturing some aspects of reality but notothers, thus leading to systematic gaps in what is recorded(Armytage, 2011; Ika & Lytvynov, 2011; Savedoff et al., 2006). Moreprofoundly, it is argued that indicators actively construct reality.Particularly when indicators are used as a basis for performancemanagement, those indicators come to define the problem, the roleof practitioners, and the identities of the ‘beneficiaries’ (Erikson,2012; Lorway and Khan, 2014; Mawdsley et al., 2005). In the in-terest of exploring the effects of monitoring systems at the grass-roots level, this article investigates the experiences of the users ofM&E systems e NGO and donor staff e charged with puttingmonitoring into practice.In the HIV/AIDS literature to date, monitoring has been largelytreated either as a health-systems issue (regarding HIV incidenceand prevalence rates, sentinel surveillance), where the concern iswhether M&E is sufficiently resourced and embedded in healthsystems (Peersman et al., 2009; Porter et al., 2012), or as a technicalissue, where the concern is with developing the ‘right’ indicatorsand the focus is on indicators of service delivery, clinical work orbehaviour change communication (Ahonkhai et al., 2012;Catumbela et al., 2013; Mannell et al., 2014) and achieving high‘data quality’ (typically through web based applications withdecentralised data entry) (Nash et al., 2009). Collectively, this bodyof work is oriented to incremental improvement of individual in-dicators, improvement of M&E frameworks, and the institutional-isation of M&E. There is generally little attention paid to how M&Eis actually implemented at grassroots level, how it is experiencedby frontline staff, or its effects at the grassroots level, despite thefact that those ‘at the sharp end’ of healthcare policies, who arecharged with implementing them, may have important insights tocontribute (Aveling et al., 2015).The exception is a body of recent research which investigatesquestionable ‘data quality’ in routine reporting relating to HIV. Forexample, Kaposhi et al. found that the number of adults receivingantiretroviral therapy in the Eastern Cape, South Africa was over-reported by 36.6% on the District Health Information System, andrecommended enhancing staff training, data-verification proced-ures, and reducing the clinical and reporting burdens on staff, tomake accurate record-keeping more manageable (Kaposhi et al.,2015). Surveying the completeness and accuracy of records in alarge, prevention of mother to child transmission programme inSouth Africa, Mate et al. found that reports submitted to the statelevel were only 50% complete, and accurate only 13% of the time(Mate et al., 2009). They suggest that the challenges are not onlytechnical, but also social, highlighting the commitment of clinicstaff as a key factor and therefore recommending that the collectionof monitoring data be shown to be useful at a local level, so thatstaff have a sense of ownership and ‘buy-in’ to the aim of gatheringaccurate data. These authors did not gather data about staff per-ceptions, but speculate about their importance. This paper empir-ically investigates staff perceptions, assuming, like Mate et al.(2009), that how staff feel about their reporting activities hasimportant implications for both staff enthusiasm and data quality.The data for this paper are drawn from HIV interventions in ahigh prevalence state of western India. There is a large and growingliterature evaluating HIV interventions in India, which predomi-nantly seeks to establish whether, and to what extent, in-terventions have achieved positive results in terms of reducing HIVtransmission or risk factors (Ng et al., 2011; Vassall et al., 2014). Asmaller body of literature examines issues of process, seeking tolearn lessons about programme design, mechanisms of change, andimplementation (Narayanan et al., 2012; Wheeler et al., 2012).Until the recent papers by Lorway and Khan (2014); andBiradavolu et al. (2015), however, we could find no evidence ofother studies on HIV in the Indian context that had consideredmonitoring as an active process, constructing people and practices,rather than simply reflecting them. Lorway and Khan (2014)explore how the epidemiological categories used in HIV interven-tion terminology came to define new identities and new grounds ofinclusion/exclusion among key populations in India. They make acompelling case that monitoring forms do not simply reflect a pre-existing reality, but construct realities. Biradavolu et al. (2015)examine the unintended consequences of a community-basedmonitoring system for sex worker interventions in India, findingthat despite its good intentions, the system deskilled and under-mined sex workers, replacing their contextually-sensitive countingsystems with a less responsive universal system, thus constitutingdisempowered sex workers and problematic data. This article seeksto contribute to this research agenda, but with a different focus. Itasks: How do the on-the-ground users of M&E systems in HIV in-terventions in India experience those systems? By asking thisquestion, we seek to understand the effects of M&E practices, not inproducing data, but on the everyday work and experience ofrunning interventions.2. Context: monitoring HIV interventions in IndiaAt the time of the fieldwork for this study (2011e2012), thegovernance of the HIV response in India was undergoing a transi-tion. Since 2003, it had been led by two agencies, working in par-allel: the Indian government's National AIDS Control Organisation(NACO) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation's Avahan pro-gramme. These agencies divided their responsibilities geographi-cally, with the Avahan programme operating in certain districts inthe six highest-prevalence states, while NACO was responsible forthe rest. In line with international principles of ‘aid effectiveness’,‘harmonisation’ and ‘coordination’, the government andphilanthropy-funded programmes were closely coordinated, hav-ing similar structures in place at each administrative andgeographical level (Hill et al., 2012). Both programmes employed acommon operational structure of distributing funds to organisa-tions operating at the state level, i.e. State AIDS Control Societiesand international NGOs respectively. In both cases, these state levelagencies managed the funding, commissioning, and evaluation ofTargeted Interventions, which were sub-contracted to and imple-mented by local NGOs and CBOs at field level. During the fieldwork,the Avahan programme was in a transition phase, with its fundingand HIV intervention programme management being handed overto the Indian Government (Rao, 2010; Sgaier et al., 2013).The government and Avahan programmes took a commonapproach to intervention, with three main components. First, pre-vention activities took place through peer-based outreach, inwhichmembers of key populations, working as peer educators, commu-nicated behaviour change messages and distributed condoms.Second, a medical component was provided through project-runclinics for HIV/STI testing and treatment. Finally, a ‘social compo-nent’ aimed at advocacy and empowerment to foster communityparticipation and ‘ownership’, by promoting local leadership.Across each of these components, M&E activities were conducted,to record and evaluate each NGO's achievements in each inter-vention strand against targets set centrally by the funding bodies.This study was conducted in the context of Targeted Interventionsfor sex workers, in a ‘high prevalence state’ in western India.M&E was embedded in the job descriptions and management ofTargeted Interventions at all levels of programmes. We investigate“M&E” as our participants defined and experienced it. “M&E”ostensibly refers to two separate processes: monitoring (i.e.recording data about activities and outcomes), and evaluation (i.e.assessing the success of a programme in relation to its objectives byA. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e15 9means of those indicators). In practice, in our study, the users ofM&E systems do not distinguish these two processes but use theterm “M&E” as a catch-all for thework of recording data and its use.With the rise of ‘results-basedmanagement’, M&E is understood byparticipants to be closely associated with the setting of targets andmonitoring progress towards those targets, and thus with perfor-mance management. In what follows, we describe how the Avahaninterventions were monitored, to give a concrete example.Government-funded interventions used slightly different in-dicators, but with a very similar overall approach. In Avahan in-terventions, starting from the base, peer educators (i.e. sex workerstrained and employed by the Targeted Intervention) completed adaily diary which included indicators such as: number of one-to-one and one-to-group sessions held; new contacts made; preven-tion materials distributed and condoms distributed. They alsocompleted a weekly ‘micro-plan’ intended to help them keep trackof individual sex workers in their outreach area.Outreach workers (who were professionally trained socialworkers or experienced peer educators, supervising 10e20 peereducators each) maintained a daily diary recording their personaloutreach indicators, such as: number of joint field visits with peereducators; meetings conducted with sex workers; condomsdistributed; new sex workers registered as well as recording theminutes of all meetings. Outreach workers had the primary re-sponsibility for data collection from the social component of theinterventions, including indicators such as: numbers of sex workersreceiving a ration card or voter card; self-help groups formed; corecommittee meetings; advocacy and sensitisation workshops con-ducted; local committees formed and networks and linkagesdeveloped. As supervisors of the peer educators, outreach workerscollated peer educators' data from daily diaries into a ‘weekly sheet’and a monthly ‘summary sheet’, and compiled their microplansinto a ‘monthly tracking sheet’.Clinic staff (doctors, counsellors, and paramedics) collected dataon clinic performance, STI case management, and clinic operations.Indicators included numbers of: sex workers attending clinic forregular health check-up; follow-up cases; sex workers visiting theproject clinic at least once; sex workers attending the clinic forpresumptive treatment for STIs, and referrals made.All of the above data, plus operational data (e.g. records ofvisits to programme-owned STI clinics, records of registers andminutes of meetings held by community groups and committeesat the drop-in centres) were aggregated at the implementing NGOlevel on a monthly basis. NGOs also maintained detailed dailyfinancial records and were responsible for sending three-monthlyreports to the state-level partner. In addition a monthly technicalreport contained details of reported indicators on infrastructure(such as number of drop in centres functional) and on ‘coverage’(such as number of new sex workers contacted). Separately, themonthly financial report contained details of project expensesunder various budget headings, and the monthly narrative reportcontained details of advocacy issues and success stories from thefield.At the state-level funding partner organisation, a project officerwould cross-verify the data (using registers and physical forms)during monthly supervisory visits to the NGO. The state level officewould then compile the data from all sub-contracted NGOs,reporting it at the central level.This large body of data was then analysed at the central (i.e.national) level, producing ‘league tables’ of the state-level partners.These league tables were displayed at quarterly and annual reviewmeetings of the state-level partners, where achievements weremade public and praise or admonishment administered. IndividualNGOs felt the pressure to perform, as these data could be used tojustify closing an intervention.3. MethodThe qualitative study draws on interviews and focus groupswith participants sampled from a wide range of agencies workingon Targeted Interventions for female, male and trans sex workers,in a high prevalence state in western India. The identity of researchsite remains undisclosed for ethical reasons. The paper investigatesusers' experiences of M&E systems. The users, in this context,include both NGO staff and donor staff. Data collection took placebetween August 2011 and January 2012. Ethical approval wasgranted by the Glasgow Caledonian University School of HealthEthics Committee, and participants took part under conditions ofvoluntary, informed consent. Interviews and group discussionswere conducted in the participants’ preferred language by the firstauthor, audio-recorded, and later translated and transcribedverbatim in English. The first author had formerly been employedas a project officer on an Avahan-funded HIV intervention(2005e2007), followed by research work in the same field. Thisexperience resulted in networks which were used for recruitmentfor this study, during which new networks were also generated.This research was conducted as an independent PhD project, withuniversity funding.3.1. NGO participantsWe used focus groups to study the experiences of NGO workers,aiming to generate rich, conversational data, reflecting users’ con-cerns. Each focus group was composed of participants from withinthe same NGO, so that participants were all talking about the sameM&E system, and could build on their common experience.Purposive sampling of NGOs aimed for diversity along two di-mensions seeking to reflect the diversity of provision in the sector.The dimensions were: (i) funding source (Avahan/government); (ii)mission (service delivery/empowerment). Our sample of six NGOsincluded representatives from three funded by Avahan and threefunded by government; and three of the six had a service-deliveryethos and three had an explicit agenda of empowerment orparticipation.In total, 51 NGO participants took part, across the six focusgroups. Each focus group contained a diversity of participants, andincluded both professional NGO staff and representatives of sexworkers. Professional staff were typically young, middle class,educated to degree level, and held job titles including counsellors,field officers, M&E officers, accountants, project managers or doc-tors. Sex worker participants usually had very low incomes andlittle formal education. They were peer educators, communityparamedics, and board members of committees.Focus groups were structured by a topic guide addressing threemain issues: (i) workers' understanding of their organisation'spurposes; (ii) experiences of day-to-day implementation of M&E;(iii) prospects for alternative M&E systems. Focus groups lasted anaverage of 2 hours.3.2. Donor participantsWe used individual in-depth interviews with donor employees,rather than focus groups, because they were geographicallydispersed, and to allow them flexibility, privacy and openness totalk about sensitive issues.The primary inclusion criterion for donor employees was thatthey had experience within the last five years of working onfunding-management of HIV-related Targeted Interventions inwestern India. Current and former donor employees (bothgovernmental and Avahan) were included. Purposive samplingaimed for diversity in terms of (i) employer; (ii) level of seniority. AA. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e1510‘snowball’ technique was used, starting with the first author'scontacts and those of colleagues. Ten interviews were conductedwith donor representatives. Five were employees of governmentorganisations, and five were employed by large onward-grantingNGOs. The sample included representatives of central, regionaland local donor organisation structures: ranging from the ProjectOfficer of a government-funded Technical Support Unit, to seniorpositions in State-Level (Avahan-funded) and Central-government-level organisations.Interviews were guided by the same topics as the focus grouptopic guide, with the addition of a section focusing on the re-lationships between the different actors involved in M&E. Theylasted for an average of 1.5 hours.3.3. AnalysisFocus groups and interviews were audio-recorded and tran-scribed for analysis. Thematic analysis was used to code for par-ticipants' experiences of M&E. Each dataset was analysedseparately, to preserve the distinctiveness of the NGO and donoremployee voices. Following Attride-Stirling's step-wise approach tothematic analysis, for each dataset, analysis began by generatingdescriptive codes, which were progressively grouped into basicthemes, further grouped into ‘organising themes’, and ultimately a‘global theme’ for each dataset (Attride-Stirling, 2001). Organisingthemes had clear value judgements attached. Some identified is-sues that were clearly positive for participants, others were seen asnegative, and we separate out the positive and negative themeswhen we present them below. Coding was validated by a team ofresearchers familiar with the project, who reviewed the codingframework, its application to interview and group discussiontranscripts, and contributed to interpretation of the data into theorganising and global themes.4. ResultsThis section presents the findings for each group separately, firstthe NGO participants, then the donor participants. For each group,we first illustrate the ‘global theme’, that is, the concept that syn-thesises their experience as a whole. This sets the context for dis-cussion of the individual organising themes, which convey thepositive and negative impacts of M&E in turn.4.1. NGO workers: targets vs.“real work”Overall, NGO participants reported overwhelmingly negativeperceptions of M&E, repeatedly contrasting what they saw as‘inappropriate’ targets with what they considered their ‘real work’.The focus groups began with a discussion of each NGO's purpose,principles and history. Participants spoke enthusiastically abouttheir commitment to improving the lives of marginalised people:R5: We are living for others; we are trying to bring about change inother people's lives. That is one thing I really feel proud of. [Groupdiscussion-4].When they spoke of what they were proud of, they identifiedachievements that were often not recorded in M&E systems, andwhich oftenwent ‘beyond the call of duty’. They described workinglonger than their scheduled hours, beyond their job description(e.g. raising funds for a needy sex worker) or working without paywhen funds were delayed, emphasising their commitment to acause that went beyond how they were monitored and managed.The empowerment of sex workers and development of trustingrelationships featured repeatedly as descriptions of their ‘realwork’. In terms of empowerment, achievements identified includedsupporting sex workers to: negotiate with police officers; resistlocal thugs; negotiatewith clients; work in an NGO office; attend aninternational conference; or serve as a representative of sexworkers at a local or regional level. The goals of behaviour-change-communication with sex workers or distributing condoms (seen askey indicators) were rarelymentioned. In general, they doubted theability of M&E to capture what was most important:AS: Can you think of ways in which these things, important fromyour point of view could be incorporated in the M & E? Whetherthere are any different methods? Do you have any suggestions?R5: Trust.R1: These things we are proud of and are related to our feelings,they cannot be bound anywhere. It cannot be tied down, that iswhat I think. Like to write it down as data, or put it as data, thatcannot be done.R1: If it is a tick mark then it becomes a form, and how can you putfeelings in a form? [Group discussion-1].According to programme documents, monitoring of the socialcomponent of interventions should include measures or narrativesreflecting such social achievements as empowerment or advocacy(Bill&Melinda Gates Foundation, 2013). Yet participants expresseda view that clinical and behavioural indicators were prioritised oversocial indicators, and that the depth of their achievements andextent of their efforts were not recognised in line with findings ofGeorge et al. (2015).Their views were not all negative, however. The following threethemes convey the advantages of M&E as reported by participants.While the first can be described as an ‘intended benefit’ in that itreflects one of the establishing goals in M&E in enabling betterprogramme management and improving accountability, the othertwo are seen as ‘unintended consequences’, reflecting a moreinstrumental, indeed cynical use of M&E, uses which do notcontradict participants' claims that existing M&E processes are notreflective of their ‘real work’.4.1.1. Intended benefits: programme planning and financialaccountabilityReflecting the formal goals of M&E, NGO participants identifiedpractical benefits of M&E in terms of aiding effective programmeplanning and financial accountability. They described howcompiling routine data on outreach activities enabled them to havea better understanding of the needs of the communities theyworked with, to better target their activities, e.g. choosing the bestlocation for their mobile medical van according to numbers ofbeneficiaries in a particular location.When asked about the value ofthe daily diaries, the following participants elaborated:R1: [We learn] what sort of services they [sex workers] havereceived [and] what services they need. Are they indulging in highrisk behaviour? How many clients does she serve? Has the numberof clients reduced over time? So we have all that information withus […].R3: We understand her condom needs.R1: If she has forgotten her dates to visit the clinic, we get hold ofher and remind her. We understand all this about them. With thisdata we know about the girls and it is useful for them as well.[Group discussion-5].The participants felt that one of the plausible purposes of M&EA. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e15 11was to check that funds were being used as intended. This wasdeemed important in a context in which corruption is acknowl-edged to be rife, withmany stories in circulation of NGODirectors orfounders purchasing large properties or multiple vehicles throughrents, bribes, or siphoning off funds. A counsellor commented:R2: When a person gives funds then he would definitely keep acheck, if I am giving funding then [I want to know] whether it isreaching the beneficiaries […] If the funds do not reach the bene-ficiaries then what is the use of giving money? [Group discussion-4].In addition, participants also mentioned expenditure informa-tion as serving an important role in accountability in terms oftracking whether activities were being undertaken as expected. Forinstance, an under-spend on ‘medical services’ might reveal thatgreater effort needed to be made in that area.4.1.2. Unintended benefit: CV buildingDeveloping skills in M&E was itself seen as a valuable andmarketable advantage for individual NGO participants. Skills inprogramme management, training, data collection, reporting anddocumentation, presentation and networking were identified asimproving the participants’ value in the labour market.R1: I have learnt a lot from this funding agency, my documentationskill has improved, my presentation skill improved, I met severalnew people, I will never say that I did not get a chance to learn fromit. I learnt a lot. [Group discussion 2].The skills and experience gained from undertaking M&E, usingthe computerised system, and the networks developed through alarge scale business model programme were all considered usefuladvantages of working for targeted interventions.4.1.3. Instrumental benefit: demonstrating success and credibilityNGOworkers appreciated the role of M&E in serving as evidenceof their own individual work, and the work of their organisation.They valued the data generated as evidence of their high-level ofperformance and sincerity, and expected it to be useful evidence inthe quest for future funding:R9: Yes, there is [value], we can present it to visitors, particularlythose who come from outside: this [is the] sort of work we do. Orwhen applying for a new project we can show the work we havedone so far. Because it is in a written format, so we can show it. It isgood in that way.[Group discussion-5].This instrumentalism carries forward into the negative percep-tions of M&E processes, which follow below. Two kinds of com-plaints were identified: complaints about undesirable or unethicalmeans used to boost performance on themonitored indicators; andcomplaints about the choice of indicators themselves.4.1.4. Over-reliance on incentivesFor our participants, the meaning of M&E was closely bound upwith the use of monitoring data to assess NGOs’ performanceagainst targets, often conceived as a competition between NGOs.Participants expressed concern that an obsession with meetingtargets for sex workers' participation was leading to the use ofexpensive incentives, to achieve short-term results at the expenseof sustainability. Participants described an abundance of gifts (suchas umbrellas, t-shirts, saris and bags) available to incentivise sexworkers' attendance at project events, and generous funds availableto make Targeted Interventions’ premises and activities moreattractive. This issue was particularly salient for those NGOs un-dergoing transition from Avahan to government funding, whichentailed a controversial drop in funding levels.R1: When we asked [donors from private philanthropy] for some-thing that would help to increase the number of patients, then theyused to immediately sanction it. ‘You take anything’. We used to gettents, games [Group discussion-6].However:R3:. […] When we received funding from the corporate [donor, i.e.private philanthropy] … there were plenty of resources, now aftergovernment [has taken over], resources have reduced.[Group dis-cussion -6].Participants explained their grievance as relating to the impactof incentives on sex workers' commitment to HIV-protectivebehaviour and to the use of sexual health services. Theydescribed their ‘real work’ as mobilising sex workers to protecttheir health, to demand access to health services, and to takeownership of community interventions, and saw these goals asdirectly undermined by a model of offering material rewards inreturn for accessing project services. One participant indicated thelikely response by sex workers:R7: [We provided] all that you can give when there is funding, andwhen that is not there then, ‘why should we come to you? Whatwould we get in return?’ This is a big hazard. [Group discussion-2].4.1.5. Use of coercionBeyond using incentives, some participants spoke of the use ofcoercion to boost performance in measured indicators. Theydescribed colleagues threatening sex workers that they wouldinvolve the police if sufficient numbers of them were not beingtested. They explicitly described this problem as deriving from thepressure to performwell on the set indicators e again, irrespectiveof the means used to meet the targets.R2: I felt that these women [NGO staff] have invested so much oftheir energy to change the mindset of these women [sex workers],but today by simply using the word ‘police’ their ‘no's’ weretransformed into 'yes'. And sex workers immediately agreed towhat NGOs were asking them to do. So ultimately what has oneachieved by all this? So should we really say that this is voluntarytesting? It's the process by which the statistics are increased. […]But other [NGOs] used all these means to achieve their target. Andthey will meet targets, if they threaten people like this. [Groupdiscussion-2].Participants felt that the logic of incentives and coercion wasdifficult to resist: if other NGOs were seen to play by those rules,thereby achieving high results, in a competitive NGO environment,not using incentives and coercion risked the organisation's resultsand thus their continued sustainability.4.1.6. Misleading indicators: inflexible and inappropriateThe majority of participants criticised the choice of indicatorsused by donors. They felt that indicators were chosen on the basisof being easy to measure whilst neglecting longer-term and hard-to-measure outcomes such as empowerment or ‘level of aware-ness’ of HIV status. As a result, they suggested that the donors'A. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e1512monitoring systems could not distinguish between qualitativelydifferent outcomes.R3: The indicators should be [measured] through a qualitativeprocess […] .for example number of ‘self-reported’ women[reporting to an STI clinic voluntarily]. [Under the currentfunding structure] All of them are escorted: peers accompanythem to the clinic. But how many women go by themselves? Thiscould be a qualitative indicator. Definitely! But this is not noticed.[Only] the total number is checked. [Group discussion-2].R3 here suggests that a sex worker independently attending aclinic is a much more significant achievement, indicating a changein a woman's own health-seeking behaviour, compared to the sexworker being brought in by a peer educator. This is anotherexample of R3 conveying that high quality, ‘real work’ was notbeing measured. Arguably, such insights from users could be takeninto account in improving the M&E system, to make such distinc-tions where they are important.Some NGO staff expressed frustration that a narrow focus onperformance according to de-contextualised indicators mightachieve ostensibly large numbers, but at the expense of the validityof those numbers. For example:R12: Does a seventy-year-old woman need to undergo HIV testingor does she require food to eat? She was FSW [female sex worker],now she is seventy years old, would you tell her that: ‘you are inthis trade, it does not matter how you do it, but you get tested forHIV’. She would say: ‘I work on a tea stall, why do you want to doHIV testing?’. They [donors] should implement actual need-basedprogrammes. [Group discussion-4].Others complained about the narrowness of indicators used,arguing that M&E systems focused on medical aspects of HIV to theneglect of social aspects.R1: About Mental Health, the funding agency does not feel it'simportant […], there is no knowledge of sexuality. […] [NamedNGO] believes that there is a real need for sensitization related tosexual identity and sexuality, […] but the funds that we aredemanding for that [work] are not approved by funding agencies.They think that we are talking nonsense, and there is no need forsuch things currently. The needs of MSM and the gay communityare only HIV and STI according to funders. [Group discussion-1].Returning to the theory that monitoring systems constituterather than mirror reality, participants considered that indicators,by virtue of their use to compare NGOs' performance, wereconstituting a competitive environment, in which Targeted In-terventions were becoming constituted as ruthless means ofreaching targets, to the neglect of data quality, validity of indicators,or sex workers’ rights not to attend clinics or be tested. Moreover,by prioritising clinical indicators over social indicators, the M&Esystem constitutes peer educators as supports for clinical workrather than as empowering change agents. In the process, it couldbe argued that M&E is being constituted as an instrument ofdiscipline rather than an instrument of improvement.4.2. Donor employees: “monitoring is our duty”Donor staff were often very critical of their M&E system, voicingsimilar challenges to those raised by the NGO participants citedabove. Nonetheless, they spoke of M&E as an important part oftheir professionalism, describing it as their ‘duty’.4.2.1. Programme improvement through professionalisation,transparency and accountabilityThe majority of donor staff described the core purpose of M&Eas feeding back important information from the field in order toimprove programmes. They described the whole process as moreflexible than did the NGO participants, suggesting that pro-grammes, and even indicators, could be altered if needed. Onedonor employee described refining the indicators used, uponobserving an anomaly:R: The peer educator was supposed to be a role model but was notacting as a role model. They were encouraging the community to gofor an internal check-up, a monthly check up, but when we askedthem whether they themselves conducted the monthly checkupsand an internal check-up we realized that they themselves werenot following the guidelines. They were preaching but not prac-tising. This immediately got the attention of the donors. Then, Iremember, in the next phase of MIS [monitoring and informationsystems review and revision] we tried to track peer educators sothat they have to do their monthly check up. So these changes thatwe see are some concrete examples that the programmes havechanged in line with the learning from the field. [DI-10].Donor employees also described ensuring financial account-ability as another key purpose of M&E; helping to keep a check onpotential corruption and malpractice and to respond accordingly:R: For example, they [NGO] have withdrawn a huge amount of cashwhen the programme did not need it. Or they have acquired assetswithout getting quotations [for their purchase]. There are certainindicators which are very sensible; [indicative of whether] they aresiphoning off money and not paying the staff. Or they [for exampleNGO director] have relatives as the staff, or they have rented theirown residence to the project. So as far as finances go, they look atthese indicators […]. If there is any stark development, then theteam [donors] from the State goes and visits them, and if they arefine, they are given threemonths [to justify the expenses], and if theyare not able to recover then they are terminated midway.[DI-5].The transparency of the M&E process was described as anadvantage. Donor employees valued M&E as a way of pro-fessionalising their relationship with NGOs. For example, the NGOswere said to try to use their informal connections at the centrallevel, bypassing their appropriate point of contact at the state level,to try to achieve benefits or to compensate for weak performance.Insisting on the primacy of M&E data was a way of avoiding suchinterpersonal pressures on donor employees, and the risks thatdonor representatives might seek to favour particular NGOs. Thisserved two purposes: decentralising the management of pro-gramme activities and establishing that powerful connectionscould not be used by NGOs to gain unfair advantages.R:We do not want to talk to the facility [NGO] directly because thenthe facilities think that they have a direct connection to the centreand therefore they do not respect the district and the state levelsanymore and they say that ‘we are in direct touch with the centre’.That is the situation that we avoid, but we are connected with theirperformance in a way so we monitor their data.[DI-5].4.2.2. Donor perceived failings: data problems and localinsensitivitiesDonor staff expressed even deeper cynicism than NGO workersA. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e15 13regarding abuses of the target system. While NGO employees ten-ded to blame the donors (for choosing the wrong targets, orencouraging the use of incentives), donor staff tended to blame theNGOs.A majority of informants reported that the current M&E systemgenerated a huge amount of data, but that this data was not ana-lysed fully, undermining its contributed to the intended purpose ofprogramme improvement and learning.R: We enter lot of data but we do not analyze it. So [a] lot of lengthyreports are generated, a lot of registers are maintained, but nobodysits down and looks at how this is going to help me change andimprove my project management at monthly level. They wait forthe annual evaluation from the funder agency and then based onthat they take corrective actions, otherwise on their own they donot reflect on their data, and analyze it. [DI-5].The common reasons given for this failure were a lack of humanresources, short time frames for reporting or short project duration.Some donor interviewees were very sceptical of the numbersreturned in M&E forms, claiming that NGOs could modify (orfalsify) reports to claim better results than were actually justified.R: Let us say that if we set up a programme which says that only ifyou can enrol 1000 female sex workers, will you get a project. Ifthat is your criteria set for getting the project and if I am an NGO inthe field and I know there are 200 sex workers in the area, [then] Iam somehow going to find 1000 sex workers, because I want to getthe project [funding]. But to get the project itself, I might have toeither openly falsify figures, or I may look at many people who maynot be sex workers, to be seen as sex workers . [DI-7].The same interviewee explained his reasoning, believing thatthe pressures on NGO staff to demonstrate results were morepowerful than the incentive to represent reality truthfully.R: If I am a worker with an NGO, and I know my boss wants to hearthat the moon is black then I say that the moon is black.[DI-7].Mirroring NGO workers' complaint that indicators were ofteninsensitive to local contexts, donor employees also expressed doubtover the appropriateness of some of the chosen indicators. Forexample, the following donor employee argued that an unintendedconsequence of disaggregating the population into different ‘riskgroups’ (e.g. positive people, sex workers) was identification andstigmatisation of individuals attending specific events, in line withLorway and Khan's (2014) argument that categories used tomonitor constitute identities.R: It should not be that today is Tuesday; it is positive people's day.That is, without saying, you have said it [revealed the HIV status ofthose who attend]. This should not happen, it is a common pro-gramme of ICTC [integrated counselling and testing centre], and inthat you invite everybody. [DI-2].Interviewees conveyed an understanding of the complex re-alities of practical local contexts, and their dissatisfaction that in-dicators developed at a central level, designed to provideepidemiologically relevant information, did not take into accountthe indicators’ effects or interpretation at a grassroots level.5. DiscussionThis paper reveals a remarkable congruence between the viewsof NGO and donor users of M&E systems in the HIV/AIDS sector inIndia. Both groups articulated the ostensible purposes of M&E, andidentified benefits in terms of financial accountability and accuraterecord-keeping. However, they also reported failures to measureimportant social outcomes, failures to distinguish between super-ficial and more sustainable ways of meeting targets, falsification ofdata, unintended consequences and under-use of data. The signif-icance of monitoring was bound up with target-setting, pressure tomeet or exceed targets, and competition between NGOs todemonstrate results. In terms of the purported aims of M&E, thisstudy suggests that monitoring may be playing a positive role indeveloping financial accountability; that monitoring is being usedto assess programme effectiveness, though participants questionthe validity of the effectiveness data; and that monitoring is notbeing used as a means of feedback and programme improvement.We argue that overall, for our participants, the activity of moni-toring is being constituted as an instrument of performance man-agement and disciplining of NGOs, and not as an instrument ofrational programme improvement. We conclude by discussingmethodological, practical and conceptual implications of ourfindings.At a methodological level, we hope that this study has demon-strated the value of investigating users' experiences of imple-menting M&E systems. It is a commonplace in health policyresearch that policies made in globally central offices are notseamlessly put into practice in local settings, but that they undergotransformations in order to work locally, and that they may haveunexpected and adverse effects (Campbell et al., 2012; Cornishet al., 2012; Lorway and Khan, 2014; Mosse, 2005). Users haveimportant information on the actual processes of implementation,including the relative priority given to different aspects of a pro-gramme, the unintended consequences of monitoring efforts, andthe activities that are not captured or valued by the monitoringsystem. Speaking to the users of M&E systems sheds light on theways that monitoring is put into practice and valued in practice.Written policies and M&E frameworks may mention social out-comes and endorse flexibility, but those principles may not make itthrough to implementation. If the donor's performance manage-ment prioritises clinical indicators over social ones (or is believed todo so), appears unable to take account of local nuance and context,or seems naïve to gaming or coercion, those implementing theM&E system are likely to respond accordingly, and prioritise andpresent the kinds of data believed to bemost important. In sum, theimplementation of M&E systems itself requires monitoring.Practically, could M&E be done better, so that the problemsidentified by our participants could be resolved? Our participantswere asked this question, and had some suggestions. At thesimplest level, better indicators could be chosen. For instance, assuggested, indicators could assess whether a sex worker was self-referred or accompanied to a clinic. Indicators for social outcomessuch as stigma reduction, advocacy to police, reduction in violence,empowerment or solidarity exist in the research literature andcould in principle be developed andmodified for local contexts. Butsocial outcomes of HIV/AIDS interventions are often poorly moni-tored because they have been difficult to define and operationalise,and because they are context-dependent and not as easily trans-ferred and compared across settings as are clinical or behaviouralindicators (Mannell et al., 2014). This problem of context-dependence suggests that simply writing better indicators is nota full solution. If what should be measured is dependent uponcontext, then the process of designing M&E systems needs to allowfor greater grassroots participation in the definition of objectivesand monitoring practices, and flexibility in the choice of indicators.Instituting such a flexible process is more challenging than simplywriting new indicators because it challenges the objective ofA. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e1514comparability across settings. Gaining meaningful data at the lossof comparability may be a trade-off that is worth making. Butimplementing community-based monitoring systems raises a hostof further challenges and has often resulted in disappointment(Biradavolu et al., 2015). As we suggest below, M&E faces structuralproblems that go deeper than the selection of indicators or morebottom-up processes.Conceptually, we have sought to investigate how M&E systemsare constituting the practice and experience of NGO and donorwork. Monitoring can serve as a useful tool of rational programmeimprovement, as long as relevant and valued indicators are used,the data are meaningfully compiled at regular intervals, fed back toprogramme managers and implementers, and acted upon. Forprogramme staff, evidence that monitoring data provides means ofadvancing their ‘real work’ makes the process of monitoringmeaningful and valuable. In the absence of such experience,monitoring risks becoming a meaningless and ‘empty’ ritual,completed because it is required by donors but not because itserves local purposes. This has implications for data quality. If, likeMate et al. (2009) we assume that staff buy-in is important to thequality of monitoring data, these findings are worrying. If staff donot have confidence in the M&E system they are unlikely to pri-oritise accurate record-keeping. Moreover, if M&E does not reflectthe ‘real work’ but is seen as a ‘game to be played’, then staff may beincentivised to game the system, further undermining the validityof the data. It is possible that the processes identified here are morewidespread than this particular case, and therefore that datacollected using existing systems may be less valid and reliable thanhas been assumed.However, the enormous commitment of resources, high fre-quency of demands for M&E reports, and major consequences ofM&E mean that, of course, the ‘ritual’ is not ‘empty’. As an alter-native to being understood as a rational means of programmeimprovement, M&E can also be understood as a means of perfor-mance management, whose massive consequences in contexts ofinsecurity (e.g., closure or expansion of a project, redundancies,performance-related pay) have been described by Ball (2003) as the“terrors of performativity”. The structural situation of M&E sys-tems, as tools for determining flows of resources from donors toimplementing NGOs in a situation of competition for shrinkingfunds, and a hegemony of results-based management, decimatestheir capacity to function as locally-intelligent means of pro-gramme improvement. But rituals would not be maintained if theywere entirely empty. The ritual of M&E is full of meaning as alegitimised way of managing a portfolio of projects, encouragingcompetition, and justifying ‘hard decisions’. Our participantsquestion the quality of the data gathered through such M&E sys-tems, and thus the legitimacy of their use for important decisions.Indeed, if the meaning of M&E is given by the use of monitoringdata to manage performance and take consequential decisions, andif those data are as badly flawed as our participants suggest, thenthe current paper is an argument to reduce the meaning and powerof current M&E systems, in other words, to further empty the ritualof M&E.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors’ contributionsAS designed and carried out the empirical research, analysed thedata and drafted themanuscript. FC and PT supervised the study. FCconceptualised the study, drafted the literature review and con-clusions, and contributed to analysis and interpretation. PTcontributed to analysis, interpretation and writing. All authors readand approved the final manuscript.AcknowledgementsWe are very grateful for the participation of the NGOs and donorstaff involved in this study. The research reported in this paper wasfunded by a Glasgow Caledonian University PhD Studentship andScottish Overseas Research Students Award Scheme (SORSAS); wegratefully acknowledge the financial support without which thestudy could not have been completed. Finally, we would like tothank the three anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.ReferencesAhonkhai, A., Bassett, I.V., Ferris, T.G., Freedberg, K., 2012. Improving HIV outcomesin resource-limited countries: the importance of quality indicators. BMC HealthServ. Res. 12 (427) http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-12-427.Armytage, L., 2011. Evaluating aid: an adolescent domain of practice. Evaluation 17(3), 261e276. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1356389011410518.Attride-Stirling, J., 2001. Thematic networks: an analytic tool for qualitativeresearch. Qual. Res. 1 (3), 385e405. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/146879410100100307.Avahan, 2008. The India AIDS Initiative: the Business of HIV Prevention at Scale,1e40. Retrieved from. http://www.gatesfoundation.org/avahan/Documents/Avahan_HIVPrevention.pdf.Aveling, E., Kayonga, Y., Nega, A., Dixon-Woods, M., 2015. Why is patient safety sohard in low-income countries? A qualitative study of healthcare workers viewsin two African hospitals. Glob. Health 11 (6). Retrieved from. http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/s12992-015-0096-x.pdf.Ball, S.J., 2003. The teacher's soul and the terrors of performativity. J. Educ. Policy 18(2), 215e228. Retrieved from. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0268093022000043065.Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 2013. Micro-planning in Peer Led Outreach Pro-grams. A Handbook Based on the Experience of the Avahan India AIDS Initiative.New Delhi. Retrieved from. http://www.popline.org/node/573757.Binnendijk, A., 2000. Results Based Management in the Development Co-operationAgencies: a Review of Experience. Retrieved from. http://www.alnap.org/resource/10435.aspx.Biradavolu, M.R., Blankenship, K.M., George, A., Dhungana, N., 2015. Unintendedconsequences of community-based monitoring systems: lessons from an HIVprevention intervention for sex workers in South India. World Dev. 67, 1e10.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.09.026.Campbell, C., Cornish, F., Skovdal, M., 2012. Local pain, global prescriptions? Usingscale to analyse the globalisation of the HIV/AIDS response. Health & Place 18(Suppl. 3), 447e452. Retrieved from. http://curis.ku.dk/ws/files/105357313/Campbell_et_al_2012_local_pain_global_prescriptions.pdf.Catumbela, E., Certal, V., Freitas, A., Costa, C., Sarmento, A., da Costa Pereira, A., 2013.Definition of a core set of quality indicators for the assessment of HIV/AIDSclinical care: a systematic review. BMC Health Serv. Res. 13 (1), 236. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-13-236.Cornish, F., Campbell, C., Shukla, A., Banerji, R., 2012. From brothel to boardroom:prospects for community leadership of HIV interventions in the context ofglobal funding practices. Health & Place 18 (Suppl. 3), 468e474. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2011.08.018.Earle, L., 2003. Lost in the matrix : the logframe and the local picture. In: INTRACS5th Evaluation Conference: Measurement, Management and Accountability?,pp. 1e17.Erikson, S.L., 2012. Global health business: the production and performativity ofstatistics in Sierra Leone and Germany. Med. Anthropol. 31 (4), 367e384.Retrieved from. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01459740.2011.621908.George, A., Blankenship, K., Biradavolu, M.R., Dhungana, N., Tankasala, N., 2015. Sexworkers in HIV prevention: from social change agents to peer educators. Glob.Public Health 10 (1), 28e40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2014.966251.Green, J., South, J., 2006. Evaluation (Key Concepts for Public Health Practice). OpenUniveristy Press.Hill, P.S., Dodd, R., Brown, S., Haffeld, J., 2012. Development cooperation for health:reviewing a dynamic concept in a complex global aid environment. Glob.Health 8 (1), 5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1744-8603-8-5.Hood, C., 1995. The “new public management” in the 1980s: variations on a theme.Account. Organ. Soc. 20 (2e3), 93e109. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0361-3682(93)E0001-W.Ika, L.A., Lytvynov, V., 2011. The “management-per-result” approach to internationaldevelopment project design. Proj. Manag. J. 42 (4), 87e104. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pmj.20248.Kaposhi, B.M., Mqoqi, N., Schopflocher, D., 2015. Evaluation of antiretroviral treat-ment programme monitoring in Eastern Cape, South Africa. Health Policy Plan.30 (5), 547e554. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czu028.Kilby, P., 2004. Is empowerment possible under a new public managementA. Shukla et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 7e15 15environment? Some lessons from India. Int. Public Manag. J. 7 (2), 207e225.Retrieved from. http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid¼2-s2.0-7244253155&partnerID¼40&md5¼e4062e95ee276ae1fc48ca1481b2eac9.Lorway, R., Khan, S., 2014. Reassembling epidemiology: mapping, monitoring andmaking-up people in the context of HIV prevention in India. Soc. Sci. Med. 112,51e62. Retrieved from. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953614002652.Mannell, J., Cornish, F., Russell, J., 2014. Evaluating social outcomes of HIV/AIDSinterventions: a critical assessment of contemporary indicator frameworks.J. Int. AIDS Soc. 17 (19073). Retrieved from. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid¼4145087&tool¼pmcentrez&rendertype¼abstract.Mate, K.S., Bennett, B., Mphatswe, W., Barker, P., Rollins, N., 2009. Challenges forroutine health system data management in a large public programme to pre-vent mother-to-child HIV transmission in South Africa. PLoS ONE 4 (5), e5483.http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005483.Mawdsley, E., Townsend, J.G., Porter, G., 2005. Trust, accountability, and face-to-faceinteraction in NortheSouth NGO relations. Dev. Pract. 15 (1), 77e82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0961452052000321613.Mosse, D., 2005. Cultivating Development:An Ethnography of Aid Policy and Prac-tice. Pluto, London.Narayanan, P., Moulasha, K., Wheeler, T., Baer, J., Bharadwaj, S., Ramanathan, T.V.,Thomas, T., 2012. Monitoring community mobilisation and organisational ca-pacity among high-risk groups in a large-scale HIV prevention programme inIndia: selected findings using a Community Ownership and Preparedness In-dex. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 66 (Suppl. 2), 34e41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech-2012-201065.Nash, D., Elul, B., Rabkin, M., Tun, M., Saito, S., Becker, M., Nuwagaba-Biribonwoha, H., 2009. Strategies for more effective monitoring and evaluationsystems in HIV programmatic scale-up in resource-limited settings: implica-tions for health systems strengthening. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndromes(1999) 52 (Suppl. 1), S58eS62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181bbcc45.Ng, M., Gakidou, E., Levin-Rector, A., Khera, A., Murray, C.J.L., Dandona, L., 2011.Assessment of population-level effect of Avahan, an HIV-prevention initiative inIndia. Lancet 378 (9803), 1643e1652. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61390-1.Peersman, G., Rugg, D., Erkkola, T., Kiwango, E., Yang, J., 2009. Are the investmentsin national HIV monitoring and evaluation systems paying off? J. Acquir. Im-mune Defic. Syndromes (1999) 52 (Suppl. 2), S87eS96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181baede7.Porter, L.E., Bouey, P.D., Curtis, S., Hochgesang, M., Idele, P., Jefferson, B., Tulli, T.,2012. Beyond indicators: advances in global HIV monitoring and evaluationduring the PEPFAR era. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndromes (1999) 60 (Suppl. 3),120e126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/QAI.0b013e31825cf345.Power, M., 1999. The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification. Oxford. Retrieved from.https://books.google.co.uk/books?hl¼en&lr¼&id¼q4U3AwAAQBAJ&oi¼fnd&pg¼PP1&dq¼Powerþ1999þAuditþsociety&ots¼DHeMkmBVLf&sig¼C8N0epCYxkcgWEH40PECSm7HrhY.Rao, P.J.V.R., 2010. Avahan: the transition to a publicly funded programme as a nextstage. Sex. Transm. Infect. 86 (1), i7ei8. Retrieved from. http://sti.bmj.com/content/86/Suppl_1/i7.short.Rau, B., 2011. The Avahan-India AIDS Initiative. Promising Approaches to Combi-nation HIV Prevention Programming in Concentrated Epidemics. ArlingtonVirginia John Snow [JSI] AIDS Support and Technical Assistance Resources[AIDSTAR-one] 2011 Mar. Retrieved from. http://www.aidstar-one.com/sites/default/files/AIDSTAR-One_case_study_combination_prevention_avahan.pdf.Rossi, P.H., Freeman, H.E., Lipsey, M.W., 2003. Evaluation: a Systematic Approach(Seventh). Sage. Retrieved from. http://www.sagepub.com/books/Book224290.Savedoff, W.D., Levine, R., Birshall, N., 2006. When Will We Ever Learn? Recom-mendations to Improve Social Development through Enhanced Impact Evalu-ation. Washington, DC. Retrieved from. http://www.cgdev.org/publication/when-will-we-ever-learn-improving-lives-through-impact-evaluation.Sgaier, S.K., Ramakrishnan, A., Dhingra, N., Wadhwani, A., Alexander, A., Bennett, S.,Anthony, J., 2013. How the Avahan HIV prevention program transitioned fromthe Gates Foundation to the government of India. Health Aff. 32 (7), 1265e1273.http://dx.doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2012.0646.Shadish, W., Cook, T., Leviton, L., 1991. Foundations of Program Evaluation: Theoriesof Practice. Sage. Retrieved from https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?q¼þFoundationsþofþprogramþevaluation%3AþTheoriesþofþpractice.þ&btnG¼&hl¼en&as_sdt¼0%2C5#0.Strathern, M., 2000. Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability,Ethics, and the Academy. Psychology Press. Retrieved from. https://books.google.co.uk/books?hl¼en&lr¼&id¼kAfKFCEGUpsC&oi¼fnd&pg¼PR7&dq¼Strathern,þM.þ(Ed.).þ(2000).þAuditþcultures:þanthropologicalþstudiesþinþaccountability,þethics,þandþtheþacademy.þþ&ots¼OMYQBhpv_A&sig¼4LCRp_KUf5YKSbsa3tas99A6d5c.Vassall, A., Pickles, M., Chandrashekar, S., Boily, M.-C., Shetty, G., Guinness, L.,Vickerman, P., 2014. Cost-effectiveness of HIV prevention for high-risk groups atscale: an economic evaluation of the Avahan programme in south India. LancetGlob. Health 2 (9), 531e540. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70277-3.Wheeler, T., Kiran, U., Dallabetta, G., Jayaram, M., Chandrasekaran, P., Tangri, A.,Alexander, A., 2012. Learning about scale, measurement and communitymobilisation: reflections on the implementation of the Avahan HIV/AIDSinitiative in India. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 66 (Suppl. 2), 16e25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech-2012-201081.