ABSTRACT: 
The energy sector plays a significant role in reaching the ambitious climate policy target of limiting the global temperature increase to well below 2°C. To this end, technological change has to be redirected and accelerated in the direction of zero-carbon solutions. Given the urgency and magnitude of the climate change challenge it has been argued that this calls for a policy mix which simultaneously supports low-carbon solutions and also deliberately drives the discontinuation of the established technological regime. Yet, the effect of such phase-out policies on the development and diffusion of low-carbon technologies has received little attention in empirical research so far. This paper addresses this gap by taking the case of the transition of the German electricity generation system towards renewable energies – the so-called Ener-giewende. Based on a survey of innovation activities of German manufacturers of renewable power gener-ation technologies conducted in 2014 it explores the impact such destabilization policies – most prominent-ly Germany’s nuclear phase-out policy – may have on technological change in renewable energies. By drawing on descriptive statistics and combining insights from earlier regression analyses we find evidence that Germany’s nuclear phase-out policy had a positive influence on manufacturers’ innovation expendi-tures for renewable energies and was seen as the by far most influential policy instrument for the further expansion of renewable energies in Germany. The insights resulting from our explorative analysis have important implications for the literature on policy mixes and sustainability transitions regarding the ‘flip sides’ to innovation and the crucial importance of destabilization policies for unleashing ‘destructive crea-tion’. We close by discussing policy repercussions for ongoing debates on policies for accelerating the phase-out of coal to meet climate change targets. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 the role of destabilization policies in sustainability transitions has received little attention in empirical research so far . 
 this paper explores the case of the transition of the German electricity generation system towards renewable en-ergies – the so-called Energiewende . 
 based on a survey of innovation activities of German manufacturers of renewable power generationtechnologies conducted in 2014 it explores the impact such destabilization policies – most prominently Germany’s nuclear phase-out policy set forcompletion in 2022 . by drawing on descriptive statistics andcombining insights from earlier regression analyses we ﬁnd evidence that Germany’s nuclear phase 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirectEnergy Research & Social Sciencejournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/erssOriginal research articleExploring the role of phase-out policies for low-carbon energy transitions:The case of the German EnergiewendeKaroline S. Roggea,b,⁎, Phil Johnstoneaa Science Policy Research Unit – SPRU, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9RH, UKb Fraunhofer Institute Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe, GermanyA R T I C L E I N F OKeywords:Energy transitionPolicy mixCreative destructionDiscontinuation / destabilization policyCredibilityRenewable energyNuclear powerA B S T R A C TThe energy sector plays a signiﬁcant role in reaching the ambitious climate policy target of limiting the global tem-perature increase to well below 2 °C. To this end, technological change has to be redirected and accelerated in thedirection of zero-carbon solutions. Given the urgency and magnitude of the climate change challenge it has been arguedthat this calls for a policy mix which simultaneously supports low-carbon solutions and also deliberately drives thediscontinuation of the established technological regime. Yet, the eﬀect of such phase-out policies on the development anddiﬀusion of low-carbon technologies has received little attention in empirical research so far. This paper addresses this gapby taking the case of the transition of the German electricity system towards renewable energies – the so-calledEnergiewende. Based on a survey of innovation activities of German manufacturers of renewable power generationtechnologies conducted in 2014 it explores the impact such destabilization policies –most prominently Germany’s nuclearphase-out policy – may have on technological change in renewable energies. By drawing on descriptive statistics andcombining insights from earlier regression analyses we ﬁnd evidence that Germany’s nuclear phase-out policy had apositive inﬂuence on manufacturers’ innovation expenditures for renewable energies and was seen as the by far mostinﬂuential policy instrument for the further expansion of renewable energies in Germany. The insights resulting from ourexplorative analysis have important implications for the literature on policy mixes and sustainability transitions regardingthe ‘ﬂip sides’ to innovation and the crucial importance of destabilization policies for unleashing ‘destructive creation’. Weclose by discussing policy repercussions for ongoing debates on policies for accelerating the phase-out of coal to meetclimate change targets.1. IntroductionThe energy sector plays a signiﬁcant role in reaching the ambitiousclimate policy target of limiting the global temperature increase to wellbelow 2 °C, as agreed at COP21 in Paris [1]. To this end, technologicalchange has to be redirected and accelerated in the direction of zero-carbonsolutions for which policies play a key role [2–5]. More precisely, the ex-istence of various market and system failures calls for policy mixes in-cluding demand pull, technology push and systemic instruments [6–9]. Inaddition, it has increasingly been pointed out that policy mixes should notonly include instruments promoting green niche innovations, such as re-newable energies, but that in addition such mixes should also target thedestabilization of established regimes [10,11].The literature on sustainability transitions [12] has considered this ‘ﬂipside’ to innovation in the form of ‘destabilization’ of technological regimes[13,14]. More recently, attention has also been given to the ‘discontinuation’processes aiming at the phase-out of certain technological trajectories[15–17]. In addition, literatures related to overcoming ‘lock in’ andincumbency in socio-technical transitions have addressed this phenomenon[18–20]. These contributions are typically based on historical case studiesanalyzing the diﬀerent inﬂuencing factors that lead up to a particular‘window of opportunity’ where a discontinuation policy is realised, oﬀeringpreliminary insights into the understudied areas of deliberate destabilizationand technological discontinuation. Yet, the eﬀect of such destabilization po-licies on the development and diﬀusion of green alternatives has receivedlimited attention in empirical research so far.Research on discontinuation is timely, with discontinuation policiesemerging across the energy policy landscape. In the wake of the Fukushimaaccident and signiﬁcant long-standing problems regarding cost overruns andﬁnancing in the nuclear sector, several countries besides the famous case ofGermany are also implementing nuclear phase out policies includingBelgium, Scotland, Switzerland, Taiwan, and South Korea [21,22]. In thecontext of the perceived need to ‘accelerate’ transitions [23], the phase out ofcoal is also becoming a prominent policy objective, for example with the UK,the Netherlands, and Quebec among countries and regions proposing suchpolicies [24–26]. Phase out policies are also taking place in the transporthttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.10.004Received 1 February 2017; Received in revised form 12 September 2017; Accepted 5 October 2017⁎ Corresponding author at: Science Policy Research Unit – SPRU, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9RH, UK.E-mail address: k.rogge@sussex.ac.uk (K.S. Rogge).Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137Available online 02 November 20172214-6296/ © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).MARKsector, e.g. with Norway proposing to phase out petrol and diesel cars by2025 [27]. Yet, despite the relevance of phase out policies in sustainabilitytransitions, so-called ‘ﬂip sides’ to innovation [14], including destabilizationand discontinuation, remain under-studied.In this paper we address this knowledge gap using the case of the tran-sition of the German electricity generation system towards renewable en-ergies – the so-called Energiewende [28–30]. We have chosen this examplebecause it represents a sustainability transition governed by a policy mixwhich not only includes policies supporting renewable energies but also de-stabilization policies – most prominently the nuclear phase-out policy set forcompletion in 2022 [31–33]. Our explorative analysis adds to existing em-pirical studies which have focused on the economic and technical assessmentsof the impacts of the nuclear phase out for energy systems [34–40]. Giventhat the power sector has traditionally been a supplier dominated sector [41]we draw on ﬁndings of a survey of innovation activities of German manu-facturers in renewable power generation technologies. By combining de-scriptive statistics and insights of earlier regression analysis [42,43] we ex-plore the impact of the nuclear phase-out policy – as an example of a decisivediscontinuation policy with a history of more than ten years – on the de-velopment and diﬀusion of renewable energies. Understanding the eﬀects ofthe nuclear phase out in Germany on technological change has internationalpolicy relevance in terms of providing insights for the increasing number ofcountries considering phase out policies to accelerate the decarbonization oftheir energy system.In the remainder of the paper, we brieﬂy summarize the literatureon destabilization / discontinuation policies (Section 2), and then de-scribe the research case (Section 3) and methodology (Section 4). In themain part of the paper we present the results of our exploration of theimpact of the German nuclear phase-out policy on technological changein renewable energies (Section 5). We close with a discussion of thetheoretical, methodological and policy implications for the governanceof the decarbonisation of energy systems (Section 6).2. Literature review“Discontinuous change” is a core concept in innovation studies [44,45],where technological change occurs in waves of ‘creative destruction’ in whichold technologies are replaced by the new [46]. While the end stage of atechnology’s life is recognized within this framing this is usually encapsulatedas a consequence of the disruptive force of new technologies and businessmodels rather than discontinuation being driven by policy. Typically, thisliterature has been limited to discontinuity in terms of speciﬁc ﬁrms or actors[47]. In contrast, there has been some work in policy studies focused on‘policy termination’ and ‘policy dismantling’ [48,49], but this literature tendsto look at termination in relation to the withdrawal of funding for certainpolicy initiatives, rather than from the perspective of broader technologicalsystems. That is, little has been written concerning broader policy processesrelated to the ending of certain technological trajectories [16,50].While the broader literature on sustainability transitions includes ‘desta-bilization’ of dominant (and unsustainable) ‘socio-technical regimes’ as a keyconcept, this has usually been encapsulated as resulting from the emergence,protection and diﬀusion of new niche-based sustainable technologies or in-novations [51,52]. However, there has been increasing attention to the waysin which the dynamics and stability of the regime level curtail sustainabilitytransitions from developing at adequate rates to meet ambitious technologicaland environmental targets [53–55]. Revisiting key notions of ‘path de-pendency’ [56] and ‘lock in’ [20], attention has turned towards under-standing the dynamics of the regime level in terms of strategies of incumbentactors [57–60] (also see Johnstone et al. in this issue) and active ‘regimeresistance’ preventing or delaying transitions [18]. Given the observed sta-bility at the regime level the destabilization of the regime through en-dogenous and exogenous economic and political pressures has become arecent focus in the transitions literature. An early example is the historicalanalysis outlining the evolution of the destabilization of the coal regime in theUK [13,14].Within this context, Kivimaa and Kern argued that policy mixes fortransitions ideally “include elements of ‘creative destruction’, involving bothpolicies aiming for the ‘creation’ of new and for ‘destabilizing’ the old.” [10].They have identiﬁed four entry points for such destabilization policies im-pacting the ‘motors of creative destruction’: control policies (such as carbontrading), signiﬁcant changes in regime rules (such as electricity market re-form), reduced support for dominant regime technologies (such as reducedpublic funding for research and development on coal (R&D)), and changes insocial networks as well as the replacement of key actors (such as the sub-stitution of incumbents with new entrants in policy advisory councils). TheEU emission trading system (EU ETS) is one example for such a controlpolicy, as it establishes a carbon price signal which can help leveling theplaying ﬁeld between carbon-intensive and low-carbon alternatives. How-ever, it has been increasingly argued that these market-based approacheshave not been suﬃcient in promoting energy transitions at the rates neces-sary to meet ambitious climate change targets [61–63]. Given various bar-riers, lock-ins, path dependencies and resistance to low-carbon energy tran-sitions further government intervention in steering them is required[4,20,64–71] (see also Bergek et al. in this issue).‘Discontinuation’ has also been a recent interest in the governanceliterature which focuses on the governance processes involved in theactive disengagement “from an on-going policy or governance com-mitment” [16:112]. This research draws on a conceptual governanceheuristic looking at the constellations of actors, issues, and ‘windows ofopportunity’ which can lead to the rare policy moments when it be-comes feasible for governance to enact a ban or phase out policy. Theanalysis of multiple historic case studies of diﬀering technological areasenabled a better understanding of the economic, technical, political,and cultural drivers that enable discontinuation to be realised in par-ticular contexts.1 Yet, while these cases are concerned with the dis-cursive and material factors through which discontinuation policy isrealised and managed as an interactive governance process, they gen-erally end once a policy decision has been reached.Yet, despite being generally rare and politically challenging to enact[15] phase out policies are becoming a growing political reality in thecontext of greater urgency in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For ex-ample, increasingly policy makers at national and the EU level are sug-gesting that a more rapid coal phase out through more proactive govern-mental intervention will be necessary if ambitious climate goals are to bemet [72]. Indeed, there is an emerging consensus that the use of unabatedcoal generation must rapidly decline over the next decade if temperaturerises shall be stabilized at 2 °C [73]. In addition, a number of countries arenow phasing out or making plans to phase out nuclear energy, such asBelgium, Germany, Scotland, South Korea, Switzerland, and Taiwan[21,22]. Therefore, given the contemporary relevance of destabilizationpolicies for energy transitions it is a question of high policy relevance tobetter understand the impacts of such dedicated phase-out policies.Yet, while there is ample evidence on the so far limited impact ofthe EU ETS as a market-based control policy on low-carbon innovation[62], there is little empirical evidence on the impact of other destabi-lization policies, such as phasing out nuclear or coal, on technologicalchange in competing low-carbon technologies. To close this researchgap, in this paper we examine the case of the German Energiewende[28–30,74], with a focus on the impact of its dedicated nuclear phase-out policy on the development and diﬀusion of renewable energies. Wehave chosen this research case because it provides one of the few ex-amples of dedicated phase-out policies which has been in place for overa decade and has been embedded in the context of a broader policy mixaiming at the decarbonization of the energy system [6,75,76]. Thisempirical case is relevant to emerging literatures on policy mixes par-ticularly in relation to the eﬀects of understudied ‘ﬂip sides’ to in-novation, and to broader European policy contexts where whether or1 The case studies included bans on DDT [50], the phase-out of incandescent light bulbs[105], the internal combustion engine [15] and nuclear policy in the UK and Germany[17].K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137129not nuclear phase out is being implemented is becoming a crucial pointof diﬀerence between countries [77,78], yet the eﬀects such a policyhas on the development of renewable energies is under-examined.3. Research caseFor exploring the impact of phase-out policies on technologicalchange we use the case of the transition of the German electricitygeneration system towards renewable energies – the so-calledEnergiewende – with its target of reaching at least a level of 80% elec-tricity generation by renewable energies by 2050 [29,32]. This long-term target is supported through a rich instrument mix [33], with thecore instrument being the Renewable Energy Sources Act (EEG).Introduced in 2000 the EEG established, among others, technologyspeciﬁc feed-in tariﬀs guaranteed over a period of 20 years [66]. Based onextensive monitoring and evaluation the EEG has been regularly amendedsince then, leading to a number of policy changes, including the increase ofexpansion targets for renewable energies and updates of feed-in tariﬀs basedon techno-economic improvements and deployment success. In addition,unexpectedly positive developments in solar PV between 2009 and 12 led toexceptional adjustments in the EEG, which combined with global compe-tition caused some turmoil and consolidation of the Germany PV industry[79,80]. The EEG reform of 2014–also dubbed as EEG 2.0–continued toimplement the government’s increased focus on cost-eﬀectiveness [81]. Forexample, technology speciﬁc expansion corridors were introduced, and pi-lots testing a system change from feed-in tariﬀs to auctions were initiated,using open space PV as the ﬁrst example.2Aside from the EEG also many complementary policies have been inplace for a long time, such as public R&D support, funding programs bythe German development bank KfW (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau),or grid expansion measures [33]. Together with the long-term targetsand the EEG, this rich policy mix has stimulated rapid technologicalchange in renewable power generation technologies [80,82,83]. Thisincludes the emergence of a strong renewable energy industry whichhas created jobs and exports its products and services abroad [84,85].Also, the renewable energy sector has been highly innovative, asmeasured by patent applications, scientiﬁc publications or new pro-ducts and processes [83,86]. Finally, the share of renewable basedelectricity generation has increased from 3.4% in 1990–31.6% in 2016,with faster diﬀusion rates than originally foreseen [87].Yet, what makes the German Energiewende an ideal research case tostudy the impact of destabilization policies is that the German policy mixalso includes destabilization policies. The most prominent one is Germany’snuclear phase-out policy until 2022 which was initially negotiated withincumbents by the Red-Green Schroeder government and adopted in 2002.After a short interlude in 2010/11 it was by and large reinstated by Merkel’sconservative-liberal government in 2011 as a reaction to the Fukushimaincident. Since then, the nuclear phase-out policy has enjoyed cross-partysupport, thereby sealing the fate of nuclear energy in Germany [17,31]. Inaddition, the EU Emission Trading System (EU ETS) represents anotherdestabilization policy by putting a price tag on greenhouse gas (GHG)emissions of regulated sectors, including energy. However, given the largeaccumulated surplus of EU allowances this EU control policy and its in-novation impact has remained rather weak [62]. Finally, the introduction ofpolicies for phasing out coal and lignite has only started to be put on thepolitical agenda prior to the COP21 negotiations at Paris in 2015. Yet, theirimplementation has been faced with signiﬁcant resistance by industry,unions and regional policy makers, despite Germany’s gap in achieving its2020 GHG reduction target [88]. This political deadlock in overcoming the‘Climate Paradox’ of rising CO2 emissions from high load factors of existingcoal and lignite plants puts into question the political will of the Germangovernment for achieving its ambitions GHG reduction target of 40% by2020 and 80% by 2050 [89].4. Methodology4.1. Data collectionIn order to explore the impact of destabilization policies on the devel-opment and diﬀusion of renewable energies we draw on the results of asurvey of innovation activities of German manufacturers and suppliers inrenewable power generation technologies conducted within theGRETCHEN project. While the details of the survey implementation aredescribed elsewhere [42], here we summarize some of the key points. First,a dataset of all German companies active in the supply chain for manu-facturing renewable power generation technologies was compiled based ondiﬀerent data sources (e.g. business directories, industry association mem-berships, business fair catalogues), resulting in the identiﬁcation of 1092manufacturers active in producing components, equipment and ﬁnal pro-ducts for on- and oﬀshore wind, solar PV, hydropower, bioenergy, wave andtidal energy, geothermal energy and concentrated solar power (as of 2013/2014).3 Second, building on the Community Innovation Survey (CIS) con-ducted within the EU a questionnaire was developed which speciﬁcallyincluded novel questions on the policy mix, in line with a broader under-standing of the term [6] and drawing on qualitative insights on oﬀshorewind [65]. Speciﬁcally, the survey attempted to capture policy mix char-acteristics, such as credibility, consistency, coherence and comprehensive-ness, but also included questions on the design features of the EEG and onthe targets for the expansion of renewable energies. Third, the innovationsurvey was conducted by a specialized service provider in the summer of2014 as a computer assisted telephone interview (CATI) with top levelmanagement representatives. It achieved a response rate of 35.7% of allGerman manufactures of renewable power generation technologies(n = 390), including both new entrants but also incumbent players thathave redirected their activities towards emerging green niche markets.4.2. Data analysisIn this paper, we draw on insights from descriptive statistics [90]and combine ﬁndings from regression analyses [42,43] to explore theimpact of the nuclear phase-out policy on technological change – dif-ferentiated in innovation and diﬀusion – in renewable energies inGermany, as is depicted in Fig. 1. In the following, we provide a sum-mary on these three building blocks of our explorative analysis.First, the descriptive analysis served as basis for generating an overviewshowing the composition of the sample, in terms of ﬁrm size, location andtechnology portfolio, the perceptions of respondents regarding the policymix, their innovation activities and expenditures, and further information[90]. As a third of the respondents were active in more than one renewablepower generation technology, respondents were asked to answer the surveyfor their main technology only, which led to half of the responses referringto solar PV (37.2%), biogas (22.3%) and onshore wind (17.4%). As is ty-pical for the German manufacturing sector, there is a large share of smalland medium sized enterprises (ca 70% SME) and many of them sell theirproducts at home and abroad (on average ca 39.7% of sales in 2013 wereexports). Also in line with trends in manufacturing the large majority of thecompanies had performed innovation activities in 2011–13 (ca 82%),leading to product innovations (ca for 75% of the respondents) as well asprocess innovations (ca 66%).2 The most recent changes of the EEG in 2016 have continued this policy paradigmchange in German renewable energy policy by rolling out auctions as standard allocationmechanism across all technologies − with exceptions being in place for small players,such as households − and by putting a greater emphasis on remaining within the en-visaged, rather conservative expansion corridors. Consequently, it has been argued thatthe government is now favoring investments by incumbents and slowing down theEnergiewende [104], despite the large majority of Germans demanding a faster transitiontowards renewables [106].3 This number is in line with Doblinger et al. who identiﬁed 1,208 manufacturers andproject developers active in renewable energies in Germany in 2012 [107].K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137130Second, regression 1 aimed at answering the research question re-garding whether policy mix characteristics matter for innovation, namelyconsistency, credibility, coherence and comprehensiveness [42]. Takingmanufacturers innovation expenditures for 2014 and 2015 as a dependentvariable, and ﬁrm-external and ﬁrm-internal factors as explanatory vari-ables, a “corner solution” bivariate Tobit model was employed to specify theregression equation for innovation expenditures in 2014 and 2015 (usingSTATA). Firm-external factors focused on the eﬀects of market demand(measured by global sales), public support for technology push (measuredby German and European subsidies received in 2011–2013) and the eﬀectsof policy mix characteristics (as perceived by manufactures at the time ofthe survey, i.e. 2014). Regarding the latter, the study diﬀerentiates betweenthe consistency of the policy strategy, of the instrument mix and of theoverarching policy mix; national and sub-national policy mix credibility; theinformational and procedural coherence of policy processes; and the com-prehensiveness of the instrument mix. In terms of ﬁrm-internal factors thestudy includes ﬁrm size (measured by total global sales in 2013), experience(measured by number of years the manufacturer has been active in the mainrenewable power generation technology) and technology portfolio (con-trolling for wind power). The study ﬁnds evidence that the consistency ofthe overarching policy mix and the credibility of the policy mix at the na-tional level have a positive impact on innovation expenditures, and suggestsa strong interaction eﬀect between the two. As could have been expectedfrom other studies, both demand pull as well as technology push instru-ments are positively correlated with innovation expenditures, as are ﬁrmsize, experience and technology portfolio.Third, inspired by the ﬁndings of earlier qualitative work and regression1 regarding the relevance of policy mix credibility – i.e. the reliability andbelievability of the policy mix – regression 2 sets out to investigate thedeterminants of this credibility [43], thereby also aiming to shed more lighton the links with other policy mix characteristics, in particular consistency.The dependent variable ‘credibility’ was created through conducting anexploratory factor analysis with varimax rotation for seven credibility itemswhich ultimately enabled the construction of an internally consistent scaleaggregating four of these items.4 The explanatory variables for the linearregression (performed with SPSS) included other characteristics and ele-ments of the policy mix. Regarding the former, and similarly to regression 1,the study diﬀerentiates between the consistency of the policy strategy, ofthe instrument mix and of the overarching policy mix; the informationaland procedural coherence of policy processes; and the comprehensivenessof the instrument mix. Regarding the latter, the study distinguishes betweenthe policy strategy (focusing on (the reduction of) the ambitiousness of thetarget for renewable energies), eight policy instruments (including twodestabilization policies, namely the nuclear phase-out and the EU ETS, seeFig. 5), and the design features of the Renewable Energy Sources Act (EEG).The study ﬁnds that manufacturers’ perceptions on the nuclear phase outadd signiﬁcantly to explaining the variance in perceived policy mix cred-ibility. In addition, there is also strong evidence that the adopted changes inthe EEG design features had a negative impact on credibility. Furthermore,the study conﬁrms a positive correlation between credibility and con-sistency as well as with the coherence of policy processes– both regardinginformational and procedural coherence of policy processes.4.3. Combination of analysisIn this paper, we are combining the insights from these three analyses toexplore the link between destabilization policies and technological change.In a ﬁrst step we explore the innovation impact by combining insights fromthe assessments of companies regarding the impact of various aspects of thepolicy mix [90] with insights from both regression analyses 1 [42] and 2[43]. In a second step, we explore the impact of destabilization policies onthe diﬀusion of renewable energies by drawing on the direct assessments ofcompanies regarding the expected impact of various policy instruments –including the nuclear phase-out – on the future expansion of renewableenergies [90]. Clearly, this analysis is not free from limitations and resultsshould thus be interpreted with caution. Aside from the limitations outlinedin the separate papers for regression analyses 1 [42] and 2 [43], we want toparticularly emphasize that our explorative analysis cannot reveal causalexplanations but at best only provides correlations. Also, while both re-gressions are suﬃciently distinct and can be logically combined, someoverlaps regarding policy mix characteristics remain. We argue, however,that this ﬁrst empirical exploration into the link between destabilizationpolicies, and in particular the ﬁndings regarding the relevance of the nu-clear phase-out, provide some important insights for policy makers inter-ested in creative destruction as well as directions for future research.5. ResultsIn this section we investigate the link between destabilization policiesand technological change by ﬁrst exploring the impact of the German nu-clear phase-out and other destabilization policies on innovation in renew-able energies, and then turn to their impact on diﬀusion.5.1. Impact on innovationExploring the innovation impact of the German nuclear phase-out policyis not straightforward, as this policy has not been included in a direct ques-tion on the link between policy and innovation, but only the EU ETS asanother destabilization policy. More precisely, innovating manufactures wereasked to assess the inﬂuence of diﬀerent aspects of the policy mix for theirinnovation activities in the period 2011–13 (see Fig. 2). The results show thatdomestic and foreign demand pull instruments are seen as most inﬂuentialelements of the policy mix – both today‘s and expected future demand pullFig. 1. Schematic illustration of combination of descriptive and regressionanalysis.Note: Sources of analysis: descriptive statistics [90], regression 1 [42],regression 2 [43]; the ‘policy mix box’ includes, among others, the nuclearphase-out, policy mix characteristics other than policy mix credibility(which is highlighted in its own box), the EEG and its design features.4 These four items included: Concerning the increase of electricity generation fromrenewable energies in Germany, there is (1) a clear political vision, (2) a ﬁrm politicalwill, (3) unambiguous political signals and (4) strong support from the German govern-ment.K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137131instruments – which is in line with ﬁndings of the eco-innovation literature[91–94]. However, the ﬁndings also show that the renewable expansiontargets for the year 2025 and a credible commitment to the Energiewende isseen as almost equally important aspects of the policy mix. Interestingly,these demand pull instruments and the policy strategy with its long-termtarget were viewed as more important than German and EU R&D support forrenewable energies – which had been received by roughly a quarter of re-spondents [90]. As could have been expected from earlier studies [62], theEU ETS was deemed as the least relevant political factor for determiningcompanies’ innovation activities. Finally, to contrast the importance of poli-tical factors with the importance assigned to market factors companies werealso asked about the inﬂuence of the demand for innovations from theircustomers, which was seen as themost inﬂuential factor, thereby highlightingthat in the supplier driven electricity sector the policy mix drives innovationby inﬂuencing demand.Manufactures who had no innovation activities in the period2011–13 were asked a similar question about the inﬂuence of the abovementioned political factors on their decision not to pursue any in-novation activities in renewable energies in that period. As can be seenin Fig. 3, what non-innovators missed most was a credible politicalcommitment to the Energiewende, further underlining the relevance ofpolicy mix credibility for stimulating innovation. They also criticizedthe insuﬃcient support under the German Renewable Energy SourcesAct (EEG). In contrast, the lack of demand for innovations fromcustomers and unfavorable foreign support were seen as the lowestobstacles to innovation, while the lack of incentives from the EU ETSranged in the middle ﬁeld.Given that a credible political commitment to the Energiewende (orperceived lack thereof) was among the top 2 most inﬂuential politicalfactors in determining companies’ innovation activities, in the fol-lowing we take a closer look at the development of this perceivedpolicy mix credibility, and then turn to its determinants – which willeventually lead us to destabilization policies, and in particular to thenuclear phase-out. As can be seen in Fig. 4, manufacturers were mostaware of the political will to promote power generation from re-newable energies at the time of the nuclear phase-out reinstitutionafter Fukushima (2011/12). However, companies think this cred-ibility of the policy mix supporting renewable energies has ebbedaway since then and expect it to stabilize at a fairly low level with the2014 amendment of the EEG .5Fig. 2. Company assessment of inﬂuence of policy mix on innovation (ranked by strength).Source: [90]Fig. 3. Company assessment of inﬂuence of policy mix on decision not to innovate.Source: [90]5 Because it may be quite diﬃcult to accurately remember the perceived strength of thepolitical will, with the situation today potentially blurring past perceptions, this concernwas alleviated by asking respondents about perceptions at key points in time (events orissues which had been heavily debated and covered in the media back then, such as thenuclear phase-out after Fukushima or discussions initiated by the former ministers for theenvironment and the economy on an electricity price brake).K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137132Given the indicated relevance of credibility for companies’ innova-tion activities Rogge and Schleich included a variable measuring theperceived credibility of the policy mix in 2014 in their regressionanalysis [42]. This credibility variable distinguishes between the na-tional and sub-national levels, and draws on companies’ assessments ofdiﬀerent items at the time of the survey (2014). The regression analysis,which also includes variables for technology push and demand pullinstruments (both signiﬁcant) as well as other characteristics of thepolicy mix (only its consistency is signiﬁcant), indicates that thosecompanies which view the policy mix at a national level as morecredible invest more in R&D in renewable energies. However, theanalysis also shows a strong interaction eﬀect between the overarchingconsistency of the policy mix and credibility at the national level.6Given that policy mix credibility seems to be a potentially importantdeterminant for companies’ innovation activities and expenditures,Rogge and Duetschke investigated the reasons why companies belief (ornot) in the policy mix, i.e. what determines the diﬀerent perceptionsabout the strength of the political will of the German government inpromoting the expansion of renewable energies [43]. They ﬁnd that,among others, the changes in the design of the German EEG negativelyimpact on the perceived credibility of the policy mix. Regarding otherpolicy instruments they ﬁnd strong evidence that the perception of thenuclear phase-out policy (on which almost all manufacturers had anopinion) matters for explaining perceived policy mix credibility. Theyalso ﬁnd, albeit weak evidence that the EU Emission Trading Systemmay potentially be positively correlated with credibility. This showsthat the implementation of destabilization policies positively con-tributes to companies’ perceptions of the credibility of the policy mix,but depends on their stringency. This in turn leads to higher invest-ments in corporate R&D in renewable energies, thereby suggesting anindirect link between destabilization policies – at least in the form ofthe nuclear phase-out in Germany – and low-carbon innovation. How-ever, this link is not a direct one but seems to operate through its in-ﬂuence on the credibility of the policy mix, which in turn seems tomatter for innovation.5.2. Impact on diﬀusionAfter establishing that destabilization policies – at least in the caseof the German nuclear phase-out policy –may positively impact on low-carbon innovation, we now turn to the question whether such policiesmight also have an impact on the diﬀusion of renewable power gen-eration technologies. To answer this question, we draw on the assess-ments of the surveyed manufacturers regarding their support for theexpansion of renewable electricity generation (see Fig. 5).7 Interest-ingly, German-based manufacturers believe the nuclear phase-out oﬀersthe strongest support for the diﬀusion of renewable energies – with theEEG, R&D support and training programs coming in second place. Incontrast, the EU Emission Trading System hardly seems to have anyeﬀect. The same holds for the framework conditions for fossil powergeneration technologies, where no speciﬁc phase-out policy was inplace at the time of the survey .6. Discussion and conclusionIn this paper we have explored whether the German nuclear phase-out policy originally introduced in 2002 and – after a short interlude inFig. 4. Perceived political will of the German government regarding expansion of re-newable energies (n = 368).Source: [90]Fig. 5. Company assessment of impact of policy instruments on diﬀusion of renewable energies.Note: Respondents were asked to assess the instruments in the following order: EEG, R&D funding, EnWG/grid, training, nature conservation, EU ETS, fossils, nuclear phase out.Source: [90]6 In the full model which combines all policy mix characteristics as well as further ﬁrm-external and ﬁrm-internal factors, only policy mix consistency and its interaction eﬀectwith credibility at the national level remain statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting the needfor larger sample sizes and investigations into the links between consistency and cred-ibility.7 Please note that companies could refrain from assessing any instrument – either be-cause they did not want to provide information or because they did not know the answer.For simplicity and clarity, here we have only provided the responses of those who pro-vided an assessment of the impact of an instrument – which is why the number of re-sponses per instrument vaies. For example, while all but ﬁve companies had an opinion(and voiced it) on the impact of the nuclear phase-out (which, incidentally, was asked aslast instrument in the list of these eight policies), whereas the impact of the EnergyIndustry Act and the Federal Nature Conservation Act was not answered by 81 and 89manufacturers, respectively, mainly because they felt they did not know this.K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–1371332010/11–reinstated in 2011 has had an impact on the development anddiﬀusion of renewable power generation technologies. To answer thisquestion we have drawn on insights gained from an innovation surveyconducted among German manufacturers and suppliers in renewablepower generation technologies. We found that in 2014 manufacturersbelieved the nuclear phase-out oﬀers the strongest support for the fu-ture diﬀusion of renewable energies. That is, while the EEG remainsimportant for future markets, the manufacturers expect that their futuresales will be most positively inﬂuenced by the nuclear phase-out policywhich oﬀers a clear decarbonization trajectory build on renewableenergies. In contrast, the EU Emission Trading System – another de-stabilization policy – hardly seems to have had any eﬀect, which, givenits low allowance prices, is hardly surprising and in line with previousstudies pointing to the importance of the instrument’s stringency.Manufactures also did not think that the framework conditions for fossilpower generation technologies would have a positive impact on thefuture expansion of renewable energies, which may be hardly sur-prising given that they did not foresee any speciﬁc phase-out policy atthe time of the survey in 2014.Regarding the impact of the nuclear phase-out policy on innovation,we ﬁnd a positive link, which seems to materialize through the eﬀect ofthe existence of this policy on the overall credibility of the Germanpolicy mix for renewable energies. The ﬁndings suggest that manu-facturers were most keenly aware of the political will to promote powergeneration from renewable energies at the time of the nuclear phase-out after Fukushima. However, companies think that the credibility ofthe policy mix has ebbed away since then. This is important given thatcredibility was regarded by companies as being almost as important afactor for determining their innovation activities as the political ex-pansion targets, the German Renewable Energy Sources Act (EEG) andcomparable foreign demand pull instruments. The EU Emission TradingSystem on the other hand, played hardly any role. This matters becauseregression analysis indicates that those companies which view thepolicy mix as more credible invest more in R&D for renewable energies.Importantly, it is not only the changes in the design of the German feed-in tariﬀs for renewable energies and other EEG design features thatdetermine the perceived credibility of the policy mix, but also the nu-clear phase-out as the only other policy instrument which had astrongly signiﬁcant eﬀect. That is, this destabilization policy is shownto positively contribute to companies’ perceptions of the credibility ofthe overarching policy mix. And this, in turn, seems to lead to higherinvestments in corporate R&D in renewable energies, therefore high-lighting that the nuclear phase-out policy may also have had a positiveinnovation impact on these competing low-carbon technologies.Our explorative analysis contributes to literatures on destabilizationand discontinuation which are furthering work in innovation studiesrelated to the understudied ‘ﬂip sides’ to innovation [14]. So far, at-tention towards destabilization has focused on how particular sociotechnical regimes become weakened through technical, economic andpolitical pressures, as suggested by the historical case study of UK coal[13,14]. In addition, recent research on discontinuation has taken agovernance perspective in order to understand how it becomes politi-cally feasible to enact policies directed at the discontinuation of certaintechnological pathways. Yet, while these approaches have contributedto understanding the policy process around discontinuation and de-stabilization, what the eﬀects of discontinuation policies are for socio-technical change have not been studied. While it has been noted that“…the deliberate destabilization and decline of fossil fuel based in-dustries may play a productive role in sustainability transitions, be-cause it would create more space for renewables” [14:36], this had notbeen veriﬁed through empirical research. Drawing on empirical data,this paper demonstrates more clearly the eﬀect that the nuclear phase-out policy seems to have in terms of technological change in renewableenergies in Germany. These explorative insights contribute to broaderunderstandings of the implications that discontinuation policies haveon innovation, thereby addressing a key research gap. In summary, thispaper diﬀers from previous research on discontinuation and destabili-zation in two ways: ﬁrst, it analyses a current and ongoing dis-continuation policy rather than a historical case study, and second,rather than focusing on the policy process and governance has studieddiscontinuation from the perspective of how such policies inﬂuence thebroader policy mix and technological change.Although the role of nuclear in low carbon transitions remainscontested in terms of the ‘actual sustainability’ of nuclear [95], it isclear that following Fukushima, a number of countries are consideringphasing out the technology [96]. In Europe for example, the UK’s am-bitious nuclear new build agenda is actually the exceptional case, withminimal new build taking place elsewhere [97]. It is not just Germany,but also Belgium, Switzerland, and Scotland that are planning to phaseout nuclear, while in Sweden, Spain, and the Netherlands, phase outcurrently looks more likely than nuclear new build [37]. Further aﬁeld,Taiwan is also implementing a nuclear phase out policy [98], and mostrecently South Korea has also signaled the intention to end the use ofnuclear power [21]. For countries making such decisions, the positiveeﬀect perceived by renewable manufacturers of a phase out policyshould be taken note of, but the range of policies that Germany has inplace to also support renewables (like the Renewable Energy SourcesAct and strong R&D support) is also important, as is the consistency ofthis policy mix. Germany had implemented signiﬁcant long-term sup-port mechanisms prior to the ﬁnal phase out decision after Fukushima,so other countries looking to phase out nuclear should also consider thebroader policy mix in terms of whether suﬃcient instruments are inplace to promote the growth of technological alternatives in the form ofrenewables and energy eﬃciency.This research also has relevance for coal phase out policies. A keychallenge over the next decade that has been recognized is the need tophase out coal in order to promote more rapid transitions in order tomeet climate change targets [73,99]. For example, the UK has an-nounced a coal phase out by 2025 [72], and the Netherlands have alsopassed initial laws to phase out the ﬁve remaining coal plants in op-eration in the country [26]. The insights generated from this researchmay be useful in understanding what the impacts of coal phase out maybe on renewables industries. Our research suggests that removing coalmay also yield positive results for the development and diﬀusion of low-carbon technologies. However, again, the exceptional nature of theGerman case must be pointed out in terms of the long-term commitmentto a renewables future envisaged in the Energiewende, as well as thenature of German politics to intervene more readily in markets [100].This implies that countries pursuing coal phase out policies may be welladvised to embed these into a broader policy mix with ambitious long-term targets and a supporting instrument mix consisting of both de-stabilization and creation policies, but also to enhance the proceduraland informational coherence of policy making and implementation.Finally, should Germany eventually overcome the strong resistance ofincumbents to implement a coal phase-out – as strongly suggested bythink tanks and environmental NGOs [88,101] – we would assume thatsuch a coal phase-out would not only reduce CO2 emissions but couldalso – similarly to the nuclear phase-out policy – yield a positive impacton the diﬀusion and innovation of low-carbon solutions for a renew-ables based energy system. In this sense, by creating space in futuremarkets destabilization policies would perhaps best be seen as ‘trans-formative’ demand pull instruments to be added to the policy mix toaccelerate transition processes.In addition, this paper speaks to building understandings of the roleof destabilization and discontinuity in sustainability transitions moregenerally, a hitherto under-researched aspect of transitions studies[18]. It adds to previous research on destabilization and discontinuityin technological systems [15–17,50] by highlighting the impacts thatdiscontinuation policies may have on the broader energy sector oncethey are implemented. The credibility and importance of the phase outpolicy for manufacturers in the renewables sector in Germany givessome indication of how policies aimed at the regime level and niche-K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137134supporting policies interact within a policy mix. Such niche-regimeinteractions are an area requiring more attention [19,102]. In parti-cular, research in sustainability transitions has recently tried to un-derstand how processes of niche protection and empowerment can beachieved [11,103]. Despite turbulence in the German energy transitionand on-going political debates [81,104], nuclear phase-out appears toplay a key role in cementing the credibility to the overall policy mix,enabling certainty in the face of challenging market conditions. As such,the German nuclear phase-out could be encapsulated as a process thatassists in protecting, empowering and shielding niche developmentsthrough companies’ conﬁdence remaining high due in part to the clearoverall direction of the German energy transition which the nuclearphase out makes clear.Our study is not free from limitations. First, it only represents a ﬁrstempirical exploration of the link between destabilization policies andtechnological change in renewable energies as low-carbon alternatives.Second, its data is limited by only covering one country, one point intime and only one type of actor. It should therefore be interpreted withcaution and rather be seen as a stepping-stone towards future researchon discontinuation and destabilization policies.Future research could look at other phase out policies in terms of theways in which they strengthen (or hinder) commitments towards nichedevelopments in sustainability transitions, analyzing the relationshipmore directly and could do so from the perspective of diﬀerent actors.This requires the explicit consideration of phase out policies in a study’sdesign from the outset – not only regarding their impact on diﬀusionbut also regarding their impact on innovation.In conclusion, this paper has provided quantitative evidence gath-ered among German manufacturers of renewable power generationtechnologies that the German nuclear phase-out policy may positivelyimpact technological change in renewable energies. As such, futurepolicy eﬀorts should pay much greater attention to devising feasiblestrategies for adopting such destabilization policies despite the like-lihood of signiﬁcant resistance of incumbents.AcknowledgementsWe gratefully acknowledge support for this work by the StrategicResearch Council at the Academy of Finland through the project “SmartEnergy Transitions” (grant no. 293405) and the German Ministry ofEducation and Research (BMBF) through the project GRETCHEN(support code 01LA1117A) under its FONA funding priority“Economics of Climate Change”. An earlier version of this research waspresented at the BIEE’s 11th Oxford Research Conference on“Innovation and Disruption: the energy sector in transition” onSeptember 22, 2016. Finally, we thank two anonymous reviewers fortheir valuable comments.References[1] UNFCCC, Paris Agreement, (2015) (Paris).[2] N. Johnstone, I. Hascic, D. Popp, Renewable energy policies and technologicalinnovation: evidence based on patent counts, Environ. Resour. Econ. 45 (2011)133–155.[3] D. Popp, Innovation and climate policy, Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 2 (2010)275–298, http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.resource.012809.103929.[4] T.J. Foxon, P.J.G. Pearson, Towards improved policy processes for promotinginnovation in renewable electricity technologies in the UK, Energy Policy 35(2007) 1539–1550, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2006.04.009.[5] J. Schleich, R. Walz, M. Ragwitz, Eﬀects of policies on patenting in wind-powertechnologies, Energy Policy. 108 (2017) 684–695, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.06.043.[6] K.S. Rogge, K. Reichardt, Policy mixes for sustainability transitions: an extendedconcept and framework for analysis, Res. Policy 45 (2016) 1620–1635, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.04.004.[7] M. Taylor, Beyond technology-push and demand-pull: lessons from California’ssolar policy, Energy Econ. 30 (2008) 2829–2854, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2008.06.004.[8] U. Cantner, H. Graf, J. Herrmann, M. Kalthaus, Inventor networks in renewableenergies: the inﬂuence of the policy mix in Germany, Res. Policy 45 (2016)1165–1184, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.03.005.[9] K.M. Weber, H. Rohracher, Legitimizing research, technology and innovationpolicies for transformative change, Res. Policy. 41 (2012) 1037–1047, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015.[10] P. Kivimaa, F. Kern, Creative destruction or mere niche support? Innovation policymixes for sustainability transitions, Res. Policy 45 (2016) 205–217, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.[11] A. Smith, R. Raven, What is protective space? Reconsidering niches in transitionsto sustainability, Res. Policy 41 (2012) 1025–1036, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.12.012.[12] J. Markard, R. Raven, B. Truﬀer, Sustainability transitions: an emerging ﬁeld ofresearch and its prospects, Res. Policy 41 (2012) 955–967, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.02.013.[13] B. Turnheim, F.W. Geels, The destabilisation of existing regimes: confronting amulti-dimensional framework with a case study of the British coal industry(1913–1967), Res. Policy 42 (2013) 1749–1767, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.04.009.[14] B. Turnheim, F.W. Geels, Regime destabilisation as the ﬂipside of energy transi-tions: lessons from the history of the British coal industry (1913–1997), EnergyPolicy 50 (2012) 35–49, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.04.060.[15] J. Longen, S. Hoﬀmann, J. Weyer, Governance of Discontinuation als neuePerspektive der sozialwissenschaftlichen TA, in: A. Bogner, M. Decker,M. Sotoudeh (Eds.), Responsible Innov. Neue Impuls. Für Die Tech. 2015, pp.121–130 (Nomos – edition sigma, Baden Baden).[16] P. Stegmaier, S. Kuhlmann, V.R. Visser, The discontinuation of socio-technicalsystems as a governance problem, in: S. Borras, J. Edler (Eds.), Gov. Socio-Technical Syst. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, 2014, pp. 111–131, ,http://dx.doi.org/10.4337/9781784710194.00015.[17] P. Johnstone, A. Stirling, Comparing Nuclear Power Trajectories in Germany Andthe UK: From "regimes" to "democracies" in Sociotechnical Transitions andDiscontinuities SPRU Work. Pap. Ser. 18, (2015), pp. 1–86.[18] F.W. Geels, Regime resistance against low-carbon transitions: introducing politicsand power into the multi-level perspective, Theory Cult. Soc. 31 (2014) 21–40,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0263276414531627.[19] D.J. Hess, The politics of niche-regime conﬂicts: distributed solar energy in theUnited States, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 19 (2015) 42–50, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.09.002.[20] G.C. Unruh, Escaping carbon lock-in, Energy Policy 30 (2002) 317–325, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(01)00098-2.[21] World Nuclear News, Korea’s Nuclear Phase-out Policy Takes Shape, World Nucl.News, 2017 http://www.world-nuclear-news.org/NP-Koreas-nuclear-phase-out-policy-takes-shape-1906174.html (Accessed 12/09/2017).[22] World Nuclear Association, Country Proﬁles, World Nucl. Assoc., 2017 http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/country-proﬁles/ (Accessed 12/09/2017).[23] P.S. Bromley, Extraordinary interventions: toward a framework for rapid transi-tion and deep emission reductions in the energy space, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 22(2016) 165–171, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.08.018.[24] BEIS, Coal generation in Great Britain: The pathway to a low-carbon future,consultation document, (2016) London.[25] F. Tomesco, Quebec Plans Coal Phase-Outby 2030 in Move to Curb Emissions,(2016) Bloomberg.[26] A. Nelsen, Dutch parliament votes to close down country’s coal industry, Guard.Online, (2016) https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/dutch-parliament-votes-to-close-down-countrys-coal-industry (Accessed 12/09/2017).[27] J. Staufenberg, Norway to 'completely ban petrol powered cars by 2025', Indep.(2016) http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/norway-to-ban-the-sale-of-all-fossil-fuel-based-cars-by-2025-and-replace-with-electric-vehicles-a7065616.html (Accessed 12/09/2017).[28] S. Strunz, The German energy transition as a regime shift, Ecol. Econ. 100 (2014)150–158, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.01.019.[29] Agora Energiewende, 12 Insights on Germany’s Energiewende, (2013) Berlin.[30] F.C. Matthes, Energy transition in Germany: a case study on a policy-drivenstructural change of the energy system, Evol. Institutional Econ. Rev. (2017),http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40844-016-0066-x.[31] C. Morris, M. Pehnt, Energy Transition The German Energiewende, (2014) Berlin.[32] BMWi, BMU, Energiekonzept für eine umweltschonende, zuverlässige und be-zahlbare Energieversorgung, (2010) Germany.[33] BMWi, Gesetzeskarte für das Energieversorgungssystem: Karte zentralerStrategien, Gesetze und Verordnungen, (2016) Berlin.[34] K. Edberg, E. Tarasova, Phasing out or phasing in: framing the role of nuclearpower in the Swedish energy transition, Energy Res Soc. Sci. 13 (2016) 170–179,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.12.008.[35] K. Bruninx, D. Madzharov, E. Delarue, W. D’haeseleer, Impact of the Germannuclear phase-out on Europe’s electricity generation—A comprehensive study,Energy Policy 60 (2013) 251–261, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.026.[36] S. Glomsrød, T. Wei, T. Mideksa, B.H. Samset, Energy market impacts of nuclearpower phase-out policies, Mitig. Adapt. Strateg. Glob. Chang. 20 (2014)1511–1527, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9558-3.[37] G. Resch, L. Liebmann, M. Lamprecht, R. Haas, F. Pause, M. Kahles, Phase Out ofNuclear Power in Europe – From Vision to Reality, (2014) Vienna.[38] L. Bretschger, L. Zhang, Nuclear Phase-out Under Stringent Climate Policies: ADynamic Macroeconomic Analysis, Energy J. 38 (2017) 167–195, http://dx.doi.org/10.5547/01956574.38.1.lbre.[39] M. Guidolin, R. Guseo, The German energy transition: Modeling competition andsubstitution between nuclear power and Renewable Energy Technologies, Renew.K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137135Sustain. Energy Rev. 60 (2016) 1498–1504, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.03.022.[40] R. Malischek, J. Trüby, The future of nuclear power in France: an analysis of thecosts of phasing-out, Energy 116 (2016) 908–921, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2016.10.008.[41] K. Pavitt, Sectoral patterns of technical change: Towards a taxonomy and a theory,Res. Policy 13 (1984) 343–373, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(84)90018-0.[42] K.S. Rogge, J. Schleich, Do Policy Mix Characteristics Matter for Low-carbonInnovation? A Survey-based Exploration for Renewable Power GenerationTechnologies in Germany, SPRU Work Pap. Ser. 19, (2017).[43] K.S. Rogge, E. Dütschke, Exploring perceptions of the credibility of policy mixes:the case of German manufacturers of renewable power generation technologies,SPRU Work Pap. Ser. 23, (2017).[44] M.P. Rice, G.C. O’Connor, L.S. Peters, J.G. Morone, Managing discontinuous in-novation, Res. Technol. Manag. 41 (1998) 7–59.[45] J.D. Linton, Forecasting the market diﬀusion of disruptive and discontinuous in-novation, IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 49 (2002) 365–374, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2002.806723.[46] J. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, Democracy, Harper and Brothers, New York,1942.[47] P. Anderson, M.L. Tushman, Technological Discontinuities and Dominant Designs:A Cyclical Model of Technological Change, Adm. Sci. Q. 35 (1990) 604–633.[48] P. deLeon, Public Policy Termination: An End and a Beginning, Policy Anal. 4(1978) 369–392.[49] A. Jordan, M.W. Bauer, C. Green-Pedersen, Policy dismantling, J. Eur. PublicPolicy 20 (2013) 795–805, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2013.771092.[50] A. Levain, P.-B. Joly, M. Barbier, V. Cardon, F. Dedieu, F. Pellissier, Continuousdiscontinuation – the DDT ban revisited, Int Sustain. Transitions Conf., SPRU,University of Sussex, Brighton, 2015.[51] R. Kemp, J. Schot, R. Hoogma, Regime shifts to sustainability through processes ofniche formation: the approach of strategic niche management, Technol. Anal.Strateg. Manag. 10 (1998) 175–198, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09537329808524310.[52] J. Schot, F.W. Geels, Strategic niche management and sustainable innovationjourneys: theory, ﬁndings, research agenda, and policy, Technol. Anal. Strateg.Manag. 20 (2008) 537–554, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09537320802292651.[53] A. Smith, Translating Sustainabilities between Green Niches and Socio-TechnicalRegimes, Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 19 (2007) 427–450, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09537320701403334.[54] M. Lawhon, J.T. Murphy, Socio-technical regimes and sustainability transitions:insights from political ecology, Prog. Hum. Geogr. 36 (2012) 354–378, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0309132511427960.[55] A. Klitkou, S. Bolwig, T. Hansen, N. Wessberg, The role of lock-in mechanisms intransition processes: the case of energy for road transport, Environ. Innov. Soc.Transit. 16 (2015) 22–37, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.07.005.[56] W. Arthur, Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy, University ofMichigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 1994, http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/mpub.10029.[57] M.M. Smink, M.P. Hekkert, S.O. Negro, Keeping sustainable innovation on a leash?Exploring incumbents’ institutional strategies, Bus. Strategy Environ. 24 (2015)86–101, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bse.1808.[58] J.H. Wesseling, E.M.M.I. Niesten, J. Faber, M.P. Hekkert, Business Strategies ofIncumbents in the Market for Electric Vehicles: Opportunities and Incentives forSustainable Innovation, Bus. Strategy Environ. 24 (2015) 518–531, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bse.1834.[59] K. Augenstein, A. Palzkill, The Dilemma of Incumbents in SustainabilityTransitions: A Narrative Approach, Adm. Sci. 6 (2016) 1, http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/admsci6010001.[60] V. Lauber, S. Sarasini, The responses of incumbent utilities to the challenge ofrenewable energy, in: B. Sandén (Ed.), Syst. Perspect. Renew. Power, ChalmersUniversity of Technology, Göteborg, 2014, pp. 138–148.[61] T.S. Schmidt, M. Schneider, K.S. Rogge, M.J.A. Schuetz, V.H. Hoﬀmann, The ef-fects of climate policy on the rate and direction of innovation: a survey of the EUETS and the electricity sector, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 2 (2012) 23–48,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2011.12.002.[62] K.S. Rogge, Reviewing the evidence on the innovation impact of the EU EmissionTrading System, in: S. Weishaar (Ed.), Res. Handb. Emiss. Trading, Edward ElgarPublishing, 2016, pp. 161–194, , http://dx.doi.org/10.4337/9781784710620.00017.[63] C. Fischer, R.G. Newell, Environmental and technology policies for climate miti-gation, J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 55 (2008) 142–162.[64] T. Foxon, P. Pearson, Overcoming barriers to innovation and diﬀusion of cleanertechnologies: some features of a sustainable innovation policy regime, J. Clean.Prod. 16 (2008) S148–S161, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2007.10.011.[65] K. Reichardt, K. Rogge, How the policy mix impacts innovation: ﬁndings fromcompany case studies on oﬀshore wind in Germany, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit.18 (2016) 62–81, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.08.001.[66] S. Jacobsson, V. Lauber, The politics and policy of energy system transformatio-n—explaining the German diﬀusion of renewable energy technology, EnergyPolicy 34 (2006) 256–276, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2004.08.029.[67] A.J. Wieczorek, M.P. Hekkert, Systemic instruments for systemic innovation pro-blems: a framework for policy makers and innovation scholars, Sci. Public Policy39 (2012) 74–87, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scr008.[68] S. Jacobsson, A. Bergek, Innovation system analyses and sustainability transitions:contributions and suggestions for research, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 1 (2011)41–57, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2011.04.006.[69] R. Raven, F. Kern, A. Smith, S. Jacobsson, B. Verhees, The politics of innovationspaces for low-carbon energy, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 18 (2016) 101–110,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.06.008.[70] S. Reddy, J.P. Painuly, Diﬀusion of renewable energy technologies—barriers andstakeholders’ perspectives, Renew. Energy 29 (2004) 1431–1447, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2003.12.003.[71] S. Tenggren, J. Wangel, M. Nilsson, B. Nykvist, Transmission transitions: barriers,drivers, and institutional governance implications of Nordic transmission griddevelopment, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 19 (2016) 148–157, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.06.004.[72] DECC, New Direction for UK Energy Policy, Dep. Energy Clim. Chang., 2016.[73] G. Muttitt, H. McKinnon, L. Stockman, S. Kretzmann, A. Scott, D. Turnbull, TheSky’s the Limit: Why the Paris Climate Goals Require a Managed Decline of FossilFuel Production, Oil Change International, Washington, 2016.[74] BMWi, Germany’s New Energy Policy: Heading towards 2050 with Secure,Aﬀordable, and Environmentally Friendly Energy, (2012) Berlin.[75] O. Renn, J.P. Marshall, Coal, nuclear and renewable energy policies in Germany:from the 1950 to the Energiewende, Energy Policy 99 (2016) 224–232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.05.004.[76] R. Rehner, D. McCauley, Security, justice and the energy crossroads: assessing theimplications of the nuclear phase-out in Germany, Energy Policy 88 (2016)289–298, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.10.038.[77] A. Cherp, V. Vinichenko, J. Jewell, M. Suzuki, M. Antal, Comparing electricitytransitions: a historical analysis of nuclear, wind and solar power in Germany andJapan, Energy Policy. 101 (2016) 612–628, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.10.044.[78] L. Hermwille, The role of narratives in socio-technical transitions – Fukushima andthe energy regimes of Japan, Germany, and the United Kingdom, Energy Res. Soc.Sci. 11 (2016) 237–246, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.11.001.[79] J. Hoppmann, J. Huenteler, B. Girod, Compulsive policy-making – the evolution ofthe German feed-in tariﬀ system for solar photovoltaic power, Res. Policy 43(2014) 1422–1441, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.01.014.[80] R. Quitzow, Dynamics of a policy-driven market: the co-evolution of technologicalinnovation systems for solar photovoltaics in China and Germany, Environ. Innov.Soc. Transit. 17 (2015) 126–148, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2014.12.002.[81] V. Lauber, S. Jacobsson, The politics and economics of constructing, contestingand restricting socio-political space for renewables – the German RenewableEnergy Act, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 18 (2016) 147–163, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.06.005.[82] K. Reichardt, S.O. Negro, K.S. Rogge, M.P. Hekkert, Analyzing interdependenciesbetween policy mixes and technological innovation systems: the case of oﬀshorewind in Germany, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 106 (2016) 11–21, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.01.029.[83] E. Bruns, D. Ohlhorst, B. Wenzel, J. Köppel, Renewable Energies in Germany’sElectricity Market, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2011, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-9905-1.[84] A. Pegels, W. Lütkenhorst, Is Germany׳s energy transition a case of successfulgreen industrial policy? Contrasting wind and solar PV, Energy Policy 74 (2014)522–534, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.06.031.[85] K. Sühlsen, M. Hisschemöller, Lobbying the Energiewende. Assessing the eﬀec-tiveness of strategies to promote the renewable energy business in Germany,Energy Policy 69 (2014) 316–325, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.02.018.[86] BMWi, Energiedaten: Ausgewählte Graﬁken, (2014) Berlin.[87] BMWi, Renewable Energy Sources in Figures: National and InternationalDevelopment, 2015, (2016) Berlin.[88] DIW, Kohle und Klimaschutz, (2014) Berlin.[89] Agora Energiewende, The German Energiewende and Its Climate Paradox. AnAnalysis of Power Sector Trends for Renewables, Coal, Gas, Nuclear Power andCO2 Emissions, 2010–2030, (2014) Berlin.[90] K.S. Rogge, Innovation activities of renewable power generation technology pro-viders in Germany: GRETCHEN Survey 2014-Descriptive results, (2015) http://www.projekt-gretchen.de/Rogge 2015 GRETCHEN_survey_results.pdf (Accessed7/7/2017).[91] J. Horbach, Determinants of environmental innovation—new evidence fromGerman panel data sources, Res. Policy 37 (2008) 163–173, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2007.08.006.[92] P. del Río González, The empirical analysis of the determinants for environmentaltechnological change: a research agenda, Ecol. Econ. 68 (2009) 861–878, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.07.004.[93] M. Peters, M. Schneider, T. Griesshaber, V.H. Hoﬀmann, The impact of tech-nology-push and demand-pull policies on technical change – does the locus ofpolicies matter? Res. Policy 41 (2012) 1296–1308, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.02.004.[94] J. Hoppmann, M. Peters, M. Schneider, V.H. Hoﬀmann, The two faces of marketsupport, Res. Policy 42 (2013) 989–1003, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.01.002.[95] A. Verbruggen, E. Laes, S. Lemmens, Assessment of the actual sustainability ofnuclear ﬁssion power, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 32 (2014) 16–28, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.01.008.[96] M.V. Ramana, Nuclear policy responses to Fukushima: exit, voice, and loyalty,Bull. At. Sci. 69 (2013) 66–76, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0096340213477995.[97] E. Cox, P. Johnstone, A. Stirling, Understanding the Intensity of UK PolicyCommitments to Nuclear Power SPRU Work. Pap. Ser. 16, (2016), pp. 1–93.[98] World Nuclear Association, Nuclear Power in Taiwan, World Nucl Assoc. Ctry.Proﬁles., 2016.K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137136[99] M. Cuﬀ, Europe’s leaders must set coal phase-out dates to hit climate targets, saysGreenpeace, Bus. Green. (2015).[100] S. Ćetković, A. Buzogány, Varieties of capitalism and clean energy transitions inthe European Union: when renewable energy hits diﬀerent economic logics, Clim.Policy 16 (2016) 642–657, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2015.1135778.[101] Agora Energiewende, Elf Eckpunkte für einen Kohlekonsens: Konzept zur schritt-weisen Dekarbonisierung des deutschen Stromsektors (Kurzfassung), (2016)Berlin.[102] S. Bui, A. Cardona, C. Lamine, M. Cerf, Sustainability transitions: insights onprocesses of niche-regime interaction and regime reconﬁguration in agri-foodsystems, J. Rural Stud. 48 (2016) 92–103, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.10.003.[103] R. Raven, F. Kern, A. Smith, S. Jacobsson, B. Verhees, The politics of innovationspaces for low-carbon energy, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 18 (2015) 101–110,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.06.008.[104] F.W. Geels, F. Kern, G. Fuchs, N. Hinderer, G. Kungl, J. Mylan, M. Neukirch,S. Wassermann, The enactment of socio-technical transition pathways: a re-formulated typology and a comparative multi-level analysis of the German and UKlow-carbon electricity transitions (1990–2014), Res. Policy 45 (2016) 896–913,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.01.015.[105] P. Stegmaier, S. Kuhlmann, Discontinuation governance as a neglected dimensionin STI studies, 2013 EU – SPRI Forum Conf. Madrid, 2013.[106] BDEW, BDEW-Energiemonitor 2016: Das Meinungsbild der Bevölkerung, BDEW,Berlin, 2016.[107] C. Doblinger, M. Dowling, R. Helm, An institutional perspective of public policyand network eﬀects in the renewable energy industry: enablers or disablers ofentrepreneurial behaviour and innovation? Entrep. Reg. Dev. 28 (2016) 126–156,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08985626.2015.1109004.K.S. Rogge, P. Johnstone Energy Research & Social Science 33 (2017) 128–137137