ABSTRACT: 
Acts of mobility require corresponding acts of immobility (or suspended mobility). Migrant journeys are not only about movement. Indeed, in the present policy context, this is ever more true. Whether a migrant is contained within a hidden compartment, detained by migration authorities, waiting for remittances to continue, or marooned within a drifting boat at sea, these moments of immobility have become an inherent part of migrant journeys especially as states have increased controls at and beyond their borders. Migrants themselves view this fragmentation – the stopping, waiting and containment – as part of the journey to be endured. Drawing on the authors’ fieldwork in Central America and Southern Europe, this paper destabilises the boundary between transit and settlement, speaking to a larger policy discourse that justifies detentions and deportations from the United States and countries on the periphery of Europe. We argue that migrants’ nested experiences of these ‘matryoshka journeys’ reveal how increased migration controls encourage them not only to take greater risks during the journey, but also to forfeit their agency at opportune moments. In turn, states exploit images of such im/mobility during the journey in order to emphasise the irrational risks migrants take in order to traverse seas and deserts and to cloak their own border policies in a humanitarian discourse of rescue. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 we investigate the 
 
                                                                                                                       
 
FULL TEXT: 
     1 Names are listed in alphabetical order. 2       Matryoshka   Journeys:   Im/mobility   during   Migration       Introduction   Clandestine   migration   journeys   are   not   only   about   movement.   Whether   a   migrant   is   contained   within   a   hidden   compartment   or   smuggler’s    safe   house,   detained   by   migration   authorities,    waiting    for    remittances    to    continue,    or    marooned    on    a    drifting    boat    at    sea,   moments   of   immobility   are   an   inherent   part   of   migrant   mobility,   especially   as   states   have   increased   controls   at   and   beyond   their   borders.1   In   her   study   of   a   ‘neoliberal   securityscape’   that    detains    and    deports    Salvadoran    migrant    youth    on    a    massive    scale,    Elana    Zilberg   explains    that,    “globalization    is    better    characterized    by    a    dialectic    of    mobility    and   immobility.”2   Migrants    themselves   view   stopping,   waiting   and   containment   as   part   of    the   journey   to   be   endured.   Indeed,   the   landscape   of   the   routes   people   travel   includes   a   variety   of   spaces   where   people   loiter   or   find   themselves   detained.      This   paper   speaks   to   the   literature   that   analyzes   the   spatial   restructuring   of   borders   at   the   periphery   of   the   Global   North.3   Drawing   on   fieldwork   in   the   Americas   and   Southern   Europe,   our   paper   points   to   the   way   this   restructuring   ruptures   and   redirects   unauthorized   journeys,    and,    in    doing    so,    destabilizes    the    boundaries    between    the    conventional   dichotomies    of    transit    and    settlement,    and   of    trafficking    and    smuggling.4    In    this   way,   we   speak   to   a   larger   policy   discourse   that   justifies   detention   and   deportation   from   the   United   States,   Mexico    and    countries    on    the    periphery    of    Europe.    In    and    around   Europe    and    the   Americas,    intensified    policing    and    criminal    violence    has    transformed    linear    spatial   movements    into    indefinite    odysseys.5    Despite    the    clear    similarities    across    regions,    there   has    been    little    cross-­‐‑Atlantic    dialogue    on    how    these    effects    are    produced    by    policy    and   embodied   in   the   lived   experience   of   migrants.      By   bringing   together   fieldwork   from   two   continents,   we   demonstrate   how   common   policing    practices,    and    language    of    crisis    and    rescue,    rupture    clandestine    migration   journeys.   The   argument   is   made   up   of   two   parts,   each   of   which   focuses   on   manifestations   of   im/mobility   along   the   migration   journey.   Firstly,   we   examine   moments   when   migrants   stop   en    route.    Secondly,    we    examine    the    immobility    that    migrants    endure    when    physically   contained   in   boats,   hidden   compartments,   trucks,   and   cargo   holds   in   order   to   facilitate   the   onward    movement    of    their    journey.    Migrants’    nested    experiences    of    these    ‘matryoshka    3       journeys’   reveal   how   increased   migration   controls   encourage   them   not   only   to   take   greater   risks   during   the   journey,   but   also   to   forfeit   their   agency   at   opportune   moments.6   In   other   words,    migrants    temporarily    surrender    control    at    points    during    the    journey,    accepting   momentary   disempowerment   to   achieve   larger   strategic   goals.   In   the   most   extreme   cases,   this    involves   physical    constraint   or    containment.   Here,    our   work    is    informed   by    feminist   scholarship    that    examines    waiting,    or    immobility,    and    how    it    ‘is    actively    produced,   embodied,   experienced,   politicized   and   resisted   across   a   range   of   migrant   spaces’.7   States   exploit   images   of   such   im/mobility   during   the   journey   in   order   to   emphasize   the    irrational   risks   migrants   take    in   order   to   traverse   seas   and   deserts   and   to   cloak   their   own    border    policies    in    a    humanitarian    discourse    of    rescue.    However,    this    symbolic   appropriation   of    images   of    immobilized   migrants   does   not   acknowledge   how   the   policing   context    structures    migrants’    difficult    choices    or    how    migrants    strategically    engage   immobility.          The    article    proceeds    in    four    parts.    First,    we    briefly    introduce    the    methods    we   employ   to   arrive   at   these   conclusions.   Second,   we   compare   the   policy   context   on   both   sides   of    the   Atlantic,    demonstrating   how    in    both    regions,    border    controls    have    intensified    and   expanded   geographically.   Third,   we   explore   the   lived   experience   of   migration   to   highlight   the    integral    relationship    between    mobility    and    immobility    in    this    policy    context.       We   describe    both    the    fragmented    and    nested    nature    of    the    transit    experience.    Fourth,    and   finally,    we    critique    a    discourse    of    rescue    that    justifies    state    responses    to    migrant   im/mobility    without    acknowledging    the    agency    of    migrants    or    addressing    the    broader   political   reality   of   restrictive   migration   policies.       Methods   We   employ   an   ethnographic   approach   to   data   collection   and   analysis.   Separately,   we   conducted   participant   observation,   semi-­‐‑structured   and   unstructured   interviews.   Through   iterative    conversations    and    writing,    we    inductively    recovered    themes    from    migrant   narratives    of    the    journey.    In    this    creative    collaborative    process,    we    arrived    at    an   understanding    of    journeys    as    a    nested    series    of    journeys    within    journeys    that    could   elucidate   the   relationship   between   state   policies   and   migrants’   lived   experiences.   Because   such   adventures   are   unpredictable   and   highly   variable   across   time   and   space,    it   might   be    4       truthfully    said    that    the    only    typical    migrant    journey    is    an    a-­‐‑typical    journey.    This   complicates   generalization   both   within   and   across   cases.   However,   we   included   narratives   that    represent    a    larger   mode    of    crossing,    resonating    broadly    both   within    and    across    the   two    regions.    Throughout    the    text,    we    juxtapose    these    narratives    side-­‐‑by-­‐‑side,    switching   rapidly    and    frequently    between    the    regional    contexts,    to    give    the    reader    a    sense    of    the   process    we    followed    discovering    the    theme    of    nested    experiences    of    immobility    and   mobility   from   our   interviews.   Under   the   auspices   of   a   larger   project,   Brigden   conducted   interviews   between   2009   and   2012.    In   2009-­‐‑2010,    she    lived    in   migrant   communities    in   El   Salvador.    In   2010-­‐‑2011,   she    also    volunteered    at    a    Catholic    migrant    shelter    in    Oaxaca,    Mexico.    Thus,    interview   participants   included   Central   American   migrants   (before,   during   and   after   their   journey   to   the   United    States),    deportees,    family   members,    human    rights    activists,    police    and    others   living   and   working   along   migration   routes   from   sending   communities   in   rural   El   Salvador   and   through   12   transit   communities   across   Mexico.   The   majority   of   migrants   encountered   in    passage    hailed    from    Guatemala,    Honduras,    and    El    Salvador    in    rough    proportion    to   estimates    of    the    overall    flow    of    migrants    who    attempt    to    cross    Mexico;    a    minority    of   migrants    interviewed    reported    other    nationalities,    such    as    Nicaraguans,    Mexicans,    one   Panamanian    and    even    one    Indian    person.    The    sample    included    a    small    number    of   interviews   in   destination   and   transit   communities   within   the   United   States   in   2012.      Mainwaring    conducted    interviews    with    over    60    migrants    in    Malta    and    Cyprus   between   2008   and   2011.   She   also   carried   out   participant   and   non-­‐‑participant   observation   within   migrant   communities   on   both   islands.   The   migrants   interviewed   were   from   an   array   of   African,   Middle   Eastern   and   Asian   countries.   Reflecting   overall   irregular   migration   flows   to   Malta   during   this   time,   the   majority   were   Somali   and   Eritrean   refugees   who   departed   on   boats    from   Libya   and   were   rescued   at   sea   by   the   Maltese   Armed   Forces.    In   Cyprus,   some   had   arrived   without   authorization   by   crossing    the   Green   Line    that   divides    the    island   and   others   had   overstayed   their   visas   which   initially   permitted   entry   in   order   to   study   or   work   (most   often   as   domestic   workers).   Compared    to    the   majority   of    the   Brigden’s    interviews,   these   took   place   further   along   the   migration   journey,   when   migrants   had   already   arrived   in   Europe.   Nevertheless,   the   interviews   explored   their   entire   journey   from   country   of   origin,   as   well   as   attempts   at   and   desires   for   onward   mobility   into   Europe.    5       Bringing    these    two    field    sites    into    dialogue    with    each    other    is    not    wholly   uncomplicated.    While    segments    of    the    journey    are    sometimes    made    by    boat,    Central   American    migrants    interviewed    in    Mexico    tend    to    travel    largely    along    land    routes    to    a   single    nation-­‐‑state    destination,    the    U.S.       The    European    Union,    on    the    other    hand,    is    a   supranational    union    of    28    member    states,    any    of    which    might    be    intended    or    de    facto   destinations   for   those   arriving   at   its   external   borders.   Furthermore,   many   migrants   travel   across   maritime   borders   in   the   Mediterranean   in   addition   to   land   routes   in   order   to   reach   the    EU.    As    has    been    forcefully    revealed    by    the    most    recent    high-­‐‑profile    refugee    crisis,   discrepancies    between    the    regulatory    frameworks    of    European    states    persist,    despite   attempts   to   create   a   common   asylum   and   immigration   system.8      The    majority    of    migrants    travelling    to    Europe    without    authorization    apply    for   asylum    once    they    arrive.    In    contrast,    migrants    clandestinely    crossing    the    U.S.-­‐‑Mexico   border   do   not   usually   apply   for   asylum.   However,   the   policy   contexts   may   be   growing   more   similar   in   this   regard;   between   2012-­‐‑2014,   the   US   Border   Patrol   documented   a   tremendous   spike    in    unaccompanied    Central    American    children    and    asylum    claims    based    on    gang   persecution.    Between    fiscal    year    (FY)    2013    and    2014,    apprehensions    of    unaccompanied   minors    grew    77%,    rising    from    38,759    to    68,541    children    encountered    at    the    southwest   border.9   Based   on   a   survey   of   404   children   in   custody,   a   2014   UNHCR   report   found   that   a   majority    of    Central    American    child    migrants    suffered    forcible    displacement    and    needed   international    protection.10    In    FY    2013,    15%    of    migrants    under    expedited    removal    (the   streamlined   deportation   process   that   occurs   at   the   border)   claimed   credible   fear   of   return,   thereby   becoming   asylum   seekers,   up   from   the   4-­‐‑6%   of   apprehended   migrants   in   the   2000-­‐‑2009   FY   periods.11   Not   coincidentally,   this   ‘humanitarian   crisis’   at   the   U.S.   border   resolved   only   after   Mexico   intensified   efforts   to   stem   the   tide   of   migrants   before   they   reach   U.S.   soil.   Apprehensions    of    unaccompanied    children    at    the    U.S.    southwest    border    declined    46%   between   FY   2014   and   FY   2015.12   As   we   will   discuss,   the   subsequent   decrease   in   entries   of   potential    asylum    seekers    across    the   U.S.-­‐‑Mexico    border    is    a    testament    to    the    ‘success’    of   this    transnationalized    migration    policing    policy,    not    the    changing    character    of    the   migration   flow.   Despite   their   differences,   destination   countries   on   both   sides   of   the   Atlantic   seek   to   shift   asylum   responsibility.    6       This    convergence    of    purpose    points    to    the    fact    that,    despite    the    potential   complications    of    such    comparisons,    cross-­‐‑regional    research    on    clandestine    routes    is   imperative   to   understanding   global   patterns   of   border   policy   and   migrant   (im)mobility.   As   we    demonstrate,    migrants    on    both    sides    of    the    Atlantic    face    similar    challenges    and   opportunities   during    their    journeys.   Comparing    their   experiences   draws   attention    to:    the   similar   state   bordering   processes   occurring    in   Europe   and    the   Americas    that   cause    these   journeys    to    become    more    fragmented;    the    ways    in    which    migrants    use    im/mobility    in   order   to   overcome   migration   controls;   and   the   ways   in   which   their   strategies   are   co-­‐‑opted   by    states    in    order    to    justify    further    controls.    Thus,    in    the    next    section    of    the    paper,    we   further    outline    the    similarities    between    the    two    policy    contexts,    thereby    justifying    the   comparison   of   Mediterranean   and   North   American   journeys.       Policing   Peripheries,   Constructing   Crises   On    both    sides    of    the    Atlantic,    restrictive    immigration    policies,    the    geographical   extension   of   policing   away   from   borders,   increased   surveillance   across   and   within   nation-­‐‑states,   international   security   cooperation,   deportations,   lengthy   detentions   for   illegal   entry,   and   the   denial   of   asylum   claims   conspire    to   prolong   transit    for   migrants.   Taken   together,   this   restructuring   of   migration   regimes   has   resulted   in   a   “thickening”   and   delocalization   of   borders.13   As   Alison   Mountz   argues,   the   mobilities   paradigm   has   overlooked   the   ‘mobility’   of    states    in    their   engagement   with   human   migration:    to   control    the   movement   of   people,   states    also   move    by    shifting    their    legal    and    territorial    boundaries,    policing    patterns    and   entry    points    to    intercept    migrants.14    We    contribute    to    this    literature    by    tracing    how   European   and   U.S.   migration   controls   move   beyond   (and   within)   the   border   and   intersect   with   the   im/mobility   of   migrants   en   route.   While   these   policies   continue   a   longer   trend   of   policing    and    border    militarization    over    the    last    century,15    such    efforts    accelerated   dramatically    in    the    aftermath    of    the    2001    attacks    in    New    York    City.16    The    discourse    of   migrants    as    a    national    security    risk    justified    putting    migrants’    human    security    at    risk   during   their   journeys.17          Immigration   Control   in   North   America    7       Since    that    time,    the   United   States   has    internalized   and   externalized    its   borders.    In   addition   to   enhancing   the    fortification   and   technological    sophistication   of    the   U.S.-­‐‑Mexico   divide    and    other    ports    of    entry,    the    U.S.    government    has    increasingly    turned    to    internal   migration    policing    for    territorial    control.    These    internal    controls    include    highway   checkpoints,    surveillance    of    public    transit    and    other    public    spaces    within    an    extended   border   zone   inside   the   United   States,   criminal   incarceration   for   immigration   offenses,   and   legislation   to   facilitate   the   removal   of   legal   migrants   for   minor   criminal   infractions,   as   well   as    partnerships    between    local    law    enforcement    and    federal   migration    authorities.18    The   result   has   been   a   dramatic    increase    in    immigrant   detention   and   deportation.19   The   post-­‐‑9/11    reorganization    of    the    Immigration    and    Naturalization    Service    (INS)    as    the    U.S.   Immigration   and   Customs   Enforcement   (ICE)   under   the   Department   of   Homeland   Security   (DHS)   also   blurred   the   boundary   between   domestic   and   foreign   security.      Like    its    European    counterparts,    the    United    States    has    also    quietly    turned    its   attention    to    its    periphery,    seeking    to    stem    clandestine    flows    of    people    and    goods    before   they   arrive   at   the   country’s   doorstep.   In   the   context   of   the   1980s   Central   American   refugee   crisis,   with    hundreds    of    thousands    of    Salvadorans    and   Guatemalans    fleeing    civil    conflict,   the   United   States   began    to   pressure   Mexico    to   stem   the    tide   of    transit   migration.20   While   Mexico   does   not   restrict   the   travel   of   its   own   nationals   to   the   United   States,21   it   has   become   a   willing   partner   in   the   policing   of   clandestine   transit   flows   across   its   territory.      Mexico   has   harmonized    its    own    visa    requirements    with    its    northern    neighbor22    and    also    instituted   several   programs   to   intercept,   detain   and   deport   unauthorized   Central   American   migrants.   From    2001-­‐‑2003,    it    adopted    ‘Plan    Sur’,    which    established    internal    control    belts    across   transport    routes    frequented    by    migrants.23    Plan    Sur    also    sponsored    inter-­‐‑agency   cooperation,   blurred    the   boundary   between    the   drug    interdiction   mission   and    immigrant   apprehensions,    and    centralized    deportation    procedures.24   While    the    size    of    the    program   remains    unclear,    after    2001,    the    United    States    funded    a    portion    of    the    expenses    for   deportations   of   Salvadorans   and   Hondurans   from   Mexico.25      At    the    official    conclusion   of    the    first    Plan    Sur,    the   Mexican    government    continued   similar   policies.26   Between   2001   and   2007,   the   number   of   migration   detention   facilities   had   increased    from   25    to    48    and    dispersed    geographically    across    the   Mexican    countryside.27   Migration    raids    on    freight    trains    also    became    more    commonplace    and    covered    more    8       territory.28   In   2005,   mirroring   post-­‐‑9/11   institutional   reorganizations   in   the   United   States,   the   Mexican    immigration    agency    (INM)    came    under    the    control    of    the   Mexican   National   Security   Council.   Some   observers   complained   that    these   changes   converted   Mexico    into   a   ‘vertical    border’    for    the    United    States.29    In    fact,    these    earlier    control    efforts    have    been   overshadowed    by    the    more    recent,    unprecedented    bilateral    cooperation    between    the   United   States   and   Mexico   under   the   ongoing   Mérida   initiative,   which   sponsors   interdiction   efforts,    surveillance    and    police    capacity    to    stem    clandestine    flows    of    goods    and    people.      Since   2011,    the   U.S.    investment    in   Mexican   border   control   has   been   massive   enough    that   Assistant    Secretary    of    Homeland    Security    for    International    Affairs    Alan    Bersin    declared,   “the   Guatemalan   border   with   Chiapas   is   now   our   southern   border.”30   In    2014,    following    in    the    wake    of    a    sudden    influx    of    unaccompanied    Central   American   minors   and   asylum   seekers,   referred   to   by   President   Obama   as   a    ‘humanitarian   crisis’,   Mexico    launched   a   reinvigorated   Plan   Sur.   This   new   Plan   Sur   primarily   targets   the   southern   train   routes   that   the   poorest   Central   Americans   traverse   to   arrive   in   the   US.   The   Plan   lists   the   protection   of   migrants   as   one   of   its   primary   objectives,   and   explicitly   seeks   to   prevent   migrants   from   “putting   themselves   at   risk”   by   boarding   the   freight   trains.31   Despite   this   emphasis   on   “protection”,   deportations   to   El   Salvador,   Honduras   and   Guatemala   from   Mexico    have    risen    dramatically,    surpassing    the    number    of    deportations    of    Central   Americans   from   the   United   States.32   Indeed,   the   recent   decline   in   apprehensions   of   Central   Americans    at    the    U.S.    border    is    largely    (though    not    exclusively)    a    consequence    of    this   increased   Mexican    enforcement    effort.33   Mexico’s    role    as    a   migration    buffer    has    become   ever   more   important   to   the   control   of   the   U.S.   border.      Under    the    programs    sponsored    by    these    initiatives,    control    of    drug    and    human   smuggling    routes   are    conflated   as   one   national    security    issue.    In    response    to    criticism   of   this    trend   by   human    rights    advocates,    the   2011   Mexican    constitutional    reforms   declared   that   unauthorized   entry   cannot   be   criminalized   and   recognized   the   universal   human   rights   of   irregular   migrants.   Unfortunately,   these   reforms   also   explicitly   link   migration   to   national   security.34    While    acknowledging    his    duty    to    protect    the    basic    rights    of    migrants,    the   recently   appointed   INM   Commissioner,   Ardelio   Vargas   Fosado,   reaffirmed   his   commitment   to    a    national    security    approach    to    policing    migration.35    The    2013-­‐‑2018    strategic    plan   released    by    the    Mexican    Secretary    of    National    Defense    (SEDENA)    re-­‐‑commits    to    the    9       national    security    priority    of    border    enforcement.    The    plan    urges    further    intra-­‐‑agency   collaboration,    international    cooperation,    and    the    dedication    of    approximately    30,000   military    personnel    for    this    endeavor.36    Thus,    Mexican    migration    controls    have    been   justified   by   both   national   security   and   humanitarian   crisis.       Immigration   Control   at   the   Periphery   of   the   EU   Across   the   Atlantic,   member   states   have   emphasized   the   need   to   control   migration   at    the    European    Union’s    external    borders,    especially    following    the    relaxation    of    internal   migration   controls   under   the   Schengen   Agreement   (1985).   This   process   of   moving   border   controls   and   asylum   responsibility   towards   the   edges   of   Europe   has   subsequently   included   the   Dublin   Convention   (1997)   and   the   related   Eurodac   database   (2003),   the   establishment   of   Frontex   (2005),   the   EU’s   external   border   agency,   and   most   recently   the   European   Border   Surveillance   System   (2013),   a   platform   for   information   sharing   between   member   states   in   order   to   detect   unauthorized   cross-­‐‑border   migration.37      Alongside    the    outward    movement    of    migration    controls    within    the    EU,    member   states   have   pursued   the   externalization   of   controls   at   the   regional   and   national   levels.   The   EU    and    its    member    states    have    encouraged    countries    on    its    periphery    to    develop   traditional    instruments    of    migration    control    (i.e.    border    patrols    and    other    measures    to   combat    ‘illegal’    immigration,    smuggling,    and    trafficking)    and    to    improve    their    asylum   systems.    The    bloc    has    frequently    linked    development    aid    and    agreements    on    trade    or   technical   cooperation   to   the   implementation   of   such   migration   controls.38   Countries   along   the    eastern    and    southern    rim    of    the    EU    are    thus    being    co-­‐‑opted    to    varying    degrees    into   becoming    what    is    effectively    a    migration    buffer    for    Europe.39    For    those    migrants    who   nevertheless   arrive   in   Europe,   there   has   been   a   second   line   of   defense   involving   provisions   for    the    return    of   migrants    and    asylum    seekers    to    third    countries    by   way    of    readmission   agreements   and   the   introduction   of   the   principle   of   ‘safe   third   countries’.40   Despite    such   measures,    there    has    been    limited    success    at    externalizing   migration   control   at   the   multilateral   level.   Member   states   along   the   EU’s   periphery   have   thus   turned   to    negotiating    formal    and    informal    bilateral    cooperation    agreements    with    neighboring   states   in   order   to   facilitate   forced   returns.41   Spain   was   one   of   the   first   southern   European   states   to   sign   a   readmission   agreement   in   order   to   externalize   migration   controls.   In   1991,    10       it    signed   an   agreement   with   Morocco    that   allowed    for    the    return   of   Moroccan   and    third-­‐‑country   nationals.42   This   was   followed   by   a   rash   of   agreements,   made   under   Spain’s   Action   Plan    for    Sub-­‐‑Sahara   Africa,   with   Guinea   Conakry    (2007),   Cape   Verde    (2008),    the   Gambia   (2008),    Guinea    Bissau    (2008),    Niger    (2008),    Senegal    (2008),    Mali    (2009),    and    the   Cameroon   (2011).43      Similarly,   in   the   face   of   increasing   flows   of   irregular   immigration   across   the   Central   Mediterranean    around    2002,    Italy    signed    a    variety    of    agreements    that    included   readmission   clauses   with   Tunisia   (2003),   Egypt   (2007),   and   Algeria   (2009).   In   2008,   Italy   also   negotiated   a   Treaty   on   Friendship   with   Libya    that    informally   acted   as   a   readmission   agreement.44   The   eruption   of   the   Libyan   Revolution   in   2011   halted   the   so-­‐‑called   push   back   policy    of    returning    boats    from    international    waters    in    the    Mediterranean    to    Libya,    a   practice    that    the    European    Court    of    Human    Rights    (2012)    subsequently    condemned.   Nevertheless,    Italy   quickly   signed   a   new   memorandum   of   understanding   with    the   Libyan   Transitional   National    Council    in    2011,   which    confirmed    both    parties    commitment    to    the   ‘management    of    migration,    primarily    through    …    cooperation    in    combating    terrorism,   organized    crime,    trafficking    in    narcotic    drugs    and    psychotropic    substances    and    illegal   immigration’.45   The    interpretation    of    irregular    immigration    as    a    security    or    humanitarian    crisis   provides   the   context   for   the   justification   of   these   externalization   policies.   Crisis   discourse   underlines    the    need    to    control    unbridled    migration    flows    and    restore    order,    while    also   rendering   controls   as   humanitarian   efforts   to   reduce   deaths   at   sea.   For   example,   Frontex’s   2006    Annual    Report    notes    that    its    mission    in    the    Canary    Islands    stopped    ‘illegal   immigrants…    from   setting   off    for    a   dangerous    journey    that   might   have    cost    their    lives’.46   Alongside   efforts   to   substantiate   and   reinforce   the   crisis   though   external   migration   policies,   crisis    discourse    has    been    used    to    justify    internal    practices    of    control    that    project    the   sovereign   power   of   the   state   to   control   its   borders.47   For   example,   Greece,   Italy   and   Malta   all   enforce   lengthy   immigration   detention   periods   of   between   12   and   18   months.48   In   2008,   Italy    amended    its    law    to    make    irregular    status    an    aggravating    circumstance    in    criminal   cases.   The    law   also    criminalized    the   act   of    renting   accommodation    to    irregular   migrants,   which    can    now    carry    a    prison    sentence    of    up    to    three    years.    Greece    constructed    a    12.5-­‐‑kilometer,   barbed-­‐‑wire   fence   in   Evros,   along   a   section   of   its   land   border   with   Turkey.   The    11       country’s   Minister   of   Public   Order   and   Citizen   Protection,   Nickos   Dendias,   has   noted   efforts   to   deter   irregular   migrants   by   turning   the   country   into   an   ‘unfriendly   destination’.   49       The   Lived   Experience   of   Migration:   Fragmented   Journeys   and   Matryoshka   Journeys   These    policies    generate    a    particular    lived    experience    of    geographic    mobility,    one   that   is   inextricably   tied   to   experiences   of   immobility.   The   policing   and   deportation   justified   by   crisis   produce    further   mobility,    as   deportees   attempt   return   again   and   again.50    In    this   section,   we    examine    two    different    forms    of    im/mobility    that    occur    in    the    context    of    the   journey:   ‘fragmented   journeys’   and   ‘matryoshka   journeys’.      First,   the   contemporary   migration   policing   regime   increasingly   requires   migrants   to   adjust    to    unforeseen    events    with    flexibility    en    route.    Michael    Collyer    has    examined   ‘fragmented    journeys’    across    North    Africa.51    We    show    that    this    fragmentation    is    global.   Migration    journeys    are    rarely    a    linear    passage,    travelled    form    point    of    origin    directly    to   destination.    Rather,   migrants   make    these    journeys    in    broken,    unplanned    stages;    a    failed   stage   may   give   rise   to   another   unexpected   leg   of   the   journey.      We   find   that   in   the   Americas   too,    journeys    take    unexpected    directions,    migrants    continually    change    their    destination,   and    as    the    difficulty    of    arrival    and    settlement    increases,    people    wander    in    search    of   opportunity.   The   boundary   between   transit   and   settlement   becomes   blurred,   as   migrants   move    indefinitely    and    sometimes    spend    very    long    periods    in    countries    of    transit,    rather   than    the    destinations    they    initially    envisioned.    Indeed,    this    form    of    immobility    is    part   physical   and   part   temporal.   Many   journeys   are   characterized   by   long   periods   of   ‘sticky’   or   even   ‘suspended’   time   spent   waiting,   stopping,   and   being   stranded   or   contained.   This   sticky   or   suspended   time   is   punctuated   by   moments   of   ‘frenzied’   time   experienced   with   urgency   and   sudden   movement.52         The    second,    related    dimension    of    immobility    is    a    layered    relationship    between   empowerment    and    disempowerment,    which    can    be    explained    with    the   metaphor    of    the   matryoshka    journey.   The   matryoshka    is    a   nested    series   of   dolls,   with   one    face    concealed   within    another.    Likewise,   migration    journeys    become    a    nested    series    of    adventures    and   concealment   strategies,   as   migrants   attempt   to   evade   capture   by   the   state   or   escape   violent   criminal   predators.   The   fragmented   nature   of   journeys   encourages   this   nested   experience.   However,    these   two   concepts   are   analytically   separate:   one   might   experience   the    journey    12       as    matryoshka    without    experiencing    fragmentation.    Migrants    may    need    to    undertake   journeys   within   journeys,   not   only   by   changing   direction,   taking   meandering   routes   away   from   their   destination   or   waiting   for   opportune   travel   conditions,   but   also   by   strategically   forfeiting    or    reclaiming    control    over    their    own    body    in    transit.    Thus,    in    these   moments,   migrants   may    be    rendered    physically    immobile    in    the   most    extreme    forms,    for    instance,   while   in   secret   compartments,   boats,   trucks   or   smuggler’s   safe   houses.      Migrants   often   accept   this   extreme   form   of   immobility   and   the   bodily   risks   involved   in   this   loss   of   control   as   necessary   in   order   to   evade   other   dangers,   usually   those   associated   with    their    visibility    to    the    state.    In    so    doing,    they    barter    moments    of    immobility    for   mobility,    and    moments    of    disempowerment    for    a    larger    purpose.    On    the    other    hand,   migrants   sometimes   find   ingenious   ways   to   negotiate   limited   control   over   their   fate   when   in   official   custody   or   in   the   hands   of   smugglers.   Migrants   are   rarely   passive   victims   in   such   circumstances.    By    peeling    back    the    layers    of    these    journeys,    we    find    that    this    form    of   immobility   is   a   complex   negotiation   of   risk,   agency   and   visibility.   Migrants    understand   periods    of   waiting,    stopping    and    containment    as    inherent    to   the    migration    experience.    The    patience    to    cope    with    indefinite    periods    of    immobility   becomes   a   survival   resource,   as   the   experience   of   immobility   folds   into   the   larger   purpose   of    mobility.    Moments    of    mobility    occur    within    their    forced    immobility,    and    immobility   occurs   within   the   larger   context   of   migration   and   life-­‐‑long   journey   to   unknown   destination.   As   explained   by   Melvin,53   a   Salvadoran   man   who   stayed   several   months   at   a   midpoint   along   the   route   through   Mexico,   “I   am   doing   it   slowly,   working.   Where   there’s   work,   I   will   stay   for   a   while.   It’s   not   good   for   the   body   or   soul   to   only   be   traveling,   doing   nothing,   not   working.   The    body    needs    to    be    busy….    The    traveling    life    is    hard.   Many    people    fall    into    drink    and   vices.    I    am    going    slowly”    (Interview,    Mexico,    11/17/10).    For    Melvin,    the    conceptual   bifurcation   of   transit   and   settlement   is   unhealthy,   especially   since   his   journey   to   the   United   States    is    an    indefinite    one.   He    had    already    failed    to    arrive    once,    captured   by   U.S.    border   patrol    at    the    crossing   and   deported   back    to   El    Salvador.   Acknowledging    that    the    journey   might   not   end,   Melvin   had   to   incorporate   the   habits   of   a   settled   life   into   his   travel   to   stay   sane.    He    could    not    pretend    the    journey    was    a    momentary    transition.    The    metaphysical   journey   of   life   and   the   physical   journey   across   terrain   had   become   inexorably   intertwined,    13       complicated   by   the   conditions   of   the   migration   route.   His   journey   is   both   fragmented   and   nested   within   multiple   personal   narratives.   The   fragmented   and   nested   nature   of   these   journeys   reveals   yet   another   layer   in   the   experience   of   the   migration   journey.   Migrants   exploit   narrow   margins   in   situations   where   they    may,    at    first    glance,    seem    powerless.    In    Collyer’s    analysis    of    fragmented    journeys,   being   ‘stranded’   increases   the   vulnerability   of   migrants.   Indeed,   fragmented   journeys   often   involve    more    risk    to    migrants:    for    example,    a    recent    European    study    on    smuggling   networks    from   Ethiopia    to    Libya    reveals    that   migrants    face    greatest    danger,    uncertainty   and    violence    when    they    must    negotiate    their    transfer    between    different    smuggling   networks.54   Nevertheless,    our    analysis    of   matryoshka    journeys    adds    to    this    literature    by   examining,    not    only    fragmentation,    but    also    the    purposeful    surrender    of    agency    as    a   survival    tactic    within    larger    geographical    and    life    trajectories.   When    viewed    within    this   larger   complex   of   goals,   moments   of   immobility   are   not   just   ruptures,   but   also   rungs   on   a   ladder    to    further   movement.   Furthermore,   during    these   moments   of    rupture   –   which   are   experienced   differently   as   refusals,   restarts,   indefinite   suspensions,   voluntary   interruptions   or    forced    terminations    –    migrants    devise    nested    tactics    and    strategies    to    achieve    both   immediate    and    long-­‐‑term    goals.   When   we    understand    journeys    as    both    fragmented    and   matryoshka-­‐‑like,   a   nuanced   view   of   migrant   agency   emerges.       Unpredictable   Journeys,   Predictable   Immobility      The    outcome    of    each    journey    is    uncertain.    While    migrants    understand    that    the   journey    is    risky    and    often    have    an    accurate    idea    of    the    life    and    death    stakes    they    will   encounter    en    route,    they    cannot    accurately    judge    the    probability    of    arrival    or    death.55   Nonetheless,    even   during    a    ‘successful’    journey,   migrants    expect   moments    of    immobility,   and   journeys   fragmented   by   hardship   and   loss   of   control.   Some    of    this    unpredictability    results    from    the    fact    that    travel    conditions    and   vehicles    vary    dramatically    within    journeys,    as    well    as    across    them.    In    a    single    journey,   migrants   en   route   to   the   U.S.   and   Europe   may   travel   by   boat,   freight   train,   bus,   foot,   bicycle,   private   car,   in   secret   compartments   in   cargo   trucks,   and   even   in   ambulances.   Migrants   and   their   smugglers   may   unexpectedly   change   their   manner   of   travel   in   response   to   changes   in   policing    or    criminal    threats.    Migrants    who    travel    with    large    scale    smuggling    operations    14       often    endure    extremely    cramped    conditions    in    ‘safe    houses’,    as    they    wait    for    the    next   segment   of   the   journey.   These   stays   may   last   from   a   few   hours   to   months,   often   in   private   homes.   Changes   in   policing,   criminal   threats,   fluctuations   in   the   organization   of   smuggling   networks   or    even   weather   may    cause   delays.   Migrants   may   be   held    captive    against    their   will,    fed    poorly,    physically    abused,    or    subject    to    unwanted    contract    renegotiations    with   their   smugglers.   Alternatively,   some   migrants   report   good   treatment   and   comfortable   stays   in   hotels.      Benjamin,    a    Congolese    journalist    and    activist,    fled    his    home    in    Goma    fearing   retribution   for   his   work   (Interview,   Cyprus,   4/8/2009).   His    journey   occurred   in   multiple,   fragmented   and   unplanned    stages   prompted   by   barriers    and   opportunities    that    arose,    as   well   as   information   he   obtained   en   route.      The   journey   took   him   through   five   countries   and   would   eventually   end,   at   least   temporarily,   in   Cyprus.   He   first   travelled   to   Uganda,   crossing   the    border    during    market    day,    when    border    controls    are    relaxed    in    order    to    facilitate   economic   flows.   Using   a   bicycle,   he   disguised   himself   as   a   local   villager   with   wares   to   sell.   With    the   help    of    family   members    in   Uganda,    he    travelled   by   plane    to   Kenya    and    then    to   Syria.    Because    he    did    not    have    a    visa,    he    was    detained    upon    arrival    in    Damascus,    but   released    when    he    convinced    officials    he    was    in    Syria    to    establish    business    contacts,   producing    $2,000    as    evidence.    The    Syrian    officials    nevertheless    confiscated    his    passport   and   demanded   he   come   back   within   a   week   with   proof   of   his   return   ticket.   Upon   release,   Benjamin    contacted    smugglers    who    organized    a    bus    northwards    out    of    Damascus    for    a   group    of    40    migrants    made    up    of    men,    women    and    children    from    different    countries.   Benjamin   spoke   to   fellow   passengers   from   Algeria,   Sierra   Leone,   and   Ethiopia.    Once   they   neared   the   Turkish   border,   the   group   started   on   foot.   Benjamin   explained,   “[It   took]   two   nights   walking.   We   have   to   walk   only   during   the   night.   During   the   day,   you   are   in   the   bushes   sleeping.”   Once   they   had   crossed   the   border   into   Turkey,   other   smugglers   met   them   and   packed   them   into   cars.   The   migrants   endured   these   cramped   conditions   as   they    progressed    towards    Adana,    the    nearest    big    city.    A    separate    car    travelled    ahead   warning   of   any   military   checkpoints.   In   these   instances,   the   cars   would   stop   and   wait   until   the   checkpoint   was   cleared.   Once   in   Adana,   Benjamin   and   his   fellow   passengers   bought   bus   tickets   to   Istanbul.       15       Benjamin    wanted    to    apply    for    asylum    in    Istanbul    but    was    informed    by    other   migrants   that   he   needed   to   go   to   Ankara   to   do   so.   Meanwhile,   he   met   Congolese   migrants   who   had   been    forcibly   returned    from   Greece.   He   also   heard    that    it   was   relatively   easy    to   travel    to    Cyprus    from    Turkey.    Thus,    after    two    weeks    in    Istanbul,    he    paid    a    man    from   Burkina    Faso    $150    in    order    to    use    his    passport    and    Turkish    visa.56    Although    he    did    not   resemble   the   man   particularly   well,   Benjamin   explained,   “Because   we   are   Africans   and   the   police,   immigration,   they   see   someone   from   Africa,   so   they   just   [think]   it’s   the   same   person.   Although   the   faces   are   not   the   same!”   Once   Benjamin   arrived   in   northern   Cyprus,   he   was   put   in   a   safe   house   in   Famagusta   with    other   migrants.    Here,    the    smugglers    demanded   more   money    in    order    to    help    them   cross   to   the   southern   side   of   the   island   and   into   the   EU   member   state.   While   they   waited   in   the   safe   house,    two   men   arrived   saying    they   were    the   police   and   asking    for   papers.   They   left   only   after   stealing   everybody’s   money,   including   the   last   $600   Benjamin   carried.   In    the   Americas,    smugglers    also    use    an    extensive   network    of    safe    houses.   Despite   bursts    of    sudden    and    fast    movement    across    long    stretches    of    terrain,    it    took    Joel,    a   shopkeeper    from    rural    El    Salvador,    seventy    days    to    arrive    in    the    United    States.    The   smugglers   kept   taking   him   to   houses   in   Mexico   where   he   would   spend   weeks   at   a   time.   In   one   house,   they   kept   one   hundred   people,   including   men,   women   and   a   few   children,   with   only   one   bathroom.   The    food   was   horrible,   but    the   people   could   not   complain.   Any   noise   would    invite    the   attention   of    the   neighbors,   who   would   call    the   police.   And   no   one   could   leave.   The   smugglers   kept   the   door   locked   with   everyone   inside.   I   paused   Joel   to   ask   him,   “What    if    there’s    a    fire?”    “Then    everyone    burns.”    Joel    continued    to    explain    the    conditions   inside   these   safe   houses.   Women   kept   the   houses,   brought   them   food   and   sometimes   drove   them    for    segments    of    the    journey.    These    women    would    drive    the    migrants    around    and   around   in   circles   to   disorient   them   before   arriving   or   after    leaving   each   house.   That   way,   the   migrants   would   not   be   able   to   tell   authorities   where   they   had   been   held.   He   never   knew   where   he   was.   There   were   people   from   many   different   countries,   and   the   smugglers   would   continually    add   people    to    the    group.    In    another   house,   where   he   was    kept    in   deplorable   conditions   for   many   weeks,   he   was   told   that   the   delay   was   due   increased   military   presence   in   the   area.   One   woman   lost   her   patience   and   escaped.   The   smugglers   opened   the   door   for   something,   and   she   ran   out.   Joel   thought   she   got   away.       16       This   system   of   safe   houses   continued   into   the   United   States,   and   he   waited   in   one   in   Los    Angeles,    locked    inside,    while    his    girlfriend’s    sister    gathered    the    money    to    pay    the   smuggler    for    his    delivery.    She   was    late,    and    they    had    to    pay    extra    charges    for    food    and   accommodation.    The    longer    it    takes    to    come    up    with    the    money,    the    bigger    the    bill.   Sometimes    they    charge    as   much    as    $100   per    day.      I    paused    Joel    again,    “What    happens    if   your   family   doesn’t   pay?”   “Then   you   stay.”   I   asked   for   clarification,   “Forever?”   He   shrugged,   “maybe…   Yes.   It’s   possible,   but   everyone   pays.   The   family   always   pays.”   These   narratives   reveal   how   migrant   journeys   toward   Europe   and   the   United   States   are   rarely    linear,   premeditated   passages.   Rather,    they   are   circuitous,    fragmented   voyages   involving    periods    of    immobility    of    varying    lengths    in    countries    of    ‘transit’.    Migrants   reimagine    their    routes    and    destinations    as    new    barriers,    dangers    or    opportunities    arise.   Unplanned    periods    of    immobility    and    reimagining    are    perhaps    the    only    predictable   experiences   of   the   journey.       Perilous   yet   Necessary   However,    fragmented    trajectories   are   only   one   dimension   of    the   narrative;   people   experience    clandestine    migration    as    nested    moments    of    movement    and    stasis,    in    other   words,    as   Matryroshka    journeys.    They    understand    that    empowerment   may    require    their   acceptance    of    temporary    immobility.    As    they    journey    northwards,    migrants    recall    these   moments   of   physical   immobility   as   perilous   yet   necessary,   and   sometimes   identify   even   the   most    severe    physical    constraints    as    a    strategic    calculation    in    pursuit    of    mobility.    Mario   described   being   hidden   in   the   secret   belly   of   a   cargo   truck,   during   a   short   segment   of   his   journey   from   El   Salvador   to   the   United   States   in   2000   (Interview,   El   Salvador,   3/1/10).   He   demonstrated    his    position    within    the    small    hidden    compartment,    with    his    head    turned   slightly    and    his    body    curled    into    a    ball.    Mario    and    his    travel    companions    were    trapped   inside   until   Puebla,   a   city   in   the   central   zone   of   Mexico.   At   a   checkpoint,   he   heard   migration   agents    asking    “you    carrying    pollos    [directly    translated    chickens,    derogatory    slang    for   smuggled    people]    in    there?”    and    banging    on    the   walls    of    the    vehicle.    The    agents   walked   loudly    over    the    top,    while    everyone    inside    sat    silently.    Mario    could    not    shift    his    weight   without   hitting   the   body   of   another   person.   People   urinated   on   themselves   and   each   other,   but    Mario    says,    “The    guides    were    smart”;    they    gave    him    a    pill    to    prevent    him    from    17       defecating.   The   truck   passed   the   checkpoint.   When   the   smugglers   unloaded   their   cargo,   all   the   people   were   numb.   None   of   them   could   move.   The   smugglers   dragged   them   out,   pulling   on    their    ankles    or    legs,    and   dumped    them   onto    the    ground    like    bags    of    potatoes.    People   would   fall   and   lie   there   immobile   for   a   while,   as   the   blood   returned   to   their   limbs.   It   would   take   thirty   minutes   before   Mario   could   move.      Mario    contrasted    this    terrifying    experience    of    extreme    immobility,    including    the   paralysis    and    betrayal    of    his    own    body,    to    his    time    crossing    the    notoriously    dangerous   Arizona   desert:    “The   desert    felt    fine.    I   am   from   the   campo    [rural   countryside].”   So,   Mario   was   accustomed    to   heat   and   working   outside.   Despite   Mario’s    confidence,    the   desert    is    a   site    of    death:    the    U.S.    Border    Patrol    reported    6,029    deaths    on    the    U.S.-­‐‑Mexico    border   between    1998    and    2013.57    The    total    number    of    deaths    is    likely    to    be   much    higher    than   those    bodies    found    and    reported    by    the    U.S.    Border    Patrol.    Where    many    migrants    find   hardship,   exposure   to   the   elements   and   even   death   in   the   formidable   natural   environment   of    the    U.S.-­‐‑Mexican    borderlands,    Mario    felt    at    home,    moving    forward    through    the    open   expanse   of   wilderness.   Flexing   his   muscles   and   changing   his   posture   to   show   me   during   our   conversation,   he   boasted    that   he   was   built    for    it.    In   some    instances,    the   containment   and   forced   immobility   of   migration   is   more   terrifying   than   any   risk   faced   by   migrants   as   they   progress   across   the   landscape.      In    other    instances,    oppressive    landscapes    exacerbate    physical    immobility.    At    sea,   geographic    markers    recede    into    the    unfamiliar    and    uniform    watery    panorama.    In    this   situation,    migrants    are    trapped,    immobilized    within    boats.    Abu,    a    medical    student    from   Somalia,    described    his    experience    crossing    the    Mediterranean:    “[At    sea,]    there    is   something:   fear.   When   you   see   the   sea   from   all   sides,   and   you   see   the   sky   above   –   blue   and   blue   –   there’s   nothing.    It’s    just   silent.   You   risk   yourself,   your    life,   your   family”   (Interview,   Malta,    5/7/2011).    Many    migrants    who    cross    the    Mediterranean    have    already    suffered   cramped,   difficult   conditions   in   order   to   cross   the   Sahara   Desert.   Their   journey   from   Africa   to   Europe   is   made   up   of   multiple,   nested   journeys   across   different   landscapes.   For   instance,   Aman,   a   young   Eritrean,   described   the   fear   that   took   hold   while   crossing   the   Desert    from   Sudan   to   Libya   (Interview,   Malta,   3/4/2009).   Twenty-­‐‑five   migrants   were   packed   into   a   jeep   in   Khartoum   for   a    journey   that   would   take   15   days.   “In   the   desert,   15   days   [feels    like]   15   years”,    he    recalled.    The    unfamiliar    environment    and    geography    contributes    to    the    fear    18       migrants    feel    as    they    are    confined    in    jeeps    and    land    cruisers    at    the    mercy    of    their   smugglers.   During   these   desert   journeys,   they   withstand   extreme   heat   and   cold   often   with   very   little   food   and   water.   Nevertheless,   at   sea   and   on   land,   migrants   accept   immobility   and   confinement    in    a    boat    or    in    a    Jeep    in    their    attempts    to    access   mobility    and    further    their   journeys.    These   migrants    view    such   decisions   not    as    acts    of    desperation   but    as    strategic   maneuvers   in   the   face   of   limited   choices.   For    some,    the   desert    crossing    is    fatal,    and    their   bodies    act    as    a    reminder    to   others.   Death    in    the    desert    without    proper    burial    is,    perhaps,    the    ultimate    form    of    immobility:   stranded    physically    or    spiritually    along    a    clandestine    route    as    an    anonymous    body.    This   immobility    and    anonymity    touches    even    the    family    members    of    missing    migrants,   rendering   them   incapable   of    ‘moving   on’   psychologically   without   knowledge   of   the   fate   of   their   loved   ones.   Kele,   a   young   Nigerian,   described   his   experience   in   the   Sahara:   When   you’re   in   the   desert,   you   see   people,   the   dead   ones;   you   see   that   skeleton   of   people,   some   female,   some   male.   Even   the   ones   sitting   with   you,   some   end   up   there   because   no   food,   no   water,   you   don’t   know   where   you   go,   you   don’t   know   where   you’re   coming   from   and   the   heavy   sun.   So   if   you’re   not   strong,   you   lose   your   life   (Interview,   Malta,   9/4/2009).   Fear    of    death    permeates    moments    of    physical    immobility,    withstood    in    order    to   facilitate   mobility.    Joel,    the    shopkeeper    from    rural    El    Salvador,    was    one    of    one    hundred   people    loaded    into    a    tanker    truck    that    typically    carried    liquids    (Interviews,    El    Salvador   3/29/10   &   4/11/10).   It   was   hot   and   there   was   no   air.   The   smugglers   closed   the   hatch   to   go   through    migration    inspection    points    in    the    interior    of    Mexico    and    people    began    to   asphyxiate.   The   Mexican   authorities   rescued   them   at   a   roadblock,   but    Joel   was   convinced   that   had   they   continued   undetected,   people   would   have   died.   His   fears   may   have   been   well   grounded.    For    example,    in   what    journalist    Jorge   Ramos    has    called    “the   worst    immigrant   tragedy    in    American    History”,    19    people    suffocated    inside    a    locked    trailer    in    Texas    in   2003.58   Across    the   Atlantic,    the    corpses   of   71    refugees   were    found    in    the   back   of    a   meat   truck    in    Austria    in    late    August    2015    after    they    died    of    asphyxiation.59    Stories    about   fatalities    circulate    widely    in    Central    America,    and    migrants    generally    understand    this   danger   when   they   embark   on   their   journeys.   After   their   rescue,   the   migrants   in   Joel’s   group    19       were   deported,   but   smugglers   generally   guarantee   three   attempts   for   the   initial   payment,   and   knowing   the   dangers   intimately,   Joel   tried   again   with   the   same   guide.    The    next    time,    the    smugglers    hid    Joel    in    the    floorboards    of    cars,    in    a    hidden   compartment   in   a   military   vehicle,   in   plain   view   on   an   airplane,   in   small   groups   in   taxis   and   even   inside   an   ambulance   traveling   with   its    lights   on.   In   Mexicali,   a   Mexican   city   near   the   U.S.    border,    he    entered    another    crowded    hidden    compartment,    similar    to    the    one    he   experienced   on   his   first   attempt   to   cross.   When   he   got   out,   Joel   couldn’t   move.   His   body   was   asleep.   He   had   been   one   of    the   first    loaded   in,   and   he   had   a    fat   woman   on   top   of   him   the   whole   time.   The   smugglers   had   to   drag   him   out   by   the   arms   and   legs,   and   tossed   him   under   a   tree.   He   was   completely   numb.   Helicopters   circled   overhead,   near   the   U.S.-­‐‑Mexico   border.   The    smuggler    warned    him    not    to    move,    but    Joel    was    stricken    with    fear    that    the    police   would   come,   everyone   would   run,   and   he   would   just   be   laying   there   paralyzed.   He   thought   it   must   have   taken   over   an   hour   before   he   could   move   again.   Although   fear   permeates   these   moments    where    migrants    surrender    control    over    their    journeys    and    their    bodies,    they   accept   such   perilous   risks   as   necessary   in   order   to   attain   the   goal   of   mobility. Reclaiming   Control       While    Joel’s    story    illustrates    how    a    loss    of    control    and    containment    may    be   perceived    as    an    inevitable    part    of    the    journey,   migrants   may    also    be    defiant    and    regain   control    in    these    moments    in    surprising    ways.    While    they    may    surrender    control    to    a   smuggler    and    expect    that    smuggler    to    dominate    decision    making,    they    nevertheless   continue   to   develop   tactics   for   dealing   with   smugglers,   travel   companions,   new   situations   and    dangers    en    route.    Indeed,    migrants    continue    to    negotiate    with    each    other,    their   smugglers   and   state   officials   during   their   journeys.   They   may   call   for   help   from   within   the   confines   of   a   hidden   compartment   or   even,   on   occasion,   refuse   to   enter.   Such   resistance   is   not   always   successful,   but   nevertheless,   migrants   rarely   passively   accept   complete   control   by   smugglers,   police,   kidnappers   or   even   the   physical   confines   of   their   containment.       Kevin’s   story,   one   of   many   tales   of   defiance   or   manipulation   of   smugglers,   illustrates   this   form   of   resistance   (Interview,   El   Salvador   2/26/10).   His   mother   had   left   for   the   United   States   when    he   was    only    three,    and    his    grandparents    had    raised    him.    He    loved    them    as   though   they   were   his   parents,   but   he   longed   to   be   reunited   with   his   mother.   In   2005,   two    20       years    after    graduating    high    school,    Kevin    convinced    his   mother    to    pay    the    $6,000    for    a   smuggler.   She   had   hesitated,   knowing   all   too   well   the   suffering   that   would   await   him   during   the   journey.   She   had   been   jailed   in   Mexico,   and   her   friend   had   died   in   the   desert.   His   family   thought    his    crossing    would    be    too    dangerous,    but    Kevin    insisted.    The    morning    of    the   journey    arrived,    and    to    his    surprise,    several    friends    convened    upon    the    smuggler’s   designated   meeting   place:   “It   was   like   leaving   high   school   with   all   my   friends   in   the   street.”   None    of    his    acquaintances    had    discussed    their    plans    to    leave,    and    it    came    as    a    pleasant   surprise   to   know   his   travel   companions   intimately.      In    fact,    this    camaraderie    changed    the    course   of    their    journey   and   may   have    saved   their   lives.   At   a   midpoint   in   the   journey   across   Mexico,   they   had   been   instructed   to   enter   a   hidden    compartment    in    a    transport    vehicle.    The    ventilation    in    the    compartment    did    not   look    sufficient    to    support    the   entire   group,    and   Kevin    felt    immediately   wary   of    the    small   space.   When   one   migrant   refused   to   enter,   they   all   did.   Normally,   migrants   feel   both   peer   pressure   and   fear   of   abandonment   when   confronted   with   this   choice.    If   only   one   migrant   refuses    to    enter,    he    or    she   may   be    left    behind   without    any    resources,    in    great    danger    of   police    apprehension    and/or    criminal    predation.    In    this    moment,    however,    the    smuggler   could   not   leave   an   entire   shipment   of   people   behind,   and   he   found   a   walking   route   to   the   destination    instead.    The    migrants    had    successfully    demanded    their    mobility    without   containment,    rejecting    the    dramatic    physical    immobilization    that    accompanies    transport   within    hidden    compartments.    This    agency    occurred    within    a    larger    context    of   disempowerment   vis-­‐‑à-­‐‑vis   the   smuggler,   who   still   exercised   control   of   the   group.   These    expressions    of    migrant    agency    are    echoed    across    the    Atlantic.    In    the   Mediterranean   Sea,   migrants   immobilized   in   often-­‐‑unseaworthy   boats   negotiate   with   coast   guard    officials    of    southern   European    countries.    For    instance,   many   migrants    report    that,   when   the   Armed   Forces   of   Malta   (AFM)   intercept   their   boats   at   sea,   officials   exert   pressure   on   them   to   continue   to   Italy,   either   through   delays   in   rescue,   threats   of   the   long   detention   period    and    other    difficulties    they    will    face    in    Malta,    or    offers    of    food    and    petrol    to   incentivise    onward    mobility.    Despite    the    clear    power    discrepancies,    migrants    leverage   their   knowledge   of   international   laws   that   require   rescue   at   sea,   of   national   flags   that   may   identify   a   rescue   vessel’s   flag   state,   and   of   languages   that   identify   officials’   nationalities.       21       Ibraahin,   a   young   Somali   refugee,   described   the   negotiation   that   took   place   when   an   AFM   vessel   intercepted   their   boat,   which   had   been   adrift   in   the   Mediterranean   for   days   and   was    taking    on    water    (Interview,    Malta,    13/4/2011).    Ibraahin    implored    the    officials    to   rescue    them.    An    official    responded    that    they    would    fix    their    engine    and    provide    some   petrol   so   they   could   proceed   to   Italy.   Ibraahin   protested   that   he   and   his   fellow   passengers   did   not   know   where   Italy   was,   but   the   official   reassured   him   that   they   would   help   them   find   their   way.   Unconvinced,   Ibraahin   said   they   could   help   them   by   rescuing   them.   Instead,   the   Maltese    officials    informed    them    that    they    would    give    them    two    hours    to    decide    if    they   wanted   to   go   to   Italy   or   not.   Meanwhile,   a   fellow   passenger   told   Ibraahin   that   he   recognized   the   Maltese    flag    flying   above    the   AFM   vessel.   When    the   AFM   returned,    Ibraahin   declared   that    they    were    headed    to    Malta,    to    which    the    official    responded    sarcastically,    “Are    you   going    to    swim?”    However,    the    officials    eventually    capitulated    and    rescued    the    migrants   from    their    sinking    boat.    Although    not    all    instances    of    negotiations    are    successful,    as    the   number   of   deaths   on   the   borders   of   Europe   and   the   United   States   attest   to,   they   do   indicate   some   room   for   maneuver,   some   ability   to   control   one’s   situation,   even   when   immobilized.   The   experience   of   concealment   and   confinement   reveals   the   matryoshka    layers   of   human   agency.          Never-­‐‑ending   Journeys   Journeys    and    forms    of    im/mobility    continue    even    once    migrants    have    arrived    in   Europe    or    the    United    States.    The    expansion    of    immigration    detention    and    deportation   regimes   on   both    continents   during    the    last   decade    contributes    to    continued    im/mobility.   More    generally,    an    irregular    status    confines    migrants    to    particular    neighborhoods,    jobs,   and   lifestyles.60         Patrick   (Interview,   Malta,   1/9/2009),   a   Sudanese   asylum   seeker,   described   how   he   felt   after   surviving   the   Mediterranean   crossing   only   to   be   immediately   detained   in   Malta:61   “[Detention]   made   me   crazy.       It   [is]    like   a    jail.       I   applied   for   asylum   but   heard   nothing   for   three   or   four   months.   I   kept   having   nightmares   and   knew   that   I   couldn’t   stay   in   detention”.   Indeed,   migrant   detainees   often   describe   their   time   in   detention   as   a   waste   of   time,   during   which    their    sense    of    time    decelerates    as    they    wait    for    release    with    very    little    to    do.   Imminent   and   uncertain   deportation   contributes   to   this   sense   of    ‘sticky   time’   and   unease.    22       This    ‘sticky    time’   may    be    ruptured   without    warning    by    ‘frenzied    time’    when    a    series    of   events    happens    quickly    and    accelerates    one’s    temporal    sense.    Deportations,    dawn    raids,   and    ‘fast   track   asylum   processes’    indicate   this    interplay   between   frenzied   and   sticky   time   (Interviews,   Malta   and   Cyprus,   2008-­‐‑2010).62   In   the   United   States,   the   tightening   nexus   of   criminal   and   immigration   law   has   fast   tracked   removals   of   migrants   suspected   of   criminal   activity.   As   explained   by   Stumpf,   “Crimmigration   law   wastes   one   of   the   law’s   most   valuable   tools:   time.   It   eschews   the   temporal   gauges   that   criminal   law   and   immigration   law   rely   on   to   evaluate   who   should   be   included   or   expelled   from   society.”63         Collaboration   between   police   and    immigrant   enforcement   has   been   widespread    in   the    United    States.    As    a    result,    migrants    experience    socio-­‐‑economic    and    geographic   immobility   after   their   arrival.   They   cannot   move   freely   within   U.S.   communities   or   across   the   country,    for    fear   of   apprehension.   Without   papers,    they    feel   socially    isolated   and    lack   economic   opportunity.   This   immobility   within   their   destination   may   be   interrupted   by   the   forced   mobility   of   deportation   and   return.   Ultimately,   migrants   may    feel    trapped    in    their   country    of    origin,    with    a    sense    of    immobility    thrown    into    particularly    sharp    relief    by    a   failed   migration   attempt.   For   example,   when   Walter   graduated   high   school,   his    father   sold   his   car   and   some   land    to    pay    a    smuggler    $5,000    for    the    journey    from    El    Salvador    to    the    United    States   (Interview,   El   Salvador,   4/17/10).64   However,   life   in   the   United   States   did   not   resemble   the   experience    he    had    imagined.    As    a    stranger    to    the    place,   without    a    network    of    friends    or   knowledge    of    the    locale,    there    was    nothing    to    do    but    work.    Nevertheless,    Walter    had   trouble   keeping    jobs.   With    idle   hours,   Walter   ultimately    fell    into   trouble   with   the    law.   He   was   arrested   and   sent   to   prison   in   Pennsylvania   and   then   to   an   immigrant   detention   facility   in   Texas,   where    they    treated   him    “like    an    animal.”   A    diabetic    friend   died    in    immigration   custody   while    they   awaited   deportation,   and   Walter   blames    the   migration   authorities    for   not   providing   access   to   medical   care   despite   the   migrant’s   continued   requests.   He   claimed   that   no   one   had   access   to   a   doctor   or   a   lawyer.   Walter   also   said   that   they   threatened   him   with   ‘the   hole’,   and   deprivation   of   food,   water   and   air,   if   he   refused   to   sign   his   deportation   papers.   He   signed.      Walter   was   so   angry   in   detention   that   he   had   sworn   he   would   kill   the   first   American   he   met    in   his   own   country:    “Americans   come   to   my   country   as    they   please   and   enjoy   the    23       beaches.   And    they    treat   me    like    this.”   At    this   point    in    the    interview,   Walter    looked   away   from   me   (an   American)   for   a   moment,   and   then   put   himself   in   the   physical   position   that   the   authorities    kept    him    for    transport    on    the    airplane,    cuffed    and    curled    under    chains   connecting   his   hands,    stomach   and    feet:    “like    I   had   killed    twenty   people...like   an   animal.”   The   marshals   on   the   airplane   were   even   worse.   They   threw   his   food   at   him,   and   chained   in   this   manner,   he   could   not   eat   his   baloney   sandwich.   The   migrants   struggled   to   reach   their   food    and    drink    their   water    through    a    straw.      The   marshals    called    him   names:    “They    pry   open    your   mouth    and    poke    their    fingers    in    your    ears    to   make    sure    you’re    not    carrying   anything.”      Walter   hypothesized    that    it   was   a   strategy    to    traumatize   people   so    they   don’t   come   back.   “I   really   was   going   to   kill   an   American   [after   that   experience]....”   Walter   had   felt   stuck    in    the    United    States,    unable    to    make    friends    or    find    fulfilling    employment    as    an   immigrant,    then    caged    like    an    animal    in    prison    and    during    the    deportation    process,    and   now   he   felt   trapped   again   in   El   Salvador   after   a   humiliating   return. For    others,    the    matryoskha    journey    continues    in    the    form    of    further    (forced)   mobility.   Patrick,   the   young   Sudanese   man,   escaped   from   the   oppressive   Maltese   detention   center    and    soon    found    a    smuggler    to    take    him    to    Italy    (Interview,   Malta,    1/9/2009).    In   Italy,    he    was    apprehended    and    returned    to    Malta,    where    he    was    once    again    put    in   detention.   After   a   month,   he   received   temporary   humanitarian   status   and   was   released.   He   worked    in    order    to    make    money    to    buy    a    ticket    to    Switzerland.    From    Switzerland,    he   journeyed   into   France,   and   in   Calais   squeezed   into   a   lorry   with   other   migrants   to   cross   the   Channel.    He    recalls    the    fear    that    permeated    the    long    five    hours    he    spent    hidden    in    the   cramped    space.    Upon    arrival    in    England,    he    was    apprehended    again    and    eventually   returned    to   Malta    under    the    Dublin    Regulation   when    his    fingerprints   were    found    in    the   Eurodac   database.   Despite   these   many   attempts,   he   was   still   determined,   “I   really   wanted   to   do   something   for   myself   and   my   future   but   there’s   no   work   here,   no   school,   no   college.   If   I   stay   in   this   country,   I’m   going   to   lose   myself.”   As   they   confront   the   possibility   (and   reality)   of   multiple   deportations,   migrants   describe   a   perpetual   sense   of   immobility   and   an   ongoing   struggle   for   mobility.    False   Rescues       24       The    global,    regional,    and    national    structures    through    which   migrants    travel    limit   their    choices,   but   do   not   eliminate    them;   migrants   may   understand    the   dangers    involved   and    nevertheless    choose    to    endure    dangerous    crossings.    States    point    to    these    extreme   measures    taken    by   migrants    hiding    in    lorries    or    ship    holds    as    justification    for   migration   controls,   depicting    interdictions   as   humanitarian   missions.   The   discursive   construction   of   rescue   and   migrant   vulnerability   justifies   interdiction   and   policing   practices,   which   in   turn   produce   further   moments   of   forced   immobility   for   migrants.   As    such,    clandestine    journeys    have    not    only    been    securitized    as    a    threat    to   communities,   but   have   simultaneously   been   depoliticized   and   naturalized   as   humanitarian   disasters.65   Both   of   these   interpretations   justify   increased   migration   controls.   For   example,   in   early   October   2013,   over   400   migrants   lost   their   lives   only   kilometers   from   Italian   and   Maltese    shores.    Italian,    Maltese    and    European    officials    declared    the    incident    a    ‘tragedy’,   ‘accident’,   and   ‘succession   of   true   slaughter   of   innocents’,   with   little   acknowledgement   that   state    policies    cause    migrant    deaths    at    sea.    Indeed,    in    the    humanitarian    narrative,    it    is   smugglers    who    are    depicted    as    reckless    killers    and    unscrupulous    criminals,    while   migration   controls   become   moral   measures   taken   for   the   common   good   of   saving   lives    in   response   to   migration   ‘crises’.66   The    dual,    contradictory    nature    of    simultaneously    rendering    clandestine   migration   routes    as    a    security    threat    and    humanitarian    problem    was    made    plain    in    the    Italian   response   to   the   migrant   deaths   in   October   2013:   the   government   provided   a   state   funeral   for    the    drowned    and    conferred    on    them    posthumous    Italian    citizenship,    while   simultaneously    branding    the    survivors    as    ‘illegal’,    fining    them    €5,000,    and    incarcerating   them    in    detention    centers    housing    four    times    their    normal    capacity.67    Italian    Prime   Minister,    Enrico    Letta,    subsequently    announced    the    start    of    Mare    Nostrum,    a    ‘military-­‐‑humanitarian    mission’    in    the    Mediterranean    involving    the    use    of    amphibious    ships,   unmanned   drones   and   long-­‐‑range   helicopters   with   infrared   equipment.68   Similarly,    the    language    of    rescue    justifies    the    militarization    of    migration    routes   across    Mexico.    Since    2010,    the    word    ‘rescue’    has    become    commonplace    in    official    and   newspaper    reports    of    INM    activities.    Joel’s    story    makes    clear    that    rescues    do    happen.   Nevertheless,    human    rights    activists    are    skeptical    of    many    rescue    reports,    arguing    that   such    ‘rescues’    are   usually    interdictions   and   deportations    (Field   notes   1/11/11).   As   Sonja    25       Wolf    adroitly    observes,    the    number    of    humanitarian    visas    to    which    rescued    trafficking   victims   would   be   legally   entitled   has   not   kept   pace   with   the   number   of   so-­‐‑called   ‘rescues’.69   The    Mexican    state    deports    ‘rescued’    migrants,    like    Joel,    in    spite    of    the    humanitarian   narrative   that   portrays   them   as   victims   of   crime.   Although    Mexican    law    restricts    the    military    from    playing    a    role    in    immigration   enforcement,    in    practice    and    often    under    the    guise    of    drug    interdiction,    the    military   collaborates    with    police    and    migration    agents.    The    language    of    rescue    provides    an   additional    rationale    for    military    intervention    along    migratory    routes.    Human    rights   activists    are    not    the    only    critics    of    these    so-­‐‑called    rescues.    For    example,    the   Guatemalan   Foreign   Ministry   argued   that   the   military   did   not,    in    fact,   rescue   44   Guatemalan   migrants   from    traffickers    in    Tamaulipas    in    February    2011,    but    instead    simply    intercepted    and   deported    migrants    who    had    been    traveling    voluntarily    with    their    smugglers.70    Indeed,   when    U.S.    border    patrol    apprehensions    of    Central    American    children    increased   dramatically    in    the   summer   of   2014,   President   Barack   Obama   announced   his   concern    for   “an   actual   humanitarian   crisis   on   the   border”.71   A   swift   and   dramatic   crackdown   on   human   smuggling    operations    based    in    Central    America    and    increased    raids    on    the    migration   routes   through   Mexico   followed   on   the   heels   of   this   announcement.72   Humanitarian   crisis   justified   the   implementation   of   “aggressive   deterrence”   to   dissuade   migrants   from   making   the   journey.73   The    humanitarian    interpretation    hinges    on    images    of    immobilized    migrants    in   containers   and   boats   taking   physical   risks   too   large   to   comprehend.   Here,   migrants   become   complete    victims    and    their    mode    of    travel    becomes    “entangled    in    the    politics    of   migration”.74    In    the   US    context,   Michael   Andreas   argues    that    the   US   Customs   and   Border   Protection   “excessively   documents   acts   of   failed   migration…   [and]   has   a   particular   interest   in    exposing    these    migrant    bodies,    unbelievably    concealed    in    speaker    boxes,    glove   compartments   or    seats,    and   presents    them   as    vulnerable    individuals,    hiding    in    trunks   or   under   hoods,   encapsulated   by   dashboards   or   even   sewn   into   seats.”75      As   our   ethnographic   data    reveals,    migrants    who    are    ‘rescued’    are    not    saved    from    their    physical    or    socio-­‐‑economic    im/mobility,    but    rather    face    detention,    deportation,    and    economic    and    social   marginalization.          26       Conclusion   The   journey   is   often   a   solution   to   socio-­‐‑economic   and   physical   immobility   suffered   in    countries    of    origin.    Migrants    express    frustration    with    their    inability    to    raise    their   families’   standard   of   living   and   safety   without   international   migration.   However,   to   become   upwardly   socially   mobile   or   geographically   mobile,   migrants   must   sometimes    immobilize   themselves,    waiting    patiently    or    confining    themselves    within    safe    houses,    secret   compartments,    boats    or    other    dangerous    spaces.    These    moments    within    journeys   represent   both   an   expression   of   individual   agency   and   a   surrender   of   that   agency.   ‘Agency’   is   an   intangible   concept   of   endless   philosophical   debate.   Nevertheless,   the   corporeal   scenes   described    in    migrant    narratives    reveal    the    multiple    layers    of    structural    constraint    and   individual    room    for    maneuver.    Such    narratives    give    a    sense    of    how    agency    can    be   embodied    in    contradictory    ways,    leading    migrants    neither    to    emancipation    nor   enslavement   to   the   borders   imposed   by   states. Similarly,   a   material   culture   of   migration   also   renders   the   nested   nature   of   journeys   visible.   Along   the   route,   a   growing   number   of   places,   social   and   material   artifacts   testify   to   immobility    as    inherent    to    movement.76    We    find    spaces    for    stopping,    waiting    and   containment   that   constitute   a   landscape   of   im/mobility.   Across   Mexico,   the   last   decade   has   witnessed   a   dramatic   proliferation   of   detention   facilities   that   contain   migrants,   smugglers’   safe    houses   where    people   wait    to   make    the    next    segment    of    their    journey,    and    Catholic   relief   shelters   where   people   stop,   wait   for   remittances   to   continue   their   journey   or   receive   other   assistance.77   The   material   artifacts   of   moments   of   immobility   accumulate   along   paths   through    the    desert    that    separates/joins    the    United    States    and   Mexico.78    On    the    edges    of   Europe,    in    the   silent   spaces   of   desert   and   sea,   activists   have   also    tried    to   create    traces   of   migrant    journeys    through    initiatives    such    as    the    Archive    of    Migrant    Memories,   Boats4People    and    the    construction    of    the    iconic    ‘Door    to    Europe’    in    Lampedusa,    a   monument    dedicated    to    migrants    who    lose    their    lives    in    the    Mediterranean    Sea.    In    the   Americas   and    the   Mediterranean   basin,    these   physical    remains   make   visible   and    tangible   the   moments   of   immobility   experienced   during   mobility.79       Indeed,    the    edges    of    both    the   United    States    and   Europe    are   now    sites    of    death    as   well   as   crossing.   The   International   Organization    for   Migration   estimates   that   over   22,400   people    have    died    in    the    Mediterranean    since    2000    while    trying    to    enter    the    European    27       Union.80   As   many   as   20,000   Central   Americans   may   be   kidnapped   in   passage   across   Mexico   each   year,81   and   criminal   gangs   murder   an   unknown   number   of   Central   American   migrants   before   they   ever   reach   the   dangerous   desert   passage   at   the   U.S.   border.   Even   those   who   are   successful   in   their   physical   journey   to   Europe   or   the   United   States   often   do   not   escape   the   socio-­‐‑economic   immobility   that   may   initially   prompt   their   migration.   Others   do   not   escape   the   mobility   of   migration:   they   are   (repeatedly)   deported   to   countries   of   transit   and   origin,   and   (repeatedly)   attempt   to   return.82          Our    analysis    of    the    fragmented    and    nested    reality    of    this    life    and    death    struggle   contributes    to    a    growing    literature    that    troubles    conventional    dichotomies    within   migration   studies.83   When   the   ‘rite   of   passage’84   becomes   a   quasi-­‐‑permanent   life-­‐‑style,   the   boundary   between    transit    and    settlement    is    elusive.   The    interplay   between   mobility    and   immobility    blurs    the    distinction    between    voluntary    and    forced    migration.    The    official   rhetoric    of    rescue    obscures    the    fragmented,    matryoshka    journeys    of    the    state’s    own   creation.      NOTES    1 We refer to both labor immigrants and refugees as ‘migrants’. 2 E. Zilberg, Space of Detention: The Making of A Transnational Street Gang Crisis Between Los Angeles and San Salvador (Durham: Duke University Press 2011) p.3. 3 E. Balibar, ‘The Borders of Europe’ in P. Cheah and B. Robbins (eds.), Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling beyond the Nation (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press 1988) pp.216-232; A. Mountz, Seeking Asylum: Human Smuggling and Bureaucracy at the Border (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press 2010); W. Walters, ‘Border/Control’, European Journal of Social Theory 9/2 (2006) pp.187-203. 4 M. Collyer, ’Stranded Migrants and the Fragmented Journey’, Journal of Refugee Studies 23/3 (Aug 2010) pp.273–293; J. O’Connell Davidson, ‘Troubling freedom: Migration, Debt and Modern Slavery’, Migration Studies 1/2 (Feb. 2013) pp.176-195; F. Düvell, ‘Transit Migration: A Blurred and Politicised Concept’, Population, Space and Place 18/4 (July-Aug. 2012) pp.407– 481; S. Hess, ‘De-Naturalising Transit Migration. Theory and Methods of an Ethnographic Regime Analysis’, Population, Space and Place 18/4 (July-Aug. 2012) pp.428–440. 5 N. Brigden, Uncertain Odysseys: Migrant Journeys and Transnational Routes, PhD Dissertation, (Cornell University 2013); J. Carling, ‘Migration Control and Migrant Fatalities at the Spanish-African Borders’, International Migration Review 41/2 (June 2007) pp.316–343; Collyer (note 4); W. Vogt, ‘Crossing Mexico: Structural Violence and the Commodification of Undocumented Central American Migrants’, American Ethnologist 40/4 (2013) pp.764-780. 6 We use William Sewell’s broad definition of agency as having the capacity to exert ‘some degree of control over the social relations in which one is enmeshed, which in turn implies the 28       ability to transform those social relations to some degree’. W. H. Sewell Jr., ‘A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and Transformation’, American Journal of Sociology 98/1 (1992) pp.1-29. 7 D. Conlon, ‘Waiting: Feminist Perspectives on the Spacings/timings of Migrant (im)mobility’, Gender, Place & Culture, 18/3 (2011) p.355. 8 E. Guild, C. Costello, M. Garlick, V. Morena Lax, and S. Carrera, ‘Enhancing the Common European Asylum System and Alternatives to Dublin’, Study for the European Parliament, LIBE Committee, July 2015. 9 U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security, ‘Southwest Border Unaccompanied Alien Children (FY 2014),’ available at <http://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/southwest-border-unaccompanied-children-2014> accessed 19 Oct 2015. 10 UNHCR, ‘Children on the Run: Unaccompanied Children Leaving Central America and Mexico and the Need for International Protection,’ (2014) available at <http://www.unhcrwashington.org/sites/default/files/UAC_UNHCR_Children%20on%20the%2 0Run_Full%20Report.pdf> accessed 19 Oct 2015. 11 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, ‘Written testimony of USCIS Deputy Director Lori Scialabba, ICE Deputy Director Daniel Ragsdale and CBP Office of Border Patrol Chief Michael Fisher for a House Committee on the Judicial hearing titled “Asylum Abuse: Is it Overwhelming our Borders?” (2013) available at <http://www.dhs.gov/news/2013/12/12/written-testimony- uscis-ice-and-cbp-house-committee-judiciary-hearing-titled-“>asylum accessed 19 Oct 2015. 12 U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security, ‘Southwest Border Unaccompanied Alien Children (FY 2015),’ available at <http://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/southwest-border-unaccompanied-children> accessed 19 Oct 2015. 13 P. Andreas, ‘Redrawing the Line: Borders and Security in the Twenty-first Century’, International Security 28/2 (2003) pp.78-111; A. Mountz, Seeking Asylum: Human Smuggling and Bureaucracy at the Border (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press 2010); M. B. Salter, ‘Passports, Mobility, and Security: How Smart Can the Border Be?’, International Studies Perspectives 5/1 (Feb. 2004) pp.71–91. 14 A. Mountz, ‘Specters at the Port of Entry: Understanding State Mobilities through an Ontology of Exclusion’, Mobilities 6/3 (2011) pp.317–34; cf. M. Sheller & J. Urry, ‘The New Mobilities Paradigm’, Environment and Planning A 38/2 (2006) pp.207–26. 15 P. Andreas, Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexico Divide (Ithaca: Cornell University Press 2000). 16 Ibid; A. Chebel D’Appollonia, Frontiers of Fear: Immigration and Insecurity in the United States and Europe (Ithaca: Cornell University Press 2012). 17 O. Ruiz, ‘La Inmigración Indocumentada Como Metáfora de Riesgo en la Globalización’, Estudios Sociológicos 23/2 (2005) p.613. 18 J. McC Heyman, ‘Constructing a Virtual Wall: Race and Citizenship in U.S.-Mexico Border Policing’, Journal of the Southwest 50/3 (Autumn 2008) p.310; J. P. Stumpf, ‘Doing Time: Crimmigration Law and the Perils of Haste’, UCLA Law Review 58/1705 (July 2011) pp.2011- 2025. 19 J. X. Inda, ‘Subject to deportation: IRCA, ‘criminal aliens, and the policing of immigration’ Migration Studies 1/3 (Nov 2013) pp.292-310. 29       20 M. C. García, Seeking Refuge: Central American Migration to Mexico, the United States and Canada (Berkeley: University of California Press 2006). 21 A. Delano, ‘From Shared Responsibility to a Migration Agreement? The Limits for Cooperation in the Mexico-United States Case 2000-2008’, International Migration 50/1 (Feb. 2012) pp.e41-e50. 22 A. Kimball, The Transit State: A Comparative Analysis of Mexican and Moroccan Immigration Policies, Center for Comparative Immigration Studies, UCSD Working Paper 150, 2007, p.78. 23 R. R. Casillas, Una Vida Discreta, Fugaz y Anónima: Los Centroamericanos Transmigrantes en México (México DF: Comisión Nacional de los Derechos Humanos 2007). 24 Ibid; C. Ogren, ‘Migration and Human Rights on the Mexico-Guatemala Border’, International Migration 45/4 (Oct. 2007) p.219. 25 Ogren (note 24) p.211. 26 Ibid, p.218. 27 R. R. Casillas, ‘Las Rutas de los Centroamericanos por Mexico, un Ejercicio de Caracterizacion, Actores Principales y Complejidades’, Revista Migracion y Desarrollo 10 (2008) p.146. 28 Ibid. 29 M. Meyer, ‘A Dangerous Journey through Mexico: Human Rights Violations Against Migrants in Transit’, Washington Office on Latin America (2010), available at <http://www.seguridadcondemocracia.org/administrador_de_carpetas/biblioteca_virtual/pdf/a_d angerous_journey_through_mexico_wola.pdf>, accessed 11 April 2014, p.5; S. Wolf, ‘Mexico’s Conflicting Migration Policy Goals: National Security and Human Rights’ Sustainable Security (11 April 2014), available at <http://sustainablesecurity.org/2014/04/11/mexicos-conflicting- migration-policy-goals/>, accessed 11 April 2014. 30 A. Isaacson and M. Meyer, ‘Mexico’s Other Border: Security, Migration and the Humanitarian Crisis at the Line with Central America,’ Washington Office on Latin America (2014), available at: <http://www.wola.org/files/mxgt/report/ >, accessed 19 Oct 2015. 31 ‘Estas son las principales acciones de la Programa Frontera Sur para proteger a los migrants,’ AnimalPolitico (2014), available online at < http://www.animalpolitico.com/2014/08/estas-son- las-principales-acciones-del-programa-frontera-sur-para-proteger-migrantes/>, accessed 19 Oct 2015. 32 R. Dominguez Villegas and V. Rieteg, ‘Migrants Deported from the United States and Mexico to the Northern Triangle: A Statistical and Socioeconomic Profile’ Regional Migration Study Group, Migration Policy Institute (2015); M. Lohmuller, ‘The Implications of Mexico’s Rising Deportations,’ InsightCrime (2015), available at <http://www.insightcrime.org/news- briefs/implications-mexico-rising-deportations>, accessed 19 Oct 1015. 33 Ibid; S. Nazario, ‘The Refugees at Our Door,’ Opinion Section, New York Times (2015), available at <http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/11/opinion/sunday/the-refugees-at-our- door.html?_r=1>, accessed 19 Oct 2015. 34 Wolf, ‘Mexico’s Conflicting Migration Policy Goals’ (note 29). 35 Ibid; INM, ‘El Fenómeno Migratorio Debe Verse Desde el Ambito de la Seguridad Nacional: Vargas Fosado’, Boletín NM 001/13 (2013), available at <http://www.inm.gob.mx/index.php/page/Boletin_0113>, accessed 12 April 2014. 30       36 S. Wolf, ‘¿Rescates de migrantes o intensificación del control migratorio?’ Animal Politico 14 (April 2014), available at <http://www.animalpolitico.com/blogueros-seguridad- 180/2014/04/14>, accessed 8 May 2014. 37 Mainwaring has discussed this outward process, which she terms distalization, in more detail. C. Mainwaring, ‘Resisting Distalization? Malta and Cyprus’ Influence on EU Migration and Asylum Policies’, Refugee Studies Quarterly 31/4 (2012) pp.38–66. 38 S. Lavenex and R. Kunz, ‘The Migration–Development Nexus in EU External Relations’, Journal of European Integration 30/3 (July 2008) pp.439–457. 39 M. Anderson, ‘The Transformation of Border Controls: A European Precedent’, in P. Andreas and T. Snyder (eds.), The Wall Around the West: State Borders and Immigration Controls in North America and Europe (Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield 2000) pp.15-29. 40 C. Boswell, ‘The “External Dimension” of EU Immigration and Asylum Policy’, International Affairs 79/3, (2003) pp.619–38; S. Lavenex, ‘Shifting Up and Out: The Foreign Policy of European Immigration Control’, West European Politics 29/2 (2006) pp.329–350; M. Samers, ‘Emerging Geopolitics of Illegal Immigration in the European Union, An’, European Journal of Migration and Law 6/1 (2004) pp.27-45. 41 J. Cassarino, ‘Informalising Readmission Agreements in the EU Neighbourhood’, The International Spectator 42/2 (June 2007) pp.179–196. 42 In practice, Morocco refused to readmit third-country nationals, claiming that there was no proof of transit in Morocco. Since 2003, however, third-country nationals were readmitted to Morocco if they had travelled by boat to Spain or the Canary Islands under the captaincy of a Moroccan national (J. Carling, ‘Migration Control and Migrant Fatalities at the Spanish-African Borders’, International Migration Review 41/2 (2007) pp.316–43. 43 Return migration and Development Platform (RDP), ‘Inventory of the agreements linked to readmission’, (Florence, Italy: Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced studies, European Union Institute 2011), available at <http://rsc.eui.eu/RDP/research/analyses/ra/>, accessed 3 May 2014. 44 P. Cuttitta, ‘Readmission in the Relations between Italy and North African Mediterranean Countries’, in J. Cassarino (ed.), Unbalanced Reciprocities: Cooperation on readmission in the Euro-Mediterranean Area (Washington, D.C.: The Middle East Institute 2010) pp.30-52. 45 Associazione per gli Studi Giuridici sull'Immigrazione (ASGI), ‘Gravi dubbi di legittimità dell'accordo tra Governo italiano e il CNT libico’, Comunicato stampa, (24 June 2011), Translated into English by Niels Frenzen available at <http://migrantsatsea.org/2011/06/20/memorandum-of-understanding-between-italy-and-libyan- nct/> 46 Frontex, Frontex Annual Report 2006 (Warsaw, Poland: Frontex 2007); N. Perkowski, ‘A Normative Assessment of the Aims and Practices of the European Border Management Agency Frontex’, Refugee Studies Centre Working Paper 81 (2012). 47 C. Mainwaring, ‘Constructing a Crisis: the Role of Immigration Detention in Malta’, Population, Space and Place 18/6 (Nov-Dec 2012) pp.697-700. 48 The European Court of Human Rights has ruled against the inadequate detention facilities in Malta and Greece, ordering both countries to pay damages to migrants who have been in held in inhumane and degrading conditions. European Court of Human Rights, Aden Ahmed v. Malta, application no. 55352/12 (23 July 2013); European Court of Human Rights, Suso Musa v. Malta, application no. 42337/12 (23 July 2013); European Court of Human Rights, Hirsi Jamaa and Others v. Italy, application no. 27765/09 (23 Feb. 2012); European Court of Human Rights, M.S.S. v. Greece and Belgium, application no. 30696/09 (21 Jan. 2011). 31       49 L. K. Cheliotis, ‘Behind the Veil of Philoxenia: The Politics of Immigration Detention in Greece’, European Journal of Criminology 10/6 (Nov. 2013) pp.725–745. 50 Zilberg (note 2) p.4; cf. A. Innes, ‘The Never Ending Journey? Exclusive Jurisdictions and Migrant Mobility in Europe’, Journal of Contemporary European Studies, forthcoming. 51 Collyer (note 4). 52 M. Griffiths, ‘Out of Time: The Temporal Uncertainties of Refused Asylum Seekers and Immigration Detainees’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 40/12 (2014) pp.1991-2009. 53 All names are pseudonyms. 54 M. Breines, M. Collyer, D. Lutterbeck, C. Mainwaring, D. Mainwaring and P. Monzini, ‘Study on Smuggling of Migrants: Characteristics, Responses and Cooperation with Third Countries Case, Study 2: Ethiopia – Libya – Malta/Italy’ European Commission (2015, forthcoming). 55 N. Brigden, ‘The Limits of Hometown Resources: Salvadoran Migration in Uncertain Times’ Migration Studies (2014) pp.1-19. 56 Turkish visas allow travellers access to the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, from where migrants cross without authorization into the southern part of the island, the Republic of Cyprus. 57 United States Border Patrol. ‘Southwest border sector deaths - FY 1998 through FY 2013’, U.S. Border Patrol Fiscal Year Statistics (2013). 58 J. Ramos, Dying to Cross: The Worst Immigrant Tragedy in American History (New York: Harper Collins 2006). 59 A. Smale, ‘A Day After 71 Migrants Died, 81 Escaped the Back of a Truck in Austria, New York Times, 4 September 2015. 60 N. De Genova, ‘Migrant “Illegality” and Deportability in Everyday Life’, Annual Review of Anthropology 31 (Oct. 2002) pp.419–447; N. Sigona, ‘“I Have Too Much Baggage”: The Impacts of Legal Status on the Social Worlds of Irregular Migrants’, Social Anthropology 20/1 (Feb. 2012) pp.50–65. 61 Malta maintains a mandatory immigration detention policy that confines all migrants arriving without authorization for up to 18 months, the maximum allowed in the European Union. 62 Griffiths (note 52). 63 J. P. Stumpf, ‘Doing Time: Crimmigration Law and the Perils of Haste’, UCLA Law Review 58 (2010) p.1705. 64 Brigden’s interview with Walter fluctuated between Spanish and English. As with all interviews, his preference dictated the language we used at any moment. Most interviews were conducted in Spanish, but several interviews seamlessly mixed the two languages. All interview quotes are translations of handwritten notes, not recordings. 65 M. Pugh, ‘Drowning Not Waving: Boat People and Humanitarianism at Sea’, Journal of Refugee Studies 17/1 (2004) pp.50–69. 66 M. Albahari, 2006. ‘Death and the Moral State: Making Borders and Sovereignty at the Southern Edges of Europe’, CCIS Working Paper 135 (San Diego: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies 2006); Perkowski (note 46). 67 Toby Vogel, ‘Barroso to visit Lampedusa’, European Voice (7 Oct. 2013). 68 I. Traynor, L. Davies and C. Stephen, ‘EU Urged to Tackle Boat People Crisis in Mediterranean’, The Guardian (13 Oct. 2013). 69 Wolf, ‘Mexico’s Conflicting Migration Policy Goals’ (note 29). 70 E. Avila, ’50 migrantes viajaban entre carga de naranjas’ El Universal (10 Feb 2011). 32       71 Office of the Press Secretary, The White House, ‘Remarks by the President on Border Security and Immigration Reform’ (June 30, 2014), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press- office/2014/06/30/remarks-president-border-security-and-immigration-reform last accessed Nov 24, 2014. 72 R. C. Archibald, ‘On Southern Border, Mexico Faces Crisis of its Own’ New York Times (July 19, 2014) available online at: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/20/world/americas/on- southern-border-mexico-faces-crisis-of-its-own.html?_r=0 last accessed Nov 24, 2014; J. Voorhees, ‘What Immigration Crisis?’ Slate (29 Aug 2014) available at: http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/08/child_migrant_crisis_the_num ber_of_unaccompanied_minors_being_arrest_has.html last accessed Nov 24, 2014. 73 Ibid. 74 W. Walters, ‘On the Road with Michel Foucault: Migration, Deportation, and Viapolitics’ in M. Tazzioli, S. Fuggle, and Y. Lanci (eds.), Foucault and the History of Our Present (New York: Palgrave Macmillan forthcoming) p.6. 75 M. Andreas, ‘Copying Camouflage: In/visibility of Illegalized Immigration in Julio Cesar Morales’ Series Undocumented Interventions’, in C. Bischoff, F. Falk and S. Kafehsy (eds.) Images of Illegalized Immigration (New Brunswick; Transaction Publishers 2010) pp.59-60. 76 Brigden (note 5) examines how migrants improvise upon this social and material infrastructure of the route. Such artifacts are not only useful to render im/mobility visible to researchers, but also become informational resources and points of vulnerability for migrants themselves. 77 Casillas, Una Vida Discreta (note 23); Casillas, ‘Las Rutas de los Centroamericanos por Mexico’ (note 27) 78 J. De León, ‘Better to Be Hot than Caught: Excavating the Conflicting Roles of Migrant Material Culture’, American Anthropologist 114/3 (Aug. 2012) pp.477-495. 79 V. Squire, ‘Desert “trash”: Posthumanism, Border Struggles, and Humanitarian Politics’, Political Geography 39/5 (March 2014) pp.11–21. 80 International Organization for Migration (IOM), ‘Fatal Journeys: Tracking Lives Lost during Migration’ (Geneva, Switzerland: IOM, 2014) p.20. 81 Comisión Nacional de los Derechos Humanos (CNDH), Informe Especial sobre los Casos de Secuestro en contra de Migrantes (Mexico City 2011). 82 N. Hiemstra, ‘Geopolitical Reverberations of US Migrant Detention and Deportation: The View from Ecuador’, Geopolitics 17/2 (April 2012) pp.293–311. 83 O’Connell Davidson (note 4) 84 W. Kandal, and D. S. Massey, ‘The Culture of Mexican Migration: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis’, Social Forces 80/3 (March 2002) pp.981-1004. 