ABSTRACT: 
The ideational narrative power of law has now solidified, and continues to solidify, ‘European Union health law’, into an entity with a distinctive legal identity. EU health law was previously seen as either non-existent, or so broad as to be meaningless, or as existing only in relations between EU law and health (the ‘and’ approach), or as consisting of a body of barely or loosely connected policy domains (the ‘patchwork’ approach). The process of bringing EU health law into being is a process of narration. The ways in which EU health law is narrated (and continues to be narrated) involve three main groups of actors: the legislature, courts and the academy. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 EU health law is a body of law that has been developed historically , has its own rationales and principles , as well as formal legal basis , and , importantly in this context , relationships between individuals and public authorities , including bodies such as the institutions within national health systems , and those of the European Union . But these responses に the non-existence or vast and imprecise scope of EU health law 
 remain pertinent today and show that the very object of inquiry in this paper is contested . Are EU health policies represented in , supported by , and implemented through specific and distinct legal arrangements ? In simpler words , does EU 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords: EU law, healthcare Introduction When Jean McHale and I began working on European Union (EU) health law in the mid 1990s, we were counselled by a senior colleague against our choice of research agenda. けEuropean Union health law に デｴWヴW ｷゲﾐげデ ;ﾐ┞がげ he mused. Then he paused. けAIデ┌;ﾉﾉ┞が I HWｪ ┞ﾗ┌ヴ ヮ;ヴSﾗﾐが ｷデげゲ ｴ┌ｪWが ｷゲﾐげデ it?げ These responses に the non-existence or vast and imprecise scope of EU health law に remain pertinent today and show that the very object of inquiry in this paper is contested. Are EU health policies represented in, supported by, and implemented through specific and distinct legal arrangements? In simpler words, does EU health law exist? In 2004 (Hervey and McHale 2004) and as recently as 2010 (Hervey and Vanhercke 2010), the implicit assumption, in my work and that of others (Hatzopoulos 2002; Newdick 2006, 2009; Lamping and Steffen 2009; Mossialos et al 2010; Flear et al 2013, but see concluding chapter thereof), was that EU health law could be understood only ｷﾐ デｴW ｷﾐデWヴa;IW HWデ┘WWﾐ EU ﾉ;┘ ;ﾐS ｴW;ﾉデｴ ふデｴW け;ﾐSげ ﾗa HWヴ┗W┞ ;ﾐS MIH;ﾉW ヲヰヰヴぶが ﾗヴ in a patchwork ﾗa ﾉWｪ;ﾉ ヮヴﾗ┗ｷゲｷﾗﾐゲ けデｴ;デ Iﾗﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉﾉ┞ さHWﾉﾗﾐｪざ デﾗ SｷaaWヴWﾐデ ヮﾗﾉｷI┞ Sﾗﾏ;ｷﾐゲが ヮヴｷﾐIｷヮ;ﾉﾉ┞ デｴﾗゲW ﾗa デｴW ｷﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデが ゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ ;aa;ｷヴゲが ヮ┌HﾉｷI ｴW;ﾉデｴが WﾐデWヴヮヴｷゲWが ;ﾐS WIﾗﾐﾗﾏｷI ヮﾗﾉｷI┞げ ふHWヴ┗W┞ and Vanhercke 2010: 85). But Hervey and McHale (2015) develops a thematic analysis of EU health law. In other words, the assumption underpinning that monograph is that it is now the case that EU * I would like to thank the editors; participants at P;デｷWﾐデゲげ Rｷｪｴデゲ ｷﾐ デｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Uﾐｷﾗﾐ, Department of Political Science, University of Copenhagen, October 2014; and my colleagues Pablo Castillo-Ortiz and Paul James Cardwell. The usual disclaimer applies. 2 health law should be seen as a distinct field of law or at least of legal enquiry (Hervey and McHale, 2015: 6, 8, 30-70). But if it is now tenable that EU health law けexistsげ, how did it come into being? Discovering how EU health law came to be matters for several reasons. The structures and assumptions underpinning a body of law have consequences for the meanings and applications of legal rules. Legal rules determine obligations and entitlements in both private relationships, and, importantly in this context, relationships between individuals and public authorities, including bodies such as the institutions within national health systems, and those of the European Union. Legal rules may be けconstitutionalげ, such as the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU (TFEU), or the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (CFR); legislative, such as the Data Protection ﾗヴ P;デｷWﾐデゲげ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ Directives; or administrative, such as a Commission Decision to grant European marketing authorization to a controversial new medical technology. To understand legal rules as part of a self-referencing entity thought of as けEU health lawげ, with its own specific logics, is to understand them differently from rules that are understood as part of けinternal market lawげ, けhuman rights lawげ, けprivacy lawげ, けinnovation lawげ and so on. Iデ ;ﾉゲﾗ ﾏ;デデWヴゲ ｷa ;ﾐ Wﾐデｷデ┞ ゲ┌Iｴ ;ゲ けEU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘げ HWIﾗﾏWゲ institutionalised into various settings, including policy, legal, and academic institutions, at EU and national levels (De Ruijter, 2016; Vollaard and Martinsen, 2016 in this issue). If we take seriously the idea that the rule of law is a key explanatory factor in European integration (Schiengold 1965; Stein 1981; Weiler 1991; Burley and Mattli 1993; Stone Sweet 2010; Greer and Loblova 2016 in this issue), then the rule of law in EU health policy is no exception. Methodology This paper places narration at the heart of the processes that are understood to have led to the emergence of EU health law. The telling of stories ふﾗヴ けIﾗｪﾐｷデｷ┗W ゲIヴｷヮデゲげ ふH;ﾉﾉ ;ﾐS T;┞ﾉﾗヴが ヱΓΓヶぎ ΓヴΑぶ) that contribute to shared beliefs and understandings of the world, its problems, and how to fix them is a feature of social constructivist political science accounts of EU integration and governance (eg Rosamond, 2000, 2003; Hay and Rosamond 2002; Risse, 2004, 2009; Risse, Jorgensen and Wiener 2001). Narration is also a significant aspect of legal methodologies: both in the academy and in legal practice. The ways in which legal processes (or the threat of legal processes), in particular court proceedings, but also legislative processes, construct social facts into shared understandings, ideas, expectations, and truths ふデｴW けIﾗﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷ┗W power of lawげ (Feeley 2013: vi)) has long been reflected in sociological (eg Friedman 1977; Mnookin and Kornhauser 1979, Galanter 1983; Boyd White 1985; Cotterrell 1992: 102-36; Ewick and Silbey 1998; Gessner and Nelken, 2007), critical (eg de Sousa Santos 1985; Fitzpatrick 1997; Hunter, McGlynn, Rackley 2010) and traditional approaches to law. These include, for instance, those based on the common law inductive processes of deriving legal ヮヴｷﾐIｷヮﾉWゲ aヴﾗﾏ デｴW ゲデﾗヴｷWゲ デﾗﾉS ｷﾐ ﾉｷデｷｪ;デｷﾗﾐが SWゲIヴｷHWS ｷﾐ けｷﾐデヴﾗS┌Iデｷﾗﾐ デﾗ ﾉ;┘げ デW┝デHﾗﾗﾆゲ (such as Holland and Webb, 2013). As de Búrca and Walker (2007) and Cardwell and Hervey (2015) observe, this is also so in the case of EU law. Law here is understood not only as a mandate which guides behaviour, but also as a site for stories which give meaning to that behaviour. The two are interconnected in that, through processes of interpretation, the meaning determines the mandate. HWﾐIW デｴW ヮ;ヮWヴげゲ mixedが けﾉ;┘-in-IﾗﾐデW┝デげが approach. 3 The limits of this approach are the well-known limits of constructivist approaches in general. Constructivist accounts tend to suppress the relevance of agency, particularly the agency of non-state actors, as an explanatory factor. They discount the importance of rationalist interest-based decision-making. They have also been accused (for instance by neo-realists) of being inappropriately optimistic (Cowles 2003). Iﾐ デｴｷゲ ヮ;ヮWヴが ┘ｴｷIｴ ;Sﾗヮデゲ ゲﾗﾏWデｴｷﾐｪ ﾗa ; けﾏｷ┝WSげ ﾏWデｴﾗSﾗlogy, some of these limits are mitigated by including elements of other approaches, in particular, a focus on three key groups of institutional actors, who interact through over-lapping networks of expertise. The strengths of a mixed approach, combining interests, institutions and ideas (Bache, George, Bulmer 2011: 63-4) compensate for the weaknesses of a single approach. Law is above all things a text-based discipline, so in the context of a paper like this, a text-based approach is more appropriate than, for instance, a quantitative approach. For example, counting the numbers of ヴ┌ﾉｷﾐｪゲ ﾗa デｴW CJEUが ﾗヴ EU DｷヴWIデｷ┗Wゲ ;ﾐS ‘Wｪ┌ﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲが けﾗﾐ ; ヮ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;ヴ ゲ┌HﾃWIデげ ┘ｷﾉﾉ ﾐﾗデ ヴW┗W;ﾉ ﾏ┌Iｴ about the ways in which the particular subject is understood に the act of deciding what to count is an act of narration in and of itself. And に of course に law occupies a particularly powerful ideational narrative space. The scope for legal ﾐ;ヴヴ;デｷﾗﾐゲ デﾗ ヴWゲ┌ﾉデ ｷﾐ Iｴ;ﾐｪWゲ デﾗ けヴW;ﾉ ┘ﾗヴﾉSげ ゲｷデ┌;デｷﾗﾐゲが relationships, obligations and entitlements differs from that for other narrations, because, ultimately, law is backed by the sanction of state-based power, for instance, to deprive of property or even liberty. TｴW けデWﾉﾉｷﾐｪげ ﾗa EU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘ ｷﾐデﾗ W┝ｷゲデWﾐIW The core argument of this paper is that EU health law has now been narrated into existence. Its agenda is to explore how this performative, discursive process unfolded and is unfolding. The narration has been, and continues to be, carried out by three key groups of narrators: those contributing to legislative processes but also determining law-making powers ふさデｴW legislatureざ ;ゲ shorthand in this paper), the courts, and the academy.i Another group, legal professionals, are also relevant, although their narrative tools in this area (it would be different in, for instance, commercial transactions law) have been focused on interactions with the legislature and, in particular, the courts, so they are not dealt with separately here. The groups of narrators form a networked community of expertise, with (at least some/sufficient) shared beliefs in both how legal problems are framed ふけデﾗﾉSげぶ, and consequently what legal solutions come to be understood as appropriate. The practical mechanisms of narration used by each of the three groups of narrators differ, contingent upon institutional constraints and dependencies. Their narratives may also differ to some extent. The EU is not a state. It is a body of constrained competence, so its legislature can act only where empowered to do so. Although the politically determined preferences of the EU legislature are undoubtedly relevant to the question of whether EU health law exists, the legal and indeed quasi-constitutional opportunities and constraints under which those preferences are pursued are equally important. It follows that, for the purposes of this paper, the legislature is not understood solely through its formal legal meaning (the Commission, European Parliament and Council). It is also understood as including the governments of the Member States, which give the formal EU 4 legislature powers and competences through the legal basis provisions of the Treaties.ii The governments of the Member States acting through Council also play a role in determining the interpretation ﾗa EU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘が デｴヴﾗ┌ｪｴ デｴWｷヴ ┌ゲW ﾗa けゲﾗaデ ﾉ;┘げ ｷﾐゲデヴ┌ﾏWﾐデゲが ゲ┌Iｴ ;ゲ DWIﾉ;ヴ;デｷﾗﾐゲ ;ﾐS Council Conclusions. The textual changes through time to legal provisions, such as (now) Article 168 TFEU, are thus an important element of the story (Hervey and McHale 2004: 72-81; McKee, Hervey, Gilmore, 2010: 235-240; Hervey and McHale 2015: 42-44, 61). TｴW EU ﾉWｪｷゲﾉ;デ┌ヴWげゲ ┌ﾐSWヴゲデ;ﾐSｷﾐｪゲ ﾗa デｴW ﾏW;ﾐｷﾐｪ and significance of its adopted acts are recounted through the binding text of the acts themselves; the preambles to those acts, which explain their rationale and intentions; and the preparatory documents that form part of the legislative process. For instance, the text of early EU food labelling legislation refers only to the internal market as its rationale and aim. But more recent EU food legislation is understood as promoting public health through reducing obesity, as part of EU health law. TｴW P;デｷWﾐデゲげ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ DｷヴWIデｷ┗W ｷゲ ﾏﾗヴW W┝ヮﾉｷIｷデﾉ┞ W┝ヮヴWゲゲWS ;ゲ a;ﾉﾉｷﾐｪ ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ ;ﾐ Wﾐデｷデ┞ ┘ｴｷIｴ ｷゲ understood as EU health law. The preamble デﾗ デｴW P;デｷWﾐデゲげ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ DｷヴWIデｷ┗W begins with Article 168 TFEU, it refers デﾗ デｴW Cﾗ┌ﾐIｷﾉげゲ ヲヰヰヶ CﾗﾐIﾉ┌ゲｷﾗﾐs on Common values and principles in European Uﾐｷﾗﾐ HW;ﾉデｴ “┞ゲデWﾏゲが ;ﾐS ｷデゲ ゲデ;デWS ;ｷﾏ ｷゲ けデo establish rules for facilitating access to safe and high-quality cross-border healthcare ぐ to ensure patient mobility ぐ and to promote cooperation on ｴW;ﾉデｴI;ヴW HWデ┘WWﾐ MWﾏHWヴ “デ;デWゲげ ふDｷヴWIデｷ┗W ヲヰヱヱっヲヴっEUが ヴWIｷデ;ﾉ ヱヰぶく The ways in which law is understood through national legislative, administrative and judicial implementation or compliance practices is also an important element in articulating EU health law (Obermaier 2009). Examples involving several EU Member States (Denmark, Spain, Netherlands, Belgium, Poland, Czech Republic, Bulgaria, France Germany) of implementation of EU law on migrant ｷﾐ ヮ;デｷWﾐデゲげ ヴｷｪｴデゲ ;ヴW Wﾉ;Hﾗヴ;デWS ｷﾐ Martinsen and Diaz-Asensio 2016 in this issue, Vollaard 2016 in デｴｷゲ ｷゲゲ┌Wが ;ﾐS V;ゲW┗が Vヴ;ﾐｪHFﾆが KギWヮWﾉﾆ; ヲヰヱヶ ｷﾐ デｴｷゲ ｷゲゲ┌Wく The legal ﾏW;ﾐｷﾐｪ ;ﾐS ふヮヴ;IデｷI;ﾉ ﾗヴ ゲ┞ﾏHﾗﾉｷIぶ ゲｷｪﾐｷaｷI;ﾐIW ﾗa Hﾗデｴ デｴW TヴW;デ┞げゲ ﾉWｪ;ﾉ H;ゲｷゲ ヮヴﾗ┗ｷゲｷﾗﾐゲ and EU legislation (Directives, Regulations) is a matter, ultimately, for courts. The principal relevant court is the CJEU, using its interpretative jurisdiction under Article 267 TFEU and its power to determine validity of EU law under Article 263 TFEU. National courts and quasi judicial administrative authorities also play an important story-telling role (Martinsen and Diaz-Asensio 2016 in this issue), including in relationships of constructive cooperation with the CJEU (Vasev, Vragbæk, KギWヮWﾉﾆ; ヲヰヱヶ ｷﾐ デｴｷゲ ｷゲゲ┌Wく A dynamic interaction between the CJEU and the EU legislature, which is in part based on a notion of the relationships between courts and legislatures in democratic societies, founded on the rule of law, forms a key part of the process of narrating EU health law into existence (Vollaard 2015; Vollaard and Martinsen 2016; Martinsen and Diaz-Asensio 2016 in this issue). So, for instance, the texts circulating during the processes of adoption ﾗa デｴW P;デｷWﾐデゲげ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ DｷヴWIデｷ┗Wが W┗Wﾐ HWaﾗヴW ｷデ I;ﾏW ｷﾐデﾗ aﾗヴIW aﾗヴﾏ;ﾉﾉ┞が ヴWゲ┌ﾉデWS ｷﾐ デｴW CJEU けゲWWｷﾐｪげ ﾗヴ けヴW;Sｷﾐｪげ, and then けヴWデWﾉﾉｷﾐｪげ, its jurisprudence on free movement of patients in a different way from the way it recounts デｴ;デ ﾃ┌ヴｷゲヮヴ┌SWﾐIW ｷﾐ けﾗヴSｷﾐ;ヴ┞げ ｷﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ ﾉ;┘ ふH;デ┣ﾗヮﾗ┌ﾉﾗゲ ;ﾐS HWヴ┗W┞が ヲヰヱンぶく In some ways, the academy is the least important narrator of EU health law. It has no formal power to issue legally binding interpretations of law. Where its narratives depart from those of legislature and courts, we might therefore expect processes of narration to be less successful. But in other 5 respects, the academy is the most important interlocutor here. The academy is the discursive and performative site for articulating what is (and is not) a topic or subject for study. Moreover, the way that the academy understands the world is noデ ﾃ┌ゲデ け;I;SWﾏｷIげく Iデ ｴ;ゲ ｷﾏヮﾗヴデ;ﾐデ ヮヴ;IデｷI;ﾉ implications, not only for research funding, for learning and teaching, and for academic appointments. The views of the legal academy have a long history of informing and even constituting the definitive meanings of legal texts に in European contexts, dating back to medieval glosses on Roman law, and more recently where courts rely on academic interpretations of texts. Perhaps concrete material expressions of EU health law in the academy (Chair in EU Health Law; programmes in EU Health Law) would be the most convincing form of evidence for the argument made in this paper. The academy narrates EU health law through its dissemination activities (particularly its publications), and through its interactions with the legislature and the courts. For instance, the work of scholars who understand those aspects of EU law that apply to medical ヴWゲW;ヴIｴ ;ゲ ヮ;ヴデ ﾗa EU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘ ふゲWWが Wｪが FﾉW;ヴ Wデ ;ﾉ ヲヰヱンぶ けヴW-readゲげ legal instruments otherwise thought of as falling within areas of EU law such as internal market law, intellectual property or competition law (the Directive on Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions; the Clinical Trials Directive; the Brüstle and International Stem Cell cases). To summarise. The ideational narrative power of law has now solidified, and continues to solidify, into an entity with a distinctive legal identity, an entity previously seen as either non-existent, or so broad as to be meaningless, ﾗヴ ;ゲ W┝ｷゲデｷﾐｪ ﾗﾐﾉ┞ ｷﾐ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲ HWデ┘WWﾐ EU ﾉ;┘ ;ﾐS ｴW;ﾉデｴ ふデｴW け;ﾐSげ approach), or as consisting of a body of barely or lﾗﾗゲWﾉ┞ IﾗﾐﾐWIデWS ヮﾗﾉｷI┞ Sﾗﾏ;ｷﾐゲ ふデｴW けヮ;デIｴ┘ﾗヴﾆげ approach). The process has been executed (and continues to be executed) by three main groups of actors: the legislature, courts and the academy. What are the constituent features of the processes? How did EU health law come to be? The processes of narration The processes through which EU health law has been (and continues to be) narrated include the following: (a) Articulation of distinctive principles and themes of EU health law (b) Expression of EU health law as structurally coherent (c) Understanding of the body of EU health law as special and distinctive These processes are not entirely separate, but overlapping and mutually reinforcing. (a) Discerning and Articulating Principles and Themes One of the already-noted principles of EU health law に the principle of constrained competence に is common to all areas of EU law. Every area of EU law, no matter how uncontested its existence, reflects the EUげゲ Iﾗﾐゲデヴ;ｷﾐWS IﾗﾏヮWデWﾐIWゲく Iデ aﾗﾉﾉﾗ┘ゲ デｴ;デ デｴW ﾉWｪ;ﾉ ゲデ;デWﾏWﾐデ デｴ;デ けデhe definition of their health policy and the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care and the ;ﾉﾉﾗI;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa デｴW ヴWゲﾗ┌ヴIWゲ ;ゲゲｷｪﾐWS デﾗ デｴWﾏげ (Article 168 TFEU) are a matter for Member States, not the EU, is not evidence that EU health law cannot be understood as a meaningful field of law. 6 Iﾐ ゲヮｷデW ﾗa デｴW EUげゲ Iﾗﾐゲデヴ;ｷﾐWS aﾗヴﾏ;ﾉ IﾗﾏヮWデWﾐIWゲが ﾗ┗Wヴ デｷﾏWが デｴW EU ｷﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐゲ ｴ;┗W ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;デWS common substantive values, which have become regarded as the underpinning principles of EU health law. The values (Article 2 TEU) and aims (Article 1 TEU) of the EU, as expressed in its founding treatiesが ｷﾐIﾉ┌SW けヴWゲヮWIデ aﾗヴ ｴ┌ﾏ;ﾐ Sｷｪﾐｷデ┞げが けWケ┌;ﾉｷデ┞げが けヴWゲヮWIデ aﾗヴ ｴ┌ﾏ;ﾐ ヴｷｪｴデゲげが けﾐﾗﾐ-SｷゲIヴｷﾏｷﾐ;デｷﾗﾐげが けゲﾗﾉｷS;ヴｷデ┞げが けデｴW ┘Wﾉﾉ-HWｷﾐｪ ﾗa ｷデゲ ヮWﾗヮﾉWゲげ ;ﾐS ヴWゲヮWIデ aﾗヴ けゲWヴ┗ｷIWゲ ﾗa ｪWﾐWヴ;ﾉ WIﾗﾐﾗﾏｷI ｷﾐデWヴWゲデげく Aﾉﾉ ﾗa デｴWゲW ｴ;┗W ; direct bearing on health, health systems, and health policy. These values, along with others such as individual (consumer) autonomy and regulatory protection from risk of harm, have also been articulated thematically (Hervey and McHale 2015). Iﾐ ヲヰヰヶが デｴW EUげゲ Cﾗ┌ﾐIｷﾉ ;SﾗヮデWS Conclusions on Common values and principles in European Union Health Systems. The history of the Common values and principles lies in significant opposition to the proposed Directive on services in the internal market, contemporaneous with SWH;デWゲ ﾗﾐ けゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ E┌ヴﾗヮWげ WﾏHﾗSｷWS デｴヴﾗ┌ｪｴ the (failed) Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. The revised Directive explicitly excluded health care, and eventually the EU adopted a separate P;デｷWﾐデゲげ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ Directive. Council has reiterated the Common values and principles in the EUげゲ ｪヴﾗ┘デｴ ゲデヴ;デWｪ┞ Europe 2020. In its 2011 Conclusions: Towards modern, responsible and sustainable health systems, Council calls on Member States and the European Commission to refocus health from being regarded as solely an expenditure, to being regarded as a contributor to economic growth (Kvist 2015). The Common values and principles have been endorsed by both the European Commission (2007) and the European Parliament (2008), although not yet by the CJEU. The 2006 Council Common values and principles ゲデ;デW デｴ;デ け┌ﾐｷ┗Wヴゲ;ﾉｷデ┞が ;IIWゲゲ デﾗ ｪﾗﾗS ケ┌;ﾉｷデ┞ I;ヴWが Wケ┌ｷデ┞ ;ﾐS ゲﾗﾉｷS;ヴｷデ┞げ Iﾗﾐゲデｷデ┌デW ; ゲWデ ﾗa ゲｴ;ヴWS EU ┗;lues that are applied to healthcare systems, and by implication, to health law. Although Council states that different Member States express these values differently in terms of practical reality, the Common values and principles go as far as to ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;デW ; ゲWデ ﾗa ゲｴ;ヴWS けﾗヮWヴ;デｷﾐｪ ヮヴｷﾐIｷヮﾉWゲげが デｴ;デ ;ヴW W┝ヮWIデWS デﾗ HW aﾗ┌ﾐS ;ﾐ┞┘ｴWヴW ｷﾐ デｴW EUく TｴWゲW ゲｴ;ヴWS ヮヴｷﾐIｷヮﾉWゲ ;ヴW けケ┌;ﾉｷデ┞ ﾗa I;ヴWげが けヮ;デｷWﾐデ ゲ;aWデ┞げが けW┗ｷSWﾐIW-based and ethically robust I;ヴWげが けヮ;デｷWﾐデ ｷﾐ┗ﾗﾉ┗WﾏWﾐデげが けヴWSヴWゲゲげが ;ﾐS けヮヴｷ┗;I┞ ;ﾐS IﾗﾐaｷSWﾐデｷ;ﾉｷデ┞げく Cヴ┌Iｷ;ﾉﾉ┞ aﾗヴ the purposes of this paper, Council not only expresses these values and principles as shared among national health care systems, and, implicitly, the law that underpins them, but also calls upon the European Commission to ensure that these principles are followed when proposing health-specific EU legislation. Aゲ ; ﾏW;ゲ┌ヴW ﾗa けゲﾗaデ ﾉ;┘げが デｴW Common values and principles are not binding, but they form a persuasive interpretative source on which the CJEU may draw (Senden 2004), in interpreting and ;ヮヮﾉ┞ｷﾐｪ ﾏW;ゲ┌ヴWゲ ﾗa けｴ;ヴS ﾉ;┘げく Such hard law includeゲ デｴW TFEUげゲ けﾏ;ｷﾐゲデヴW;ﾏｷﾐｪげ ヮヴﾗ┗ｷゲｷﾗﾐゲく TｴW┞ require the EU institutions, when defining and implementing their policies and activities, to take into ;IIﾗ┌ﾐデ けヴWケ┌ｷヴWﾏWﾐデゲ ﾉｷﾐﾆWS デﾗ ぐ ; ｴｷｪｴ ﾉW┗Wﾉ ﾗa ぐ ヮヴﾗデWIデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa ｴ┌ﾏ;ﾐ ｴW;ﾉデｴげ (Article 9 TFEU; Article 168 (1) TFEU. See also Article 35 EU CFR). The TFEU is binding on the EU institutions when they adopt EU Health Law.iii The Common values and principles are an interpretative guide as to the meaning of the mainstreaming duty, at least in the context of EU law pertaining to health systems, and arguably also pertaining to public health. Hence the Common values and principles are a credible expression of the principles and themes of EU health law. 7 The EUげゲ ｴ┌ﾏ;ﾐ ヴｷｪｴデゲ ｷﾐゲデヴ┌ﾏWﾐデゲ also express the principles and themes of EU health law. Originally EU law was devoid of explicit recognition for human rights. They first appeared ;ゲ けｪWﾐWヴ;ﾉ ヮヴｷﾐIｷヮﾉWゲげ ﾗa EU ﾉ;┘く TｴW EU ﾐﾗ┘ ｴ;ゲ ｷデゲ ﾗ┘ﾐ Cｴ;ヴデWヴ ﾗa F┌ﾐS;ﾏWﾐデ;ﾉ ‘ｷｪｴデゲが ┘ｴｷIｴ ｴ;ゲ けデｴW ゲ;ﾏW ﾉWｪ;ﾉ ┗;ﾉ┌W ;ゲ デｴW TヴW;デｷWゲげ (Article 6 (1) TEU). The EU CFR protects human dignity (Article 1), the right to life (Article 2), integrity of the person (Article 3), private life (Article 7), protection of personal data (Article 8), right to marry and found a family (Article 9), freedom of thought, conscience and religion (Article 10) all of which have significance for EU health law (McHale 2010). In addition, the EU CFR provides for the rights of children (Article 24), the elderly (Article 25), and persons with disabilities (Article 26), three groups whose vulnerabilities mean that their rights need special attention in health contexts. TｴW EU CF‘ ゲデ;デWゲ デｴ;デ けW┗Wヴ┞ﾗﾐW ｴ;ゲ デｴW ヴｷｪｴデ ﾗa ;IIWゲゲ to ヮヴW┗Wﾐデｷ┗W ｴW;ﾉデｴ I;ヴW ;ﾐS デｴW ヴｷｪｴデ デﾗ HWﾐWaｷデ aヴﾗﾏ ﾏWSｷI;ﾉ デヴW;デﾏWﾐデげ ｷﾐ ;IIﾗヴS;ﾐIW ┘ｷデｴ ﾐ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ conditions (Article 35). The CJEU, and in particular its Advocates General, has referred to the EU CF‘げゲ ヮヴﾗ┗ｷゲｷﾗﾐゲが ゲ┌Iｴ ;ゲ デｴ;デ ﾗﾐ デｴW ヴｷｪｴデ デﾗ ｴW;ﾉデｴ care, when it interprets EU health law (Hervey and McHale 2015: 160-164; 169-176; 185-189; 202-210). In so doing, the CJEU narrates those principles as expressing the framework within which it understands the relevant litigation に expressing it as something distinct from other, more established, areas of EU law. Some commentators, including me, have expressed significant reservations as to the practical fulfilment of these principles, particularly those of solidarity and equity, but also those of human rights protection, within EU health law (Hervey 2003, McHale 2010). In particular, there is concern about the extent to which the free movement and fair competition provisions of EU internal market law, when they form part of EU health law, can ever support such principles (Hatzopolous 2002; Newdick 2006, 2009; McHale 2010; Hervey 2011). There is also concern over whether the quality of care principle is sufficiently fulfilled where EU health law seeks to support technological innovation (Flear et al 2013, Hervey and McHale 2015)く “ﾗﾏW ﾗa デｴWゲW IﾗﾐIWヴﾐゲ ヴWaﾉWIデ デｴW EUげゲ Iﾗﾐゲデヴ;ｷﾐWS competences in health. However, in the context of this paper, whether these Common values and principles, and the human rights expressed in the EU CFR, are honoured in every specific instance is not the point. What matters is the thematic けデWﾉﾉｷﾐｪげ ﾗa デｴﾗゲW ｷﾐゲデヴ┌ﾏWﾐデゲ ;ゲ ;ﾐ expression of the underlying principles of EU health law. The articulation and acceptance of the principles of EU health law, as comprising human rights protection, quality of care, patient safety, evidence-based and ethically robust care, patient involvement, redress, and privacy and confidentiality, within the context of constrained EU competences, is one process of narration of EU health law. It is an expression of the existence of EU health law, distinct from (although interacting or even overlapping with) other fields of EU law, or national health law, or global health law. (b) Expressing Structural Coherence However one measures its scope (for an inclusive approach see Hervey and McHale 2015), although EU health law is a body of law based on constrained EU competences, it nonetheless represents a sizeable body of legal texts. But mere volume is insufficient as evidence of the existence of EU health law. What is needed is an account that makes sense of that body of legal texts in accordance with some kind of internal and self-referring structural coherence. The articulation of the principles of EU health law (see above) goes some way to expressing such structural coherence. 8 However, as we already noted, the dominant metaphor, historically, for describing EU health law, ;ﾐS WゲヮWIｷ;ﾉﾉ┞ EU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ヮﾗﾉｷI┞が ｴ;ゲ HWWﾐ デｴ;デ ﾗa ; けヮ;デIｴ┘ﾗヴﾆげ ふAゲｴIヴﾗaデ ヲヰヱンき GヴWWヴ ヲヰヱヱき Hervey and Vanhercke 2010; Lamping and Steffen 2009). For instance, some of the earliest EU health legislation and court rulings consist in 1965 rules on marketing authorisation for pharmaceuticals, a 1971 Regulation on the access of mobile workers and their families to health care in the Member State to which they have migrated for work, CJEU decisions from the mid 1970s on the question of whether intellectual property rights could justify restrictions on importation of pharmaceuticals, and 1975 Directives on mutual recognition of dﾗIデﾗヴゲげ ケ┌;ﾉｷaｷI;デｷﾗﾐゲく Ia ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;デWS ｷﾐ デｴ;デ ┘;┞が デｴW implication is that EU health law is nothing more than WﾉWﾏWﾐデゲ ﾗa ﾉ;┘ ;ﾐS ヮﾗﾉｷI┞ デｴ;デ けHWﾉﾗﾐｪげ ｷﾐ different domains, in a way that makes no sense as a coherent story.iv An argument against the existence of EU health l;┘ ｷゲ デｴ;デ デｴW けa;HヴｷIげ ﾗa W;Iｴ ;ゲヮWIデ デｴWヴWﾗa ｷゲ SｷゲデｷﾐIデｷ┗Wが ;ﾐS デｴW WaaWIデ ﾗa putting together the total is of a not-quite-complete and not-terribly-coherent whole: hence the けヮ;デIｴ┘ﾗヴﾆげ ﾏWデ;ヮｴﾗヴく If one articulates the pieces of this けヮ;デIｴ┘ﾗヴﾆげ ｷﾐ デｴW デWヴﾏゲ ﾗa I;デWｪﾗヴｷWゲ ﾗa EU law with a longer pedigree, as in Hervey and McHale 2004, there is little evidence of structural coherence. Multiple areas of EU law are involved. For instance, and non-exhaustively, provisions on the recognition of ｴW;ﾉデｴ I;ヴW ヮヴﾗaWゲゲｷﾗﾐ;ﾉゲげ ケ┌;ﾉｷaｷI;デｷﾗﾐゲが ;ﾐS デｴWｷヴ ;Hｷﾉｷデ┞ デﾗ ヮヴ;IデｷゲW ;Iヴﾗゲゲ HﾗヴSWヴゲ ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ デｴW EUき ﾗﾐ access to health care of mobile workers and their families in another EU Member State; on patients accessing health care services across borders; on restrictions on health care providers setting up and offering their services in another Member State, fall within various areas of EU free movement law. Measures on the marketing and advertising of pharmaceuticals and medical devices fall within EU free movement, consumer protection and innovation law. Perhaps counter-intuitively, legislation on data protection also falls within EU free movement law. Special arrangements for the provision of health care services paid for by the public purse, through for instance granting exclusive licenses, authorisations or other restrictive measures to hospitals, clinics and other health care providers, at least potentially fall within EU competition law. Legislation on working conditions in hospitals falls within EU labour law. Provisions on development, authorisation and marketing of novel health technologies fall within EU innovation and free movement law. International treaty provisions and EU legislation on access to essential medicines across the globe fall within EU external relations law. Measures ensuring safety of food, as a major disease vector, or the regulation of sale, labelling and ;S┗Wヴデｷゲｷﾐｪ ﾗa aﾗﾗSが デﾗH;IIﾗ ;ﾐS ;ﾉIﾗｴﾗﾉが ﾏ;ﾃﾗヴ IﾗﾐデヴｷH┌デﾗヴゲ デﾗ けﾉｷaW-ゲデ┞ﾉWげ SｷゲW;ゲWゲが a;ﾉﾉ ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ EU external trade law, agricultural law, free movement law and consumer protection law. Air or water quality regulation falls within EU environmental law, as does road safety, which also falls within EU transport law. In addition, as already noted, provisions of EU けconstitutionalげ law, on allocation of IﾗﾏヮWデWﾐIWゲが けﾏ;ｷﾐゲデヴW;ﾏｷﾐｪげ S┌デｷWゲが ;ﾐS デｴW ヮﾉ;IW ﾗa ｴ┌ﾏ;ﾐ ヴｷｪｴデゲ ｷﾐ EU ﾉ;┘が are also important, in terms of their implications for how the more detailed legislative provisions are both adopted and interpreted. Each of these different areas of EU law, through which EU health law has been developed historically, has its own trajectory, its own rationales and principles, as well as formal legal basis, and its own communities of expertise, with shared understandings of problems and their (legal) solutions. The pedigree of EU health law, as emerging from these areas and solidifying into a structurally coherent area relatively recently, forms part of the distinctive quality of EU health law, ;ゲ ﾗヮヮﾗゲWS デﾗ ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘ ｷﾐ ;ﾐ┞ ﾗa デｴW EUげゲ MWﾏHWヴ “デ;デWゲが ﾗヴ ｷﾐSWWS ｪﾉﾗH;ﾉ ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘く 9 The key group of actors articulating EU health law as structurally coherent is the academy. Increasing numbers of legal academics interested in the EU and health, and those from other disciplines, have sought to express EU health law through its increasing structural coherence. One way in which the academy has told this story is to see EU health law as a new combination of one or more of these ヴWIﾗｪﾐｷゲWS ;ヴW;ゲく Aゲ デｴW ﾉｷゲデ ;Hﾗ┗W ｷﾐSｷI;デWゲが W┗Wﾐ デｴW けalready ヴWIﾗｪﾐｷゲWSげ ;ヴW;ゲ ﾗa EU ﾉ;┘ Hﾉ┌ヴ ｷﾐデﾗ one another, as is the case for free movement law and consumer protection law. The academy creaデWゲ けEU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘げ ;ゲ ; ﾐW┘ HﾉWﾐSｷﾐｪ ﾗa W┝ｷゲデｷﾐｪ ;ヴW;ゲ ﾗa EU ﾉ;┘く It has けヴW-ヴW;Sげ ゲﾗﾏW W;ヴﾉ┞ EU health law texts, with hindsight, to understand them as part of this new field of legal enquiry, as well as of the pre-W┝ｷゲデｷﾐｪ け;IIWヮデWSげ I;デWｪﾗヴｷWゲ ﾗa EU ﾉ;w. Thus, for instance, the 1984 CJEU ruling of Luisi and Carbone, to the effect that restrictions on currency movement, where the currency was to be used to pay for medical treatment, are prima facie contrary to EU law, or its 1991 Grogan ruling, to the effect that restrictions on abortion advertising are prima facie contrary to EU law, although may be justified, are ﾐﾗ┘ ┌ﾐSWヴゲデﾗﾗS ;ゲ WﾏHﾗS┞ｷﾐｪ デｴW EUげゲ ;ヮヮヴﾗ;Iｴ デﾗ ｷデゲ ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘が デｴヴﾗ┌ｪｴ principles of human rights protection, quality of care, patient safety, evidence-based and ethically robust care, patient involvement, redress, and privacy and confidentiality, all within the context of constrained EU competences (Hervey and McHale 2015: 62-63, 161, 194). At the time the decisions were taken, they were understood within the fields of EU internal market and constitutional law (eg Phelan 1992). Admittedly not every area of health law (either nationally or globally focused) is significantly covered by EU health law. If we take the main areas of health law, as for instance understood by key health law texts from European countries (Westerhäll 1994; Nys 1994, 2012; Kennedy and Grubb 2000; Montgomery 2002; Mason and Laurie 2010; Rynning and Hartlev 2011; Brazier and Cave 2011; Madden 2012; Jackson 2014, Herring 2014; Pattinson 2014), we see some areas where EU law has no, or very little, relevance. These include, for instance, consent to treatment, end of life decision-making, and resource allocation within national health systems. An objection to the argument that I am making in this paper is thus that EU health law is not sufficiently structurally coherent to constitute a distinct legal area, because it does not cover these areas on which the structural coherence of health law rests. But two observations may be made in response. First, in each of the areas of health law where EU law appears to have no relevance, there is some relevance. For sure, the prospects of harmonized EU level legal rules are remote. But the EU level is no longer entirely absent from legal structures. For example, questions of consent to treatment, or of beginning or end of life decision-making (Nys 2001) may fall within the scope of the EU CFR, and are covered by EU law on biomedical research and human organ and tissue regulation. Questions of resource allocation within national health systems are covered by EU law on transparency of pharmaceuticals pricing, as well as indirectly by EU ﾉ;┘ ﾗﾐ aヴWW ﾏﾗ┗WﾏWﾐデ ﾗa ヮ;デｷWﾐデゲく ‘;デｴWヴ デｴ;ﾐ EU ﾉ;┘ HWｷﾐｪ ｷヴヴWﾉW┗;ﾐデが デｴW EUげゲ ﾉWｪ;l order has become one of the areas in which conflicting rights claims, or claims to resources, are adjudicated, even if those processes ｪｷ┗W ゲｷｪﾐｷaｷI;ﾐデ けﾏ;ヴｪｷﾐ ﾗa SｷゲIヴWデｷﾗﾐげ デﾗ ﾐ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ヮヴWaWヴWﾐIWゲく “WIﾗﾐSが ﾏ┌Iｴ of the substantive content of health law is covered by EU health law, and increasingly so. As we suggested in 2004, the pattern or trajectory is for EU law to have relevance in ever more areas of health law. The argument I am making here is that the trajectory has reached a stage of sufficient structural coherence デﾗ W┗ｷSWﾐIW デｴW W┝ｷゲデWﾐIW ﾗa けEU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘げ. 10 (c) Understanding EU Health Law as a Distinctive Body of Law At least until the 2000s and 2010s, EU health law occupied at best an uncertain position vis-à-vis EU internal market law. EU ﾉ;┘げゲ けIﾗﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ;ゲ┞ﾏﾏWデヴ┞げ ふ“Iｴ;ヴヮa ヱΓΓヶぶ に the (contested) idea that social policies are constitutionally subservient to EU internal market law に is at the heart of this uncertainty. The logical consequence of the constitutional asymmetry position, as applied to EU health law, is that freedom of movement and competition are the rule; health protection or health promotion are at best exceptions. “ﾗﾏW デ;ﾆW デｴW ┗ｷW┘ デｴ;デ デｴW EUげゲ ｷﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ ﾉ;┘ ｷゲ デｴW central organising area of law, and that EU health law is not conceptually distinct from internal market law, but rather national health law is subservient to it (Hatzopoulos 2002, 2005; Montgomery 2005, Newdick 2006, 2011; Gekiere Baeten Palm 2010; Davies 2011). But others (Hervey and Vanhercke 2010; Hervey 2011; Hervey 2008; (to some extent) Hancher and Sauter 2012) ゲWW デｴW ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮ ┘ｷデｴ ｷﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ ﾉ;┘ ;ゲ ﾏﾗヴW IﾗﾏヮﾉW┝ デｴ;ﾐ けヴ┌ﾉW-W┝IWヮデｷﾗﾐげが ;ﾐS hence express EU health law as more coherent and distinctive than before the 2000s. EU health law is no longer understood as comprised of a series of unrelated exceptions to free trade rules, but rather as a distinctive legal area, with its own underlying principles and structural coherence. Some of the broader contexts within which the emergence of EU health law as a distinctive body of ﾉ;┘ ｴ;ゲ デ;ﾆWﾐ ヮﾉ;IW ｷﾐIﾉ┌SW デｴW EUげゲ けLｷゲHﾗﾐ ;ｪWﾐS;げ aﾗヴ ｪヴﾗ┘デｴ ;ﾐS SW┗WﾉﾗヮﾏWﾐデ (Copeland and Papadimitriou 2012, de Ruijter 2015)き ; ヴW┗ｷデ;ﾉｷゲ;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa デｴW SｷゲI┌ゲゲｷﾗﾐ ;Hﾗ┌デ けｪﾗ┗Wヴﾐ;ﾐIWげ ふﾐW┘ ;ﾐS old) of the internal market (Hatzopoulos 2012); and the idea of health and other social capital not only as a matter of social rights or welfare, but also as a factor in a productive economy (Greer 2014, Kvist, 2015) or an element of macroeconomic conditionality (Baeten and Vanhercke 2016 in this issue). Many of these ideas are reflected in the Lisbon Treaty, most prominently in the statement デｴ;デ デｴW EUげゲ ｷﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ ｷゲ H;ゲWS ﾗﾐ ; けゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ WIﾗﾐﾗﾏ┞げ ふAヴデｷIﾉW ン ふンぶ TEUぶく TｴW CJEU ｴ;ゲ increasingly articulated the idea that health systems occupy a distinctive position in internal market law (Hervey and McHale 2015, 227-246; 247-268; 269-291 elaborating the multiple ways in which the CJEU has given weight to the solidarity that underpins health systems rather than narrating ｴW;ﾉデｴ ゲ┞ゲデWﾏゲげ ヮﾉ;IW ｷﾐ ｷﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ ﾉ;┘ ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ IﾗﾐIWヮデゲ ﾗa aヴWW デヴ;SW ;ﾐS a;ｷヴ IﾗﾏヮWデｷデｷﾗﾐ) に to the extent that that position can be said to be part of the principles or structural coherence of EU health law. TｴW けﾗHﾃWIデｷ┗W ヮ┌HﾉｷI ｷﾐデWヴWゲデげ ｷﾐ ヮヴotecting the organisational structures and capacities of national health systems, and their financial viability, has been increasingly recognised by the CJEU, in cases concerning migration of patients, but also concerning migration of professionals, and novel business structures delivering aspects of health services, such as internet pharmacies, privately owned biomedical laboratories, and multinational hospital chains. In doing so, the CJEU built on earlier jurisprudence which recognised the need to protect the financial viability of social security systems; rules about the organisation of health care professions, qualifications, and professional ethics; or consumer protection. National courts, competition authorities and the CJEU have expressed the idea デｴ;デ ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾗII┌ヮｷWゲ ; ゲヮWIｷ;ﾉ ヮﾉ;IW ｷﾐ EU IﾗﾏヮWデｷデｷﾗﾐ ﾉ;┘が ;ゲ ; けゲWヴ┗ｷIW ﾗa ｪWﾐWヴ;ﾉ WIﾗﾐﾗﾏｷI ｷﾐデWヴWゲデげく Similarly, both the CJEU and the EU legislature have explicitly recognised in public procurement law that health systems do not operate entirely within ordinary markets. 11 IﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ ﾏ;ヴﾆWデ ﾉWｪｷゲﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ デｴ;デ ｷデゲWﾉa ヮヴﾗデWIデゲ けﾐﾗﾐ-ﾏ;ヴﾆWデげ ｷﾐデWヴWゲデゲ has existed since the foundation of the internal market. Obvious examples are legislation covering pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and products that are harmful to health (in particular tobacco, but also food and alcohol). Again, the way that this legislation is understood to fit within the scheme of EU law has changed over time. TｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Cﾗﾏﾏｷゲゲｷﾗﾐげゲ 2001 review of its pharmaceuticals regulation, involving stakeholders from health policy communities, not only from industry, and involving DG Sanco and DG Markt, led to a significant amendment of the EU pharmaceuticals legislation in 2004. TｴW けヴW-デWﾉﾉｷﾐｪげ ﾗa ヮｴ;ヴﾏ;IW┌デｷI;ﾉゲ ヴWｪ┌ﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ ;ゲ ﾐﾗデ ﾏWヴWﾉy a matter of internal market law is a strong example of the emerging greater distinctiveness of EU health law. The proposed amendments to EU medical devices regulation are another example; as is EU regulation of tobacco and alcohol. The idea of health as a factor in a productive economy (Greer 2014), related to internal market law, the Lisbon Agenda and now Europe 2020, is reflected in various aspects of EU law. A particularly good example is EU law on pharmaceuticals and medical devices, which seeks to promote industry innovation (Flear et al 2013). EU law and policy on health-related research involves investment in research into novel health products or processes, as well as into health system reform. The EU invests in health infrastructure through its cohesion funds (Clemens et al 2013). Some aspects of this element of the distinctiveness of EU health law may at least appear to run against some of its underlying principles, such as equality. Whether that is the case or not (Hervey and McHale 2015), the underlying idea of health as a productive factor has the effect of enhancing the cohesiveness of EU health law as a distinctive body of law. Conclusions PWヴｴ;ヮゲ デｴW ┌ﾉデｷﾏ;デW W┗ｷSWﾐIW デｴ;デ けEU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘げ ﾐﾗ┘ W┝ｷゲデゲ ┘ﾗ┌ﾉS HW デｴW ｷﾏヮﾗゲゲｷHｷﾉｷデ┞ ﾗa publishing this paper(!). In other words, if the academy and the legal profession (broadly understood, as including legislatures, courts and those who practise law), were sure that the notion of けEU ｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘げ ┘WヴW HW┞ﾗﾐS Sｷゲヮ┌デWが ┘W ┘ﾗ┌ﾉS HW ヮヴWデデ┞ IﾗﾐaｷSWﾐデ デｴ;デ ゲヮWIｷaｷI ;ﾐS SｷゲデｷﾐIデ ﾉWｪ;ﾉ arrangements support EU health(care) policies. A body of law is understood as autonomous and distinct as a consequence of the performative effects of the discourses of relevant actors who consider it to be so. Very few people would ﾐﾗ┘ ゲWヴｷﾗ┌ゲﾉ┞ Sｷゲヮ┌デW デｴ;デ けEU ﾉ;┘げ ﾗヴ けｴW;ﾉデｴ ﾉ;┘げ ふﾗヴ aﾗヴ デｴ;デ ﾏ;デデWヴが けIﾗﾐデヴ;Iデ ﾉ;┘げが ﾗヴ けa;ﾏｷﾉ┞ ﾉ;┘げぶ ｷゲ ; ﾏW;ﾐｷﾐｪa┌ﾉ IﾗﾐIWヮデく TｴWヴW ;ヴW Sｷゲヮ┌デWゲ about the scope of those entities (see, eg, Barnard and Odudu 2009; and the discussion in Hervey and McHale 2015: 10-29; 53-55), and about their intellectual trajectory (see eg, re EU law, Cardwell and Hervey 2015; de Witte 2009; Arnull 2008; Walker 2005; Shaw 1996) but very rarely about their very existence. (There is a thoughtful discussion of exceptions to that rule concerning health law in Ruger 2008, Hall 2008). That is not the case for EU health law. Its very existence remains contested. But the argument advanced in this paper is that those who are sceptical should no longer be so. Through their narrative accounts, the EU legislature, courts and the legal academy have created/constructed EU health law. They have done so, and continue to do so, through articulation of principles and themes of EU health law, and expression of EU health law as structurally coherent, special and distinct from other areas of law. The distinctive features of EU health law include a weak 12 (but not a strong, as is sometimes claimed) consumerizing effect on health policies; a rhetorical attention to (human) rights, with some consequences for procedural entitlements; respect for the solidarity and equality bases of national health systems; and context-specific approaches to risk (Hervey and McHale 2015, summarized at 544-546). Telling stories about EU health law matters in academic contexts; in the ways in which legal texts are enacted, adopted, and implemented; and in the ways courts interpret them. Whether a body of law such as EU health law is understood to exist in a meaningful sense also matters in the non-legal world. Law not only has narrative power; it also has material power, to alter relationships between human beings and institutions. The stories we tell about law affect its very meaning, in that they inform the interpretative acts of applying legal texts to concrete situations, determining obligations and entitlements, powers and constraints. The important questions now are not so much about how EU health law came to be に they are about its meaning and significance. 13 Bibliography Arnull, A (2008) けTｴW AﾏWヴｷI;ﾐｷ┣;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa EU L;┘ “Iｴﾗﾉ;ヴゲｴｷヮげ ｷﾐ A Aヴﾐ┌ﾉﾉが P EWIﾆｴﾗ┌デ ;ﾐS T TヴｷSｷﾏ;ゲが eds, Continuity and Change in EU Law: Essays in Honour of Sir Francis Jacobs (Oxford: OUP) Ashcroft, R (2013) けNﾗ┗Wﾉ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ-B;ゲWS Aヮヮヴﾗ;IｴWゲ デﾗ HW;ﾉデｴ TWIｴﾐﾗﾉﾗｪｷWゲげが ｷﾐ M Flear, A-M Farrell, T Hervey, T Murphy, eds, European Law and New Health Technologies (Oxford: OUP) Bache, I, S George, S Bulmer (2011) Politics in the European Union (Oxford: OUP) Barnard, C and O Odudu, eds, (2009) The Outer Limits of EU Law (Oxford: Hart) Boyd White, J (1985) HWヴ;IﾉWゲげ Bﾗ┘ぎ Eゲゲ;┞ゲ ﾗﾐ デｴW RｴWデﾗヴｷI ;ﾐS PﾗWデｷIゲ ﾗa L;┘ (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press) Brazier, M and E Cave (2011) Medicine, Patients and the Law (Harmondsworth: Penguin) Brooks, P and P Gewirtz (1996) L;┘げゲ SデﾗヴｷWゲぎ N;ヴヴ;デｷ┗W ;ﾐS RｴWデﾗヴｷI ｷﾐ デｴW L;┘ (New Haven: Yale University Press) Burley, A-M and W Mattli ふヱΓΓンぶ けE┌ヴﾗヮW HWaﾗヴW デｴW Cﾗ┌ヴデぎ A PﾗﾉｷデｷI;ﾉ TｴWﾗヴ┞ ﾗa LWｪ;ﾉ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐげ International Organization 47:1 Cardwell P J, and T Hervey (2015) けThe Metaphors of Legal Scholarship of a 21st Century European Union: Bringing the Technical into the Socio-ﾉWｪ;ﾉげ in D Cowan and D Wincott, eds, Exploring the Legal in Socio-legal Studies (London: Palgrave Macmillan) Clemens, T, K Michelsen and H Brand (2013) け“┌ヮヮﾗヴデｷﾐｪ ｴW;ﾉデｴ ゲ┞ゲデWﾏゲ ｷﾐ E┌ヴﾗヮWぎ ;SSWS ┗;ﾉ┌W ﾗa EU ;Iデｷﾗﾐゲげ Health Economics Policy and Law 9:49 Copeland, P and D Papadimitriou, eds, (2012) TｴW EUげゲ LｷゲHﾗﾐ Sデヴ;デWｪ┞ぎ E┗;ﾉ┌;デｷﾐｪ S┌IIWゲゲが Understanding Failure (London: Palgrave) Council Conclusions on Common values and principles in European Union Health Systems [2006] OJ C146/1 Council Conclusions: Towards modern, responsive and sustainable health systems [2011] OJ C202/10 Cowles, M (2003) けNﾗﾐ-State Actors and False Dichotomies: Reviewing IR/IPE Approaches to E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐげ Journal of European Public Policy 10:102-20 de Búrca, G and N Walker (2007) け‘WIﾗﾐIWｷ┗ｷﾐｪ L;┘ ;ﾐS NW┘ Gﾗ┗Wヴﾐ;ﾐIWげ Columbia Journal of European Law 13:519- 537 de Sousa Santos, B (1995) Toward a New Common Sense: Law, Science and Politics in the Paradigmatic Transition (London: Routledge) 14 de Ruijterが A ふヲヰヱヶぶ けTｴW Iﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ CﾗﾐゲﾗﾉｷS;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa EU H┌ﾏ;ﾐ HW;ﾉデｴ E┝ヮWヴデｷゲWげ VOL Comparative European Politics PAGES de Witte, B (2009) けE┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ L;┘ ;ゲ ;ﾐ AI;SWﾏｷI DｷゲIｷヮﾉｷﾐWぎ Uﾐｷデ┞ ;ﾐS Fヴ;ｪﾏWﾐデ;デｷﾗﾐげが ｷﾐ L H;ﾐIｴWヴが M Bulterman, A McDonnell, H G Sevenster, eds, Views of European Law from the Mountain: Liber Amicorum Piet Jan Slot (Alphen a/d Rijn: Kluwer Law International) 417-28 European Commission, White Paper: Together for Health: A Strategic Approach for the EU 2008-2013 COM (2007) 630 European Parliament ヴWゲﾗﾉ┌デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa Γ OIデﾗHWヴ ヲヰヰΒ ﾗﾐ けTﾗｪWデｴWヴ aﾗヴ HW;ﾉデｴぎ A “デヴ;デWｪｷI Aヮヮヴﾗ;Iｴ aﾗヴ the EU 2008-ヲヰヱンげ OJ ヲヰヱヰ C Γ Eっヵヶ Ewick, P and S Silbey (1998) The common place of law: stories from everyday life (Chicago, University of Chicago Press) Feele┞が M ふヲヰヱンぶ けForW┘ﾗヴSげ in S A Scheingold, The Rule of Law in European Integration: The Path of the Schuman Plan (originally published 1965) (New Orleans: Quid Pro Books) Fitzpatrick, P (1997) けDｷゲデ;ﾐデ ‘Wﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲぎ TｴW NW┘ Cﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾗﾐｷゲﾏ ｷﾐ CヴｷデｷI;ﾉ ;ﾐS “ﾗIｷﾗ-LWｪ;ﾉ “デ┌SｷWゲげ in P Thomas (ed) Socio-Legal Studies 145-62 (Aldershot: Dartmouth) Flear, M, A-M Farrell, T Hervey and T Murphy, eds, (2013) European Law and New Health Technologies (Oxford: OUP) Friedman, L (1977) Law and Society (London: Prentice Hall) Gessner, V and D Nelken (2007) European Ways of Law: Towards a European Sociology of Law (Oxford: Hart) GヴWWヴが “ ;ﾐS O LﾗHﾉﾗ┗; ふヲヰヱヶぶ けE┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐ ｷﾐ デｴW Wヴ; ﾗa ヮWヴﾏｷゲゲｷ┗W SｷゲゲWﾐゲ┌ゲぎ Neofunctionalism and agenda-setting in European health technology assessment and communicable SｷゲW;ゲW Iﾗﾐデヴﾗﾉげ VOL Comparative European Politics PAGES Greer, S (2011) けTｴW ┘W;ﾆﾐWゲゲ ﾗa ゲデヴﾗﾐｪ ヮﾗﾉｷIｷWゲ ;ﾐS デｴW ゲデヴWﾐｪデｴ ﾗa ┘W;ﾆ ヮﾗﾉｷIｷWゲぎ L;┘が experimentalist governance, and supporting coalitions in European Union health c;ヴW ヮﾗﾉｷI┞げ Regulation & Governance, 5:187 Hall, M (2008) けTｴW LWｪ;ﾉ ;ﾐS HｷゲデﾗヴｷI;ﾉ Fﾗ┌ﾐS;デｷﾗﾐゲ ﾗa P;デｷWﾐデゲ ;ゲ MWSｷI;ﾉ Cﾗﾐゲ┌ﾏWヴゲげ Georgetown Law Journal 96:583. Hall, P and R Taylor (1996) けPﾗﾉｷデｷI;ﾉ “IｷWﾐIW ;ﾐS デｴW TｴヴWW NW┘ Iﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉｷゲﾏゲげ Political Studies 44:936-57 Hancher, L and Sauter, W (2012) EU Competition and Internal Market Law in the Health Care Sector (Oxford: OUP) 15 H;デ┣ﾗヮﾗ┌ﾉﾗゲが V ふヲヰヱヲぶ けFヴﾗﾏ H;ヴS デﾗ “ﾗaデぎ Gﾗ┗Wヴﾐ;ﾐIW ｷﾐ デｴW EU IﾐデWヴﾐ;ﾉ M;ヴﾆWデげ Cambridge Journal of European Legal Studies, 15:101-137 Hatzopoulos, V and T Hervey (2013) けCﾗﾏｷﾐｪ ｷﾐデﾗ ﾉｷﾐWぎ TｴW EUげゲ Cﾗ┌ヴデ “ﾗaデWﾐゲ ﾗﾐ Cヴﾗゲゲ BﾗヴSWヴ HW;ﾉデｴI;ヴWげ Health Economics Policy and Law 8:1 Hatzopoulos, V (2002) けKｷﾉﾉｷﾐｪ ﾐ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ｴW;ﾉデｴ ;ﾐS ｷﾐゲ┌ヴ;ﾐIW ゲ┞ゲデWﾏゲ H┌デ ｴW;ﾉｷﾐｪ ヮ;デｷWﾐデゲいげ Common Market Law Review 39:683 Hay, C and B Rosamond (2002) けGﾉﾗH;ﾉｷ┣;デｷﾗﾐが E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐ ;ﾐS デｴW DｷゲI┌ヴゲｷ┗W Cﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa EIﾗﾐﾗﾏｷI IﾏヮWヴ;デｷ┗Wゲげ Journal of European Public Policy 9:147-67 Herring, J (2014) Medical Law and Ethics (5th edn, Oxford: OUP) Hervey T and B Vanhercke (2010) けHW;ﾉデｴ I;ヴW ;ﾐS デｴW EUぎ デｴW ﾉ;┘ ;ﾐS ヮﾗﾉｷI┞ ヮ;デIｴ┘ﾗヴﾆげ ｷﾐ E Mossialos, G Permanand, R Baeten, T Hervey, eds, Health Systems Governance in Europe: the role of EU law and policy (Cambridge: CUP) Hervey T and J McHale (2004) Health Law and the European Union (Cambridge: CUP) Hervey T and J McHale (2015) European Union Health Law: Themes and Implications (Cambridge: CUP) Hervey, T (2011) けIa ﾗﾐﾉ┞ ｷデ ┘WヴW ゲﾗ ゲｷﾏヮﾉWぎ P┌HﾉｷI HW;ﾉデｴ “Wヴ┗ｷIWゲ ;ﾐS EU L;┘げ ｷﾐ M Cremona, ed, Market Integration and Public Services in the EU (Collected Courses of the Academy of European Law, Oxford: OUP) Hervey, T (2003) けTｴW ‘ｷｪｴデ デﾗ HW;ﾉデｴ ｷﾐ EU L;┘げ ｷﾐ T Hervey and J Kenner, eds, Economic and Social Rights Under the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (Oxford: Hart) Holland, J and J Webb (2013) Learning Legal Rules (Oxford: OUP) Hunter, R, C McGlynn and E Rackley, eds, (2010) Feminist judgments: from theory to practice (Oxford: Hart) Jackson, E (2014) Medical Law: Text, Cases, and Materials (3rd edn, Oxford: OUP) Kennedy, I and A Grubb (2000) Medical Law: Text with Materials (3rd edn, London: Butterworths) Kvist J (2015) けA aヴ;ﾏW┘ﾗヴﾆ aﾗヴ ゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ ｷﾐ┗WゲデﾏWﾐデ ゲデヴ;デWｪｷWゲぎ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾐｪ ｪWﾐWヴ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉが ﾉｷaW Iﾗ┌ヴゲW ;ﾐS ｪWﾐSWヴ ヮWヴゲヮWIデｷ┗Wゲ ｷﾐ デｴW EU ゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ ｷﾐ┗WゲデﾏWﾐデ ゲデヴ;デWｪ┞げ Comparative European Politics 13:131-149 Lamping W and M Steffen (2009) けE┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Uﾐｷﾗﾐ ;ﾐS HW;ﾉデｴ PﾗﾉｷI┞ぎ TｴW さCｴ;ﾗヴSｷIざ D┞ﾐ;ﾏｷIゲ ﾗa IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐげ Social Science Quarterly, 90:1361 16 Galanter, M (1983) け‘W;Sｷﾐｪ デｴW L;ﾐSゲI;ヮW ﾗa Dｷゲヮ┌デWゲぎ Wｴ;デ ┘W ﾆﾐﾗ┘ ;ﾐS Sﾗﾐげデ ﾆﾐﾗ┘ ふ;ﾐS デｴｷﾐﾆ ┘W ﾆﾐﾗ┘ぶ ;Hﾗ┌デ ﾗ┌ヴ ;ﾉﾉWｪWSﾉ┞ IﾗﾐデWﾐデｷﾗ┌ゲ ;ﾐS ﾉｷデｷｪｷﾗ┌ゲ ゲﾗIｷWデ┞げ University of California Los Angeles Law Review 31:4-71 Madden, D (2011) Medicine, Ethics and the Law in Ireland (2nd edn, Dublin: Bloomsbury Professional) McHale, J (2010) けF┌ﾐS;ﾏWﾐデ;ﾉ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ ;ﾐS HW;ﾉデｴ C;ヴWげ ｷﾐ E Mossialos, G Permanand, R Baeten and T Hervey, eds, Health Systems Governance in Europe: The Role of European Union Law and Policy (Cambridge: CUP) McKee, M, T Hervey and A Gilmore (2010) けP┌HﾉｷI ｴW;ﾉデｴ ヮﾗﾉｷIｷWゲげ in E Mossialos, G Permanand, R Baeten and T Hervey, eds, Health Systems Governance in Europe: The Role of European Union Law and Policy (Cambridge: CUP) Martinsen, D S and J M Diaz-AゲWﾐゲｷﾗ ふヲヰヱヶぶ けA J┌SｷIｷ;ﾉｷゲ;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa HW;ﾉデｴI;ヴW PﾗﾉｷIｷWゲ ｷﾐ DWﾐﾏ;ヴﾆ ;ﾐS Spaｷﾐい TｴW Uﾐｷ┗Wヴゲ;ﾉｷゲデ HW;ﾉデｴI;ヴW MﾗSWﾉ MWWデゲ デｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Uﾐｷﾗﾐげ VOL Comparative European Politics PAGES Mnookin, R and L Kornhauser (1979) けB;ヴｪ;ｷﾐｷﾐｪ ｷﾐ デｴW “ｴ;Sﾗ┘ ﾗa デｴW L;┘ぎ TｴW C;ゲW ﾗa Dｷ┗ﾗヴIWげ Yale Law Journal 88:950-997 Montgomery, J (2002) Health Care Law (2nd edn, Oxford: OUP) Mossialos, E G Permanand, R Baeten and T Hervey, eds, (2010) Health Systems Governance in Europe: The Role of European Union Law and Policy (Cambridge: CUP) Newdick, C (2006) けCｷデｷ┣Wﾐゲｴｷヮが aヴWW ﾏﾗ┗WﾏWﾐデ ;ﾐS ｴW;ﾉデｴ I;ヴWぎ CWﾏWﾐデｷﾐｪ ｷﾐSｷ┗ｷS┌;ﾉ ヴｷｪｴデゲ H┞ IﾗヴヴﾗSｷﾐｪ ゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ ゲﾗﾉｷS;ヴｷデ┞げ Common Market Law Review 43:1645 Newdick, C (2009) けTｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Cﾗ┌ヴデ ﾗa J┌ゲデｷIWが Tヴ;ﾐゲﾐ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ HW;ﾉデｴ C;ヴWが ;ﾐS “ﾗIｷ;ﾉ Cｷデｷ┣Wﾐゲｴｷヮ - Accidental Deatｴ ﾗa ; CﾗﾐIWヮデいげ Wisconsin International Law Journal 26:845 Nys, H, ed, (1994) International Encyclopedia of Laws: Medical Law (63rd supp, The Hague: Kluwer Law International) Nys, H (2001) けCﾗﾏヮ;ヴ;デｷ┗W HW;ﾉデｴ L;┘ ;ﾐS デｴW H;ヴﾏﾗﾐｷゲ;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa P;デｷWﾐデゲげ ‘ｷｪｴデゲ ｷﾐ E┌ヴﾗヮWげ European Journal of Health Law 8:317 Nys, H (2012) Medical Law in Belgium (2nd edn, The Hague: Kluwer Law International) Obermaier, A (2009) The End of Territoriality? The Impact of ECJ Rulings on British, German and French Social Policy (Aldershot: Ashgate) Pattinson, S (2014) Medical Law and Ethics (4th edn, London: Sweet and Maxwell) Phelan, DR (1992) けTｴW ‘ｷｪｴデ デﾗ LｷaW ﾗa デｴW UﾐHﾗヴﾐ ┗ Pヴﾗﾏﾗデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa Tヴ;SW ｷﾐ “Wヴ┗ｷIWゲぎ TｴW E┌ヴﾗヮean Cﾗ┌ヴデ ﾗa J┌ゲデｷIW ;ﾐS デｴW Nﾗヴﾏ;デｷ┗W “ｴ;ヮｷﾐｪ ﾗa デｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Uﾐｷﾗﾐげ Modern Law Review 55:670 17 Risse, T, K E Jorgensen, A Wiener (2001) The Social Construction of Europe (London: Sage) Risse, T (2004) and (2009) け“ﾗIｷ;ﾉ Cﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷ┗ｷゲﾏ ;ﾐS E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐげ ｷﾐ A WｷWﾐWヴ ;ﾐS T DｷW┣が eds, European Integration Theory (Oxford: OUP) 159-76 and 144-60 Rosamond, B (2000) Theories of European Integration (London: Macmillan) Rosamond, B (2003) けNW┘ TｴWﾗヴｷWゲ ﾗa E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ IﾐデWｪヴ;デｷﾗﾐげ ｷﾐ M Cｷﾐｷが WSが European Union Politics (Oxford: OUP) 109-27 Ruger, T (2008) けHW;ﾉデｴ L;┘げゲ CﾗｴWヴWﾐIW Aﾐ┝ｷWデ┞げ Georgetown Law Journal 96: 625 Rynning, E and M Hartlev, eds, (2011) Nordic Health Law in a European Context: Welfare State PWヴゲヮWIデｷ┗Wゲ ﾗﾐ P;デｷWﾐデゲげ Rｷｪｴデゲ ;ﾐS BｷﾗﾏWSｷIｷﾐW (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff) Scheingold, S (1965) The Rule of Law in European Integration (New Orleans: Quid Pro Quo Press) Senden, L (2004) Soft Law in European Community Law (Oxford: Hart) Shaw, J (1996) けE┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Uﾐｷﾗﾐ LWｪ;ﾉ “デ┌SｷWゲ ｷﾐ Cヴｷゲｷゲい Tﾗ┘;ヴSゲ ; NW┘ D┞ﾐ;ﾏｷIげ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 16:231 Stein, E ふヱΓΒヱぶ けL;┘┞Wヴゲが J┌SｪWゲが ;ﾐS デｴW M;ﾆｷﾐｪ ﾗa ; Tヴ;ﾐゲﾐ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ Cﾗﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐげが American Journal of International Law 75:1-27. Stone Sweet, A ふヲヰヱヰぶ けTｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Cﾗ┌ヴデ ﾗa J┌ゲデｷIW ;ﾐS デｴW J┌SｷIｷ;ﾉｷ┣;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa EU Gﾗ┗Wヴﾐ;ﾐIWげが Living Reviews in European Governance 5:2. Available at: http://europeangovernance.livingreviews.org/Articles/lreg-2010-2/ V;ゲW┗が Nくが Vヴ;ﾐｪHFﾆが Kくが ;ﾐS KギWヮWﾉﾆ;が Fく ふヲヰヱヶぶ ろTｴW EﾐS ﾗa E;ゲデWヴﾐ TWヴヴｷデﾗヴｷ;ﾉｷデ┞い CJEU Compliance in the New Member States'. Comparative European Politics. Vollaardが H ふヲヰヱヶぶ けCｴ;ﾐｪｷﾐｪ TWヴヴｷデﾗヴｷ;ﾉｷデ┞ ｷﾐ デｴW EU ｴW;ﾉデｴI;ヴW ┌ﾐｷﾗﾐげ VOL Comparative European Politics PAGES Vollaard, H, H van de Bovenkamp and D Martinsen (2015) けTｴW ﾏ;ﾆｷﾐｪ ﾗa ; E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ ｴW;ﾉデｴI;ヴW ┌ﾐｷﾗﾐぎ ; aWSWヴ;ﾉｷゲデ ヮWヴゲヮWIデｷ┗Wげ Journal of European Public Policy DOI: 10.1080/13501763.2015.1034160 Paper REFERENCE NEEDED when published Vollaard, H. and Martinsen, D.S. (2016) 'The Rise of a European Healthcare Union'. Comparative European Politics. Walker, N (2005) けLWｪ;ﾉ TｴWﾗヴ┞ ;ﾐS デｴW E┌ヴﾗヮW;ﾐ Uﾐｷﾗﾐぎ A ヲヵth Aﾐﾐｷ┗Wヴゲ;ヴ┞ Eゲゲ;┞げ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 25: 581 WWｷﾉWヴが JHH ふヱΓΓヱぶ けTｴW Tヴ;ﾐゲaﾗヴﾏ;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa E┌ヴﾗヮWげ Yale Law Journal 100:2403-2483. 18 Westerhäll, L (1994), Medical Law: An Introduction (Berlin: Fritzes) i I note the self-reflexive nature of this paper, in that I am very much part of the academy on which the paper reflects. ii Iﾐ デｴｷゲ ヴWｪ;ヴSが デｴW ﾐﾗデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa けﾉWｪｷゲﾉ;デ┌ヴWげ SWヮ;ヴデゲ aヴﾗﾏ ｷデゲ デヴ;Sｷデｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ﾏW;ﾐｷﾐｪ ﾗa ; ﾐWデ┘ﾗヴﾆ ﾗa ;Iデﾗヴゲ Iﾗﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉﾉ┞ empowered to adopt laws within a legal system. iii Technically, if the EU institutions were to adopt legislation or take decisions contrary to the mainstreaming principle, those measures would be subject to judicial review under Articles 263 or 267 TFEU. In fact, the CJEU has never held a ﾏW;ゲ┌ヴW デﾗ HW Iﾗﾐデヴ;ヴ┞ デﾗ デｴW ヮ┌HﾉｷI ｴW;ﾉデｴ けﾏ;ｷﾐゲデヴW;ﾏｷﾐｪげ S┌デ┞が ;ﾐS I am unaware of any judicial review claim brought ;ｪ;ｷﾐゲデ デｴW EUげゲ ｷﾐゲデｷデ┌デｷﾗﾐゲが ;ｪWﾐIｷWゲ ﾗヴ HﾗSｷWゲが ﾗﾐ デｴW H;ゲｷゲ デｴ;デ ;ﾐ EU ﾉ;┘ ﾗヴ ヮﾗﾉｷI┞ a;ｷﾉWS デﾗ ensure a high level of health protection. One staff case, Case F-64/06 S v European Parliament OJ C 199 from 25.08.2007, p.53; removed from the register OJ C 223 from 30.08.2008, p.63, which settled out of court, included the argument that a reassignment in the place of work from Rome to Brussels of an ill person constituted a breach of Article 35 EUCFR. iv This might well be the case for many other areas of EU law, for instance EU external relations law. 