ABSTRACT: 
Cataloged from PDF version of article.In this paper, I examine the charge that Gopnik and Meltzoff’s ‘Child as Scientist’ program, outlined and defended in their 1997 book Words, Thoughts and Theories is vitiated by a form of ‘cognitive individualism’ about science. Although this charge has often been leveled at Gopnik and Meltzoff’s work, it has rarely been developed in any detail. I suggest that we should distinguish between two forms of cognitive individualism which I refer to as ‘ontic’ and ‘epistemic’ cognitive individualism (OCI and ECI respectively). I then argue - contra Ronald Giere – that Gopnik and Meltzoff’s commitment to OCI is relatively unproblematic, since it is an easily detachable part of their view. By contrast, and despite their explicit discussion of the issue, their commitment to ECI is much more problematic. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 ' '' ''    ' '' ''    ' '' ''  
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529Contents lists available at ScienceDirectStudies in History and Philosophy of Biological andBiomedical Sciencesjournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate /shpscCognitive individualism and the child as scientist programBill WringeDepartment of Philosophy, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkeya r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c tArticle history:Available online 16 August 2011Keywords:Philosophy of developmental psychologyCognitive individualismChild as scientistGopnikMeltzoffKitcher1369-8486/$ - see front matter  2011 Elsevier Ltd. Adoi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2011.06.003E-mail address: wringe@bilkent.edu.tr1 Gopnik (1996, 1998, 2003), Gopnik & Meltzoff (192 Gopnik’s more recent work suggests that the focuunderlie children’s acquisition of theories and in partic2007). This suggestion is clearly compatible with the clataken to be one way of making that claim more speciﬁ3 See Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, pp. 32–33).4 Gopnik 1996; Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, pp. 18–20In this paper, I examine the charge that Gopnik and Meltzoff’s ‘Child as Scientist’ program, outlined anddefended in their 1997 book Words, Thoughts and Theories is vitiated by a form of ‘cognitive individu-alism’ about science. Although this charge has often been leveled at Gopnik and Meltzoff’s work, it hasrarely been developed in any detail.I suggest that we should distinguish between two forms of cognitive individualism which I refer to as‘ontic’ and ‘epistemic’ cognitive individualism (OCI and ECI respectively). I then argue - contra RonaldGiere – that Gopnik and Meltzoff’s commitment to OCI is relatively unproblematic, since it is an easilydetachable part of their view. By contrast, and despite their explicit discussion of the issue, their commit-ment to ECI is much more problematic. 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.When citing this paper, please use the full journal title Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences1. IntroductionIn a number of papers in the 1990s, and in their 1997book Words, Thoughts and Theories, Alison Gopnik and AndrewMeltzoff defended a view of children’s conceptual developmentknown as the ‘Child as Scientist’ view.1 On this view there areimportant parallels between the ways in which children acquirenew concepts and the ways in which scientists develop newtheories.2Philosophers of science should be interested in Gopnik andMeltzoff’s views for at least three reasons. First, Gopnik and Meltz-off (henceforward GM) claim that if their view is correct, thenimprovements in our understanding of conceptual change in chil-dren will shed light on conceptual change in science. Secondly,Gopnik and Meltzoff’s understanding of what scientiﬁc theoriesare (and consequently the content of their claim that children’sll rights reserved.97, 1998), Gopnik, Meltzoff, & Kuhls of her interests has evolved consiular the claim that they use ‘Bayes nim that the same sort of processesc.).theories are like scientiﬁc theories) relies heavily on their under-standing of parts of the philosophy of science literature.3 So philos-ophers of science can contribute directly to the evaluation of GM’score claims. Finally, GM suggest that the Child as Scientist programunderpins an argument for scientiﬁc realism.4 This claim depends onthe idea that the sorts of mechanisms which underlie children’s con-ceptual development are likely to issue in true theories. For cognitivemechanisms which lead children to develop false theories of do-mains which play a central role in their lives would be a massiveevolutionary disadvantage. So the cognitive mechanisms whichunderlie children’s conceptual development are likely to be truth-conducive. But if so and if the same mechanisms underlie the devel-opment of scientiﬁc theories, then it appears to follow that scientiﬁctheories are the product of truth-conducive mechanisms. This argu-ment is obviously relevant to debates about at least some forms ofscientiﬁc realism.(1999).derably since the 1990’s: much of it has focused on the learning mechanisms whichets’ in doing so. (See in particular Gopnik & Schulz, 2004, 2007 Gopnik & Tenenbaum,underlie children’ s acquisition of theories and scientists theorizing: indeed it could beB. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529 519I shall argue that the second of these reasons for being inter-ested in GM’s views undercuts the ﬁrst and the third. GM’s viewsabout the nature of science involve a commitment to a cluster ofviews which I shall refer to as ‘Cognitive Individualism.’5 This leadsthem to downplay the cognitive and epistemological signiﬁcance ofdistinctive forms of social organization that are characteristic ofmany forms of scientiﬁc enquiry. However, a signiﬁcant body of re-cent work in analytic philosophy of science suggests that if weignore the social dimensions of scientiﬁc enquiry we miss somethingwhich is distinctive of science, and essential to explaining its suc-cess.6 This work suggests that there is a serious obstacle to the pro-jects of learning about conceptual change in children by studyingconceptual change in science and vice versa. If so, the claims thatGM make for the relevance of developmental psychology to philoso-phy of science cannot stand.GM’s disregard of the social aspects of science has been criti-cized before.7 However, these criticisms have typically failed tospecify which aspects of the social nature of science GM have ig-nored, or why ignoring them is problematic. To criticise GM moreeffectively we will need to distinguish between what I shall ‘onticcognitive individualism’ – a view about what theories are – and ‘epi-stemic cognitive individualism’ – a view about what explains thesuccess of science. GM’s commitment to ontic cognitive individual-ism is relatively unproblematic, since it turns out to be inessentialto their view. Their commitment to epistemic cognitive individual-ism is both problematic and essential to their view. 8In this paper, I shall draw on work by Philip Kitcher and MiriamSolomon, to argue both that contemporary science involves a formof division of cognitive labour, and that the existence and exactform of this cognitive division of labour play an important role inexplaining the epistemic success of science. This second claim isincompatible with the sort of epistemic cognitive individualismwhich is essential to Gopnik and Meltzoff’s view.Criticisms of GM’s commitment to epistemic cognitive individ-ualism need to be developed with care, since, in their 1997 bookGM make some concessions to critics of epistemic cognitive indi-vidualism and in particular to Kitcher’s views. However I shall ar-gue that GM’s concessions do not go far enough: they do notappreciate how deep the critique of epistemic cognitive individual-ism cuts or how far their view would need to be revised in order toaccommodate it effectively.2. The anti-individualist challenge to the child as scientistprogramTo see why it is worth distinguishing between different kinds ofcognitive individualism in assessing GM’s position, consider thefollowing passage from Miriam Solomon’s brief commentary onGopnik (1996).‘The Scientist as Child is not only incomplete, it is also inaccu-rate. One important area of inaccuracy is the assessment ofthe role of ‘social factors’ (this includes motivational, social,political, economic inﬂuences) in scientiﬁc decision-making.5 The term ‘cognitive individualism’ has been used in a similar context by Downes DoSection 3 below.6 Hull (1988), Hankinson Nelson (1990), Longino (2002), Kitcher (1993), Downes (19937 Solomon (1996), Stich & Nicholls (1998), Giere (2002).8 My understanding of the term ‘cognitive individualism’ has something in common windividualism is the thesis that a sufﬁcient explanation for all cognitive activity will be provand adds, a few pages later ‘A cognitive-individualist account seeks an explanation of a cognas internal mechanisms’ (ibid, p. 454).9 See footnote 6 above.10 Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, pp. 24–26).11 Ibid, pp. 70–71.Gopnik thinks that ‘social factors must have little inﬂuence,because, she asserts that children’s cognitive processes are sim-ilar to scientists while their sociology is different. Even if Gop-nik were granted these two assertions . . . social factors can stillplay a crucial role in theory choice. I have argued . . . that scien-tists sometimes form a consensus on the best theory while eachscientist involved is making a decision that is strongly and var-iously affected by ‘social factors.’ Consensus can be broughtabout by a variety of mechanisms.’(Solomon, 1996, p. 549, italics mine)Call the view that social factors do not play any role at all in the-ory choice ‘Basic Cognitive Individualism.’ As Solomon points out,many philosophers of science have argued that BCI is false.9GM are not committed to BCI. They concede that in at leastsome scientiﬁc ﬁelds – such as high-energy particle physics – asocial division of epistemic labor plays a crucial role in gatheringevidence for scientiﬁc theories; and evidence is surely one thingwhich is relevant to theory choice.10 Furthermore, a commitmentto BCI is inconsistent with a central aspect of the Child as Scientistview. On that view, there are important similarities between thecognitive processes of scientists and children. Yet it would be absurdto hold that a claim analogous to BCI was true of children. Thatwould involve holding that social factors played no role in the cogni-tive development of children. That is false; GM say it is false; andthey cite evidence for its falsity.11Arguably though, in the quoted passage, Solomon is not simplyobjecting to BCI. She claims, after all, that social factors do not sim-ply play some role in theory choice, but that they play ‘a crucialrole.’ However, she does not spell out here what this crucial roleis. So it is difﬁcult to assess the extent to which her criticismundermines GM’s position. In particular, it is not clear from whatshe says here whether the ‘crucial role’ that social factors play intheory choice can explain what GM say is ‘the most importantthing about science, namely that it gets things right’ (Gopnik &Meltzoff, 1997, p. 16). GM suggest, by contrast, that ‘it is difﬁcultto see how the . . . sociological features of science could explainits epistemological potency.’ (ibid p16).3. Cognitive Individualism – A Brief TaxonomyTo assess whether GM’s commitment to cognitive individualismis problematic, we need to look more carefully at how social factorsplay a role in scientiﬁc cognition. In particular, we need to distin-guish between individualist views of what scientiﬁc theories are,and individualist theories aboutwhat explains the success of science– between ontic and epistemic versions of cognitive individualism.I shall use the phrase ‘ontic cognitive individualism’ (OCI forshort), to refer to the following pair of claimsOCI (i) Scientiﬁc theories are sets of representationsOCI (ii) The representations which constitute scientiﬁc theoriesare in the heads of individual scientists.wnes (1993), whose work I have been inﬂuenced by in a number of ways. See also), Thagard (2000), Solomon (2001), Goldman (1999, 2004).ith that of Downes (1993). Downes deﬁnes cognitive individualism thus:‘cognitiveided by an account of autonomous individual cognitive agents’ (Downes, 1993, p. 452):itive phenomenon purely in terms of individuals’ psychological processes, understood520 B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529OCI is a view about what scientiﬁc theories are. It can be con-trasted with the Platonist view that theories are sets of abstract ob-jects such as propositions, or models conceived of set-theoretically;and also with what one might call the ‘social materialist ’ idea thattheyarepartially constitutedbymaterial paraphernalia or apparatus,externally embodied representations, or collective practices involv-ing the competent use of such external material objects.12 (However,it is not incompatible with the view that embodied representations,apparati, or practices are causally necessary for the formation of thesorts of sets of representations that constitute scientiﬁc theories.)13GM’s commitment to OCI has been criticised by Ron Giere.14OCI can be distinguished from the following claim, which I shallrefer to as ‘Epistemic Cognitive Individualism, or ECI:ECI) It is possible to give an adequate explanation of the episte-mic success of science by considering only the semantic andepistemic relationships between sets of representations whichconstitute theories and relationships between those theoriesand those aspects of the world they purport to describe.This formulation of ECI may initially seem opaque. Here is a briefgloss. ECI is not simply the truistic view that semantic and epistemicrelationships between different representations and between thoserepresentations and theworld theypurport to represent are relevantto explaining the success of science. What ECI adds to this is theclaim that these are the only factorsweneed to considerwhen tryingto explain the epistemic success of science.15ECI is an individualistic view because of what it denies: namelythat social relationships between thinkers are relevant toexplaining the success of science. It is a form of cognitive individu-alism because what it is individualistic about is a form of cognition– namely scientiﬁc cognition; and it is worth describing asepistemic cognitive individualism because it focuses on questionsabout how scientiﬁc theories are able to constitute knowledge; inother words questions of how it acquires its epistemic status.16,17ECI entails a commitment to denying that things other thansemantic or epistemic relationships between representations orbetween those representations and the world are relevant toexplaining the epistemic success of science, and in particular, todenying that features of the social and institutional organizationof science, such as social and institutional relationships betweenindividuals who generate or possess scientiﬁc theories are relevantto explaining the epistemic success of science. Critics of ECI includeboth Philip Kitcher and Miriam Solomon.1812 The contrast here is less sharp than one might hope, since there are views on which meFor the purposes of this paper I shall take someone to be committed to cognitive indirepresentations of one individual, no matter what further view they take of the nature of13 Giere (2002).14 An earlier writer who might be regarded as a critic of OCI is Lynn Hankinson Nelcommunities rather than individuals to be the primary subjects of knowledge attribution.intended to establish the claim that individuals cannot know, or simply that individuals canto compatible with OCI as I have formulated it.15 I use the bland phrase ‘epistemic success of science’ so as to give a formulation of ECI whconstitues scientiﬁc success. See van Fraassen, 1980, 2002.16 See Section 4 (pp13ff below) for evidence of Gopnik and Meltzoff’s commitment to EC17 ECI, as so formulated does not entail that representations are in the heads of individual tabout what scientiﬁc theories are.18 Kitcher (1993), Solomon (1994, 1996, 2001). These are not the only critics of ECI to be fogreat deal, though for reasons of space I do not engage explicitly with her views in this paHowever, I take Harding to be less interested in the question of explaining why science is epof science in society we need to be fully aware of the ways in which the production and19 Downes (1993).20 Can a commitment to ECI could be motivated without OCI? One might think not. Howthere is precedent for a philosopher of science to accept ECI while rejecting OCI.21 These points may seem like trivial nit-picking. Nevertheless, getting clear about themIndividualism Gopnik and Meltzoff are committed to, and to assess how they might respo22 See Downes (1999). Elsewhere, Downes has suggested that there are in fact three redistinctions he makes there I am ignoring the reading of the Program which makes childrsuper-scientists and children as social institutions.OCI and ECI are distinct and mutually compatible views whichare not (in the absence of further assumptions) mutually entailing.They do not exhaust the range of views which might fall under thelabel ‘Cognitive Individualism’. For example, they are both distinctfromwhat I described in section 1 as ‘Basic Cognitive Individualism’:one could deny BCI while accepting one or both of ECI and OCI.(One might suppose he distinction that I am making betweenECI and OCI to have been anticipated - in a slightly different con-text - by Stephen Downes. 19 Towards the end of a critique of (whathe calls) cognitive individualism, he distinguishes the point that cog-nitive individualist accounts of science are descriptively inadequatefrom the claim that they provide us with an inadequate basis formaking normative judgments about science. This distinction mayseem to parallel the distinction I make between OCI and ECI. How-ever, it is not clear whether Downes thinks of OCI and ECI as beingdistinct theses; and his view of the relationship between these issuesseems different frommine. He argues that since OCI presents us witha descriptively inadequate view of science, the sorts of normativeviews that are put forward by proponents of OCI are likely to be sus-pect. By contrast, I suggest that even if Gopnik and Meltzoff were togive up OCI, their commitment to ECI would still be problematic.20)4. The ‘child as scientist’ view: some ambiguitiesBefore we can attempt to assess the nature and depth of GM’scommitment to one or another version of Cognitive Individualism,we need to look more closely at their views. We need to knowwhat exactly they are comparing children’s theories to; the preciserelationship which they take to hold between children’s theoriesand scientiﬁc theories; and which aspects of children’s cognitivestructures they take to be theory-like. 214.1. What are GM comparing to what?Here is one prominent formulation of the Child as ScientistView:‘Children’s conceptual structures, like scientists’, are theo-ries . . . their conceptual development is theory-formation andchange and their semantic development is theory dependent.’(Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 13) – emphasis mineSteven Downes and Michael Bishop have noted that this quota-tion can be understood in a number of ways.22 First, GM might bental representations are themselves partially constituted by external material objects.vidualism provided that they take a scientiﬁc theory to be a subset of the mentalmental representations.son (Hankinson Nelson (1990)) who argues that, strictly speaking we should takeHowever, it is not clear to me whether her arguments succeed in establishing – or areonly know in virtue of being socially situated. The second of these views seems to meich avoids prejudging issues between realists and constructive empiricists about whatI.hinkers. It is a view about the best explanation of the success of scientiﬁc theories; notund in the recent philosophy of science literature. Another from whom I have learnt aper is Longino (2002). One might also take Harding (1986) to be an early critic of ECI.istemically successful than in showing that in order to understand and assess the roledissemination of scientiﬁc knowledge depends on a division of cognitive labour.ever if the reading I give of Giere’s views in footnote 37 is correct it seems as thoughwill be important when we come to look at the question of which kinds of Cognitivend to objections on this score, something which is essential to my purposes here.adings of the Child as Scientist program (Bishop & Downes, 2002). In terms of theen like scientists, and adopting an approach which has elements of both children asB. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529 521interested in a comparison between the ways in which children’sconcepts change and the ways in which individual scientists acquirethe concepts which belong to existing scientiﬁc theories. Alterna-tively, they might be concerned with comparing the ways in whichchildren acquire new concepts and the ways in which the scientiﬁccommunity as a whole comes to believe new theories, containingnew concepts.Bishop and Downes argue that philosophers should be mostinterested in the second reading of GM’s position. I agree. Con-sider the argument for scientiﬁc realism mentioned in section1. This purported to show that the fact that children’s theorizingand scientiﬁc theorizing are subserved by the same mechanismsgives us reason to think that scientiﬁc theorizing will tend toyield true theories. As Bishop and Downes point out, a defenderof scientiﬁc realism needs to show that science as a whole has atendency to produce true theories, not that individual scientistsdo. For, viewed at the level of the productions of individual sci-entists, what our theory-producing mechanisms come up with isfalse at least as often as it is true. It is only when we considerscience as a whole that what we have to defend is a surprisingrecord of success.23I shall be arguing against this version of the Child as Scientistview. If ECI is false – in other words, if the social organization ofscience plays an important role in explaining its epistemic success,then it is implausible that we can learn a great deal about eitherthe nature of science or the workings of the child’s mind by com-paring them in the way that GM suggest. In other words, we shouldsee science as a whole as producing epistemic outputs which aresuccessful for reasons which are interestingly different from thereasons for which individual children’s epistemic outputs are (epi-stemically) successful. If ECI is false, then the epistemic success ofscience depends, in non-trivial ways, on the organization of multi-ple cognitive agents.By contrast, children are individual cognitive agents. Whatevertheir epistemic success depends on, it is not the way they are orga-nized. This is not to say that the learning of children does not takeplace in any kind of social setting - that claim is ﬂatly implausible,Nor is it to say that the social setting plays no role in explainingchildren’s learning. It is simply to point out that there is no reasonto suppose that there is anything within the mind of individualchildren which plays an analogous role to that of the social struc-ture of science, taken as a whole.24There is good textual evidence that GM intend their view to beunderstood in the way I have outlined. Their attempts to mine the-ories about conceptual change within a scientiﬁc domain as awhole – such as the work of Kuhn and Lakatos – for a plausible ac-count of what children’s theories are seem hard to account for onany other reading.25Nevertheless, one might take GM to be arguing for a differentview – namely that young children and scientists rely on similarmechanisms for generating and assessing theories.26 Thearguments which I shall be putting forward tell against this viewtoo. If ECI is false, then the epistemic success of science dependson the interaction of a range of psychological mechanisms andforms of social organization. If young children enjoy a comparablemeasure of epistemic success, it is presumably produced by an23 Bishop and Downes (2002).24 Among the evidence Gopnik and Meltzoff intend their view to be interpreted along theconceptual change within a scientiﬁc domain as a whole – such as the work of Kuhn and25 Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 25.26 This is also seems suggested by some of Gopnik’s more recent work.27 Glennan (2005) both notes and plays down the signiﬁcance of this ambiguity.28 One reader commented that Gopnik and Meltzoff ‘would not be content with the thesismeans that they make stronger claims than this, I agree; however I argue that these strongthere are such analogies, I am at a loss to understand how they intend the passage I haveinteraction between whatever cognitive mechanisms are presentin young children and what is – presumably - a rather differentform of social organization. It may be reasonable to infer likecauses from like effects, it is less reasonable to infer that whentwo like effects are produced by unknown causes interacting withdiscernibly different further causes that the unknown causes arethe same – unless one thinks that the contribution of the unlikecauses is negligible.4.2. What relationship do GM think holds between children’s theoriesand scientiﬁc theories?In characterising the ‘Child as Scientist’ view, GM are unclearabout the kind of relationship they take to hold between scientiﬁctheories and children’s theories.27 Sometimes, as in the quotationgiven in section 3a) they seem to be saying that the two are thesame. Sometimes they say that they are similar (or perhapsidentical):‘The central idea . . . is that processes of cognitive developmentin children are similar to, perhaps even identical with; the pro-cesses of cognitive development in scientists.’(Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 3 , emphasis mine)Sometimes they say that there is an analogy‘Very young children just beginning to talk are engaged in pro-found restructurings of several domains of their knowledge.These restructurings are analogous to theory changes.’(ibid p7 emphasis mine)I shall argue below that when GM formulate their view in theﬁrst or second of these ways, they commit themselves to OCI.When they formulate it in the third way they do not. GM will beable, then, to meet criticisms of their view which depend on theuntenability of OCI by retreating from a formulation of the ﬁrstor second sort to one of the third sort – that is by retreating froma formulation couched in terms of identity or similarity to onecouched in terms of analogy.284.3. What do GM take theories to be?GM characterize theories as follows:‘A person’s theory is a system that assigns representations toinputs just as one’s perceptual system assigns representationsto visual input or one’s syntactic system assigns representationsto phonological input. The representations . . . are . . . distinctivein many ways . . . We can capture these distinctive structuralfeatures by talking about the speciﬁc abstract, coherent, causal,ontologically committed, counterfactual supporting entities andlaws of the theory . . . The representations are also operated onby rules that lead to new representations . . . There are also dis-tinctive functional relations between theoretical representa-tions and the input to them; theories predict interpret andexplain data’(Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 43)lines of this second interpretation: in particular their attempts to mine theories aboutLakatos – for a plausible account of what children’s theories are.that there is analogy between children’s theories and scientiﬁc theories’. If this simplyer claims are untenable. If they mean that Gopnik and Meltzoff would not accept thatquoted.522 B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529They go on to say‘If we discovered that children’s representational system (sic)had the features we have been describing (sc – those mentionedin the paragraph I have just cited) we would . . . be licensed insaying that children had theories.’GM’s identiﬁcation of theories with representation-formingsystems, and the analogy which they draw with the visual systemis puzzling. It is natural to think of a theory as something whichconsists of a set of representations, rather than a system that pro-duces such representations. Furthermore the (admittedly enthym-ematic) argument that GM put forward for holding that childrenhave theories seems to involve showing that some of the sets ofrepresentations have the same features as those sets of representa-tions that we normally characterize as scientiﬁc theories. But if thisargument gives us reason to believe anything, it is that certain setsof representations in children’s minds are theories, not that thesystems which form those representations are.(This distinction may appear to be trivial, 29 especially if the factthat the word ‘system’ means something rather different in the twophrases is overlooked. In the phrase ‘system of representations’, ‘sys-tem’ means ‘an organized collection’ while in the phrase ‘representa-tion forming system’ it means a mechanism or set of mechanisms forproducing representations. Consequently, what it makes sense to sayabout ‘systems of representations’ – and what might conceivably betrue of them is rather different from what it might make sense to say– and what might be true of representation-forming systems.)Since the claim that theories are representation-forming sys-tems, rather than systems of representations, does not surfaceagain, I shall take GM not to be committed to it but instead tothe more plausible view that, for which they have in fact argued,that theories are systems of representations, rather than represen-tation-forming systems. 305. GM’s Commitment to OCI and ECIIn section 3c) I suggested that on a charitable reading of theirargument for the claim that young children have theories, GM’sargument involved an appeal to the idea that theories are sets ofrepresentations in individuals’ heads. If so, it turns on a commit-ment to OCI.31This is also true if we take GM only to be claiming that themechanisms involved in belief change in children are the sameas those involved in scientiﬁc theory change. The mechanismswhich explain cognitive change in children are certainly mecha-nisms which operate on sets of representations in the minds ofindividuals. If the same mechanisms are working when scientiﬁctheories change, then what they are working on must also be setsof representations in the minds of individuals.29 It seemed so to one anonymous reader.30 I thank Josh Cowley for pressing me on this.31 In Section 5 below I shall argue that this commitment is one they could easily avoid.32 GM’s use of the word ‘hierarchy’ at this point is not entirely transparent. From the contthe idea of a set of theories being hierarchically organized in the sense in which one mighthose in another domain – say, biology. I take ‘hierarchy’, when used correctly, to refer to onextreme, and one sided deference over epistemic and other matters between individualsdiscussion, - and in particular, the fact that GM do not, for example, contrast hierarchical sway exchanges of information between inquirese who see one another and treat on anothrefer, by substitution of part for whole, to any form of social organization that might be chun-nuanced understanding of what scholars in various areas have said about the role of socmore nuanced view.33 I am grateful to a reader, name unknown to me (who is not the anonymous reader mposition.34 As both Thagard (1999) and Longino (2002) suggest, many authors writing on thedichotomizing view on which the causation of beliefs is either rational or social, but not boapplies here.GM’s commitment to ECI comes out when they write:‘A cognitive view of science . . . might provide at least a partialexplanation of the most important thing about science, namelythat it gets things right. In contrast it is difﬁcult to see how the(phenomenological and) sociological features of science couldexplain its epistemological potency.’(Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 16 – italics and bracketsmine)However, GM’s commitment to ECI is qualiﬁed in one importantrespect. For they concede that the social organization of sciencemay be relevant to explaining something which is relevant to itsepistemic success. It can explain how scientists are able to formtrue beliefs in situations where it is hard to ﬁnd evidence in favorof a particular view. As they put it:. . . Paucity of evidence leads to the division of labor and to manyof the . . . institutions characteristic of science . . . To ﬁnd evi-dence of a Higgs boson, you need, quite literally an Act of Con-gress. (p24)Nevertheless, they insist that while the division of labor mayplay a signiﬁcant role in collecting evidence for scientiﬁc theories,it plays no role in explaining why the sorts of procedures which areinvolved in assessing scientiﬁc theories are particularly successfulin providing us with true theories.‘It’s easy to see how the division of labor could result from theneed for various forms of evidence . . . What is extremely hard tosee is how . . . hierarchy could lead to truth, or how the divisionof labor could lead to theory formation and conﬁrmation’Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 2432One might think that GM are not really committing themselvesto anything like ECI here, and are instead claiming explanations ofthe success of science will need to involve reference both to repre-sentational processes in the heads of scientists, and to institutionalfactors.33 However it is hard to see how GM’s words can bear thisreading. Admittedly GM say that a cognitive view of science providesus with a ‘partial explanation’ of ‘why science gets things right’ andnot that it gives a complete explanation. Taken on its own, this claimwould of course be consistent with the view that a complete expla-nation would involve both cognitive, and social factors. However, GMdo not continue by claiming that institutional factors can also pro-vide us with a partial explanation of how science gets things right.Nor do they simply say, as someone who thought that GM werenot committed to ECI might hope, that it is difﬁcult to see how thesefeatures can lead to truth or conﬁrmation on their own. They say thatit is difﬁcult to see how they could do so, period.34Both of the critics of ECI whose work I will be examining inwhat follows hold that scientiﬁc division of labor plays an impor-tant role in explaining how science arrives at truth. So, it seemsBut this does not show that they do not have the commitment.ext of the quotation t they are clearly talking about social hierarchies rather than, say,t (or might not) take the result in one domain – say psychology to be subordinate toe possible set of social relationships between scientists – namely one in which there isin one group and individuals in another group. However, given the context of theirocial structures with other kinds of social structure ones in which there are free two-er as epistemic equals – it seems plausible to take GM’s use of the word ‘hierarchy’ toaracteristic of science. To interpret GM thus is admittedly to attribute to them a veryial structures in explaining belief change in science I see no evidence that they have aentioned in footnote 20) for suggesting this interpretation of Gopnik and Meltzoff’srole of scientiﬁc factors in the ﬁxation of scientiﬁc belief appear to subscribe to ath. The wording of Gopnik and Meltzoff’s position seems to suggest that this criticismB. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529 523reasonable to object that in arguing for their views GM have failedto engage adequately with signiﬁcant critics of their position.Moreover, if GM’s formulations can be read as saying that we needto appeal to both representational and institutional factors in orderto explain the success of science, then presumably their view couldequally well be formulated as follows:‘An institutional view of science . . . might provide at least a par-tial explanation of the most important thing about science,namely that it gets things right. In contrast it is difﬁcult to seehow the representational features of science could explain itsepistemological potency.’I suspect that GM would regard this as a travesty of their view. Ithink they would be right to do so. But on the interpretation of theirview that I am considering (and rejecting) they would have fewgrounds for objecting to this formulation.GM do, admittedly, point out that various features of social lifecontribute to young children’s capacity to develop cognitively:These include leisure, lack of other demands on their time and,most importantly ‘a community of adults who are designed toact in ways which further the children’s cognitive progress’ andwhich ‘has an interest in passing on information which is relevantto the child.’ 35 However, these observations provide no reason forqualifying GM’s commitment to ECI. ECI is a view about what ex-plains the epistemic success of scientists. But these points are waysin which GM take the social setting of young children to differ from(and be epistemically superior to) that of scientists. So they cannotbe taken as evidence of GM’s holding that the social setting of scien-tists contributes to their epistemic success.Signiﬁcantly, GM’s commitment to ECI does not seem to dependon their commitment to OCI. The points they make which suggestthey accept ECI seem to be independent of any claims about whatscientiﬁc theories are. For example, they are compatible with theview that scientiﬁc theories are abstract entities such as sets ofsentences; or sets of models – in either Giere’s sense on which amodel is a kind of abstract entity; or in the technical sense of mod-el taken from model theory.36Furthermore, since ECI is a view about the nature of scientiﬁctheories, and the arguments in favour of it depend on GM’s viewsabout what could and what could not plausibly explain progressive35 Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, p. 25).36 Giere (1988).37 See footnote 23 for further discussion of Giere (1988).38 Giere (2002). Giere’s arguments against OCI draw some support from Hutchins’ discuss287) However, while Hutchins does provide us with a very interesting example of the distrnavy he has very little to say about the social distribution of cognitive labour in the formulaMeltzoff seems more pertinent to my immediate purposes than a detailed discussion of H39 As an anonymous reviewer of an earlier version of this paper has pointed out to me, thethis criticism. For in some of Giere’s earlier work, he can be read as supporting a form of csame referee – ‘a tour de force of cognitive individualism.’ (Downes (1993) also classiﬁesmatters are more complex. In the early parts of that work Giere certainly makes a numbcritique of Bayesianism and his use of satisﬁcing models to explain scientiﬁc decision-makapproach here may well involve a commitment some form of epistemic cognitive individcognitive individualism. Most obviously his 1988 view of theories does not seem to be anmodels are regarded as abstract entities. (ibid p 78) This is a view from whose unabashed Prepresentations in his 2002. Another reason for doubting Giere (1988)’s commitment tobackground knowledge in science being best thought of us as knowledge ‘embodied in thethis line of thought has contributed in large measure to the prominence of anti-individualisthink about the relationship between Giere’s earlier and later work).40 Giere (2002).41 This is not to say that items of this sort constitute representations independently of anenable them to function as representations without having some kind of internal representthat we should take these use-enabling representations to be scientiﬁc theories – or inde42 Giere backs up his claim by reference to case studies in Knorr-Cetina (1999).43 A view of this sort would, of course, be no help to Gopnik and Meltzoff: they do not billustrate the fact that Giere’s point about the way in which knowledge of theories is sociallof things theories are. A fortiori, it does not entail that they are not mental representationscientiﬁc change, GM’s commitment to it is independent of thequestion of whether they take children’s theories to be identicalto, similar to, or merely analogous to scientiﬁc theories. 376. Giere’s Critique of Ontic Cognitive IndividualismRonald Giere has recently argued that an adequate account ofscientiﬁc knowledge should avoid a commitment to OCI becausescientiﬁc knowledge involves ‘distributed cognition’.38 Distributedcognition involves the co-operation of groups of agents interactingwith scientiﬁc apparatus in such a way that it becomes appropriateto regard the locus of the representational system which constitutesa scientiﬁc theory as extending beyond the skin of a single knowingsubject. Giere is here denying OCI ii while accepting OCI i.39 By con-trast, GM are committed to both components of OCI. If Giere is cor-rect, there seems to be trouble for GM.Perhaps problematically, Giere seems to be committed either tothe existence of ‘group minds’ or to the possibility of there beingrepresentations without representing subjects. Giere opts deci-sively for the second horn of this dilemma, suggesting thatalthough scientiﬁc theories are representations, they are not inter-nalmental representations.40 Rather, they are representations in themundane and non-mentalistic sense that diagrams on paper, scalemodels, explicit written mathematical descriptions of phenomenaunder consideration and the like are representations.41Giere cites in support of his rejection of OCI the highly plausibleclaim that it is characteristic of many contemporary scientiﬁc the-ories that no particular individual need know everything that is apart of the theory.42 However it is unclear whether this claim sup-ports Giere’s position. For it seems to be compatible with a widerange of views about what theories are, including the traditional‘syntactic’ view, in which scientiﬁc theories are regarded as sets ofsentences in a formalized language, (where sets of sentences are re-garded as abstract entities) and a version of the semantic view,which equates theories with sets of models, where models are re-garded as set-theoretical entities.43However, this point does not help GM, who are committed toscientiﬁc theories’ being sets of representations rather than ab-stract entities. Someone who thinks that scientiﬁc theories areinternal representations might try to accommodate Giere’s pointion of distributed cognition in Hutchins (1995). (See for example Giere, 2002, pp. 286–ibuted performance of a complex cognitive task - namely that of navigation in the UStion or evaluation of scientiﬁc theories. So a focus on Giere’s discussion of Gopnik andutchins’ views.re is something ironic about the fact that it should be Giere in particular who has madeognitive individualism: indeed, Giere (1988) can be regarded as – in the words of theGiere as a cognitive individualist.) However, a close reading of Giere (1988) suggestser of programmatic statements along cognitive individualist lines. In particular, hising seem to ﬁt well within a cognitive individualist framework. More speciﬁcally, hiaualism. It is less clear, however that in this work, Giere is committed to ontologicainstance of OCI, for he holds that theories are clusters of models, (1988, p 82), wherelatonism he appears to have retreated in favour of the view that theories are materiaOCI is his use of the notion of embodied knowledge, as when he speaks of sometechnology used in performing experiments.’ (ibid p104). I suspect that following oum in some of his later work. (I am indebted to an anonymous reader for pressing me toyone’s use of them as such; nor that anyone could use the items in a way that wouldational capacity. However, it would take non-negligible further argument to established theories of any sort.elieve that theories are abstract entities of any sort. The point of introducing it is toy distributed shared does not seem to entail any particular conclusion about the sortss.llt524 B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529by suggesting that scientiﬁc theories are in some way constitutedout of representations in the heads of groups of scientists. Howevera view of this sort would not help GM much either, since it still re-quires a denial of OCI ii. In saying that scientiﬁc theories were con-stituted out of representations in the heads of several individuals,one would be conceding an important difference between themand the sorts of things which GM think developmental psycholo-gists should be studying.44 For those seem to be, almost by deﬁni-tion, sets of representations within the head of individuals.Alternatively or additionally, one might suggest that Giereought to allow for a distinction between two different sorts ofthings that might be called scientiﬁc theories. In other words,one might want to distinguish between the complete theory ofany given area – which, as Giere suggests, might not be represent-able by any one individual, and different individual’s ‘takes’ on orunderstandings of the theory. As Staley points out, different scien-tists working in a highly collaborative area may disagree over thesigniﬁcance of a particular experimental result.45 Distinguishingbetween ‘personal’ and ‘complete’ theories in the way suggestedhere helps to explain such phenomena.However, although Giere might concede that distributed cogni-tion requires some sort of representational resources at the indi-vidual level, it is not obvious that, or why, he need concede thatthese representations are theory-like. They may, for example, in-volve things that are better regarded as the representationalunderpinnings of practical abilities to use the theory, rather thanas themselves being theories.However, there is a way out for GM. In section 3b, I pointed outthat GM wavered in their statements of the relationship betweenchildren’s theories and scientiﬁc theories between claims of iden-tity, similarity, and analogy. As far as Giere’s critique of the Childas Scientist program is concerned, it matters which of these formu-lations we adopt. The claim that scientiﬁc theories are the verysame sorts of thing as children’s theories seems incompatible witha recognition of the distributed nature of scientiﬁc theories. Bycontrast, claims about similarities or analogies between them arenot undermined by points of this sort.Advocates of the Child as Scientist program can, then, respondto Giere’s critique by retreating from the claim that scientiﬁc the-ories and children’s theories are the same kinds of thing to theclaim that they develop in analogous ways. After all two thingsof different sorts surely can develop in analogous ways.46One might object that claims about the existence of analogiesbetween the ways in which scientiﬁc theories develop and theways in which children’s understanding of the world develop areunhelpfully vague. A defender of the Child as Scientist view needsto give a speciﬁcation of the ways in which these two processes areanalogous. Nevertheless GM’s discussions of the ways in whichparticular examples of children’s theories develop do precisely this.One might also object that retreating from a version of the Child asScientist program formulated in terms of identity to one formu-lated in terms of analogy might be seen as an epistemically retro-grade step since it involves abandoning a claim with more contentin favor of one with less. However, since GM waver between for-mulations of the Child as Scientist Program which speak of identityand those which speak of analogy, we might reply that the sugges-tion that they should abandon the ﬁrst in favour of the second44 This might seem obvious. However, developmental psychologists in the Vygotskyan t45 Staley (2005).46 Whether GM would accept this suggestion I do not know. I am only claiming they shouwith some of the claims that GMmake, and which would enable them to salvage at least parand Meltzoff’s proposal along these lines, though without giving this rationale.47 I am grateful to the anonymous reader cited in footnote 20 for pressing this objection48 Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, pp. 39,42).amounts to a suggestion which increases rather than decreasesthe contentfulness of their view.A further objection is that understanding the Child as ScientistProgram in the way I have suggested is incompatible with a keyclaim of GM’s – namely, that the mechanisms which underpin the-ory change in children are the same mechanisms as those whichunderpin theory change in mature scientists.47 To this, I have threecomments. First, it is not immediately obvious that the suggestionthat these two views are incompatible is true. There is no a priorireason why the same mechanisms should not be involved in thedevelopment of two different, but analogously structured kinds ofthing. Secondly, even if the suggestion is correct, there is a naturalresponse, namely to suggest that someone who thinks that children’stheories are analogous to scientiﬁc theories might consider the pos-sibility that the mechanisms which underlies the changes are, whilenot identical, also analogous. Indeed, when GM write that‘These restructurings (ie, the ones undergone by young childrenjust learning languages – current author) are analogous to the-ory changes’it is natural to think that this claim, if true, would at best support aclaim that the mechanisms involved in these restructurings wereanalogous. Thirdly, at the beginning of this paper, I speciﬁed threereasons why the Child as Scientist program might be of interest tophilosophers of science. Only one of those reasons depended onthe idea that the mechanisms involved in theory change in scien-tists and in children are exactly the same. So whatever GM’s ownview of the matter I claim that the Child as Scientist program shouldbe of interest even if the claim about identity of mechanisms cannotbe sustained.7. ECI and the child as scientist program7.1. Why ECI mattersGM’s commitment to ECI is much harder to excise than theircommitment to OCI. On their view, part of the appeal of the ideathat there is an analogy between the development of science andthe development of children’s theories about the world is that chil-dren’s understanding of the world appears to resemble our moresophisticated scientiﬁc understanding because both involve exam-ples of progressive convergence on an accurate portrayal of theworld via processes which include episodes of revolutionarychange.48 An obvious corollary is that if we want to exploit the anal-ogy to help us see how children’s understanding of the world devel-ops then we will need to draw on our understanding of what it isabout science that accounts for its having those features. In otherwords we will want to appeal to features of science which make itepistemologically special. If children’s ways of understanding theworld can be shown to lack these features, then this counts heavilyagainst the Child as Scientist program.In this section I shall argue that contemporary science involvesa form of division of cognitive labor, and that this division of cog-nitive labor plays an important role in explaining the epistemicsuccess of science. If so, then ECI is false.Many social factors other than the division of cognitive labouraffect the outcome of scientiﬁc decisions. These include peerradition, such as Rogoff & Toma (1997) and Gauvain (1998, 2001).might disagree.ld: it is a plausible way of responding to Giere’s criticism which is at least compatiblet of their position. I note that Glennan (2005) has also proposed understanding Gopnik.B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529 525pressure, socially communicated extra-scientiﬁc values, ideologi-cal commitments on the part of scientists and so on.49 Howeverin order to refute ECI it is not enough to establish that social pro-cesses play some role in explaining why scientiﬁc beliefs change.We must also show that these features play an important role inexplaining the epistemic success of science.50 The arguments that Ishall examine support this claim. It is much harder to establish thatthe factors mentioned at the beginning of this paragraph play a po-sitive epistemic role than that the division of cognitive labour does.51The arguments I consider will not simply be aimed at showingthat the existence of a form of division of cognitive labor in scienceplays a role in explaining the success of science. They will also sup-port the claim that the particular form that this division of labortakes plays a role in explaining this success. This will help to defusea certain kind of response to attacks on ECI which involves conced-ing that certain socially mediated processes are important inmature science; and that such processes do not have a similar in-put into the content of children’s theorizing; but then suggestingthat children’s theorizing might receive an analogous kind of inputfrom some other source.Suppose, for example, that one could show that extra-scientiﬁcvalues played a role in making science epistemically successful. Adefender of the child as scientist program might suggest that ex-tra-scientiﬁc values communicated to children by their care-giverscould play an analogous role in the scientiﬁc theorizing of children.If the argument being put forward by critics of ECI simply showedthat science involved some kind of division of cognitive labor, asimilar defense might be mounted: perhaps whatever it is that isimportant about the existence of a division of cognitive labor inmature science is supplied from somewhere else in children’s the-orizing. I shall argue, though, than when we look at the details ofthe positions which Kitcher and Solomon put forward, responsesof this sort are quite implausible. It is hard to see how the value-based argument, or a possible argument based on the role ofpeer-pressure in scientiﬁc decision-making could be developed ina way that made this sort of response in question as implausible.7.2. ECI rejected (I): KitcherIn their 1997 book, GM respond to suggestions that their posi-tion is weakened by their commitment to some forms of cognitiveindividualism via a discussion of Kitcher (1993).52 They argue that49 Further arguments which might be thought to undermine the plausibility of ECI can beNelson (1990) that scientiﬁc knowledge is necessarily knowledge possessed by a communinvolves justiﬁcations by the standard of a particular scientiﬁc community (Longino, 200important role in explaining the epistemic fertility of science (Thagard, 2000). I focus on Kand Hankinson Nelson aut hold that nothing describable as science could be done by a singllabour, even though they develop this insight in very different ways from Kitcher (1993) (wthe phrase.) The work by Thagard which I have cited develops the idea of a ‘division of co50 So a good argument here cannot simply rely on pointing out the extent to which tdevelopments (as do for example Faucher et al., 2002). It needs to show that these valuerequires substantial argument to show that it is the case. Without such argument, the poiequally successful in some other cultural matrix than the one it actually developed in.51 Note that if such arguments could be given, they would strengthen, rather than weak52 Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, pp. 24–26).53 Kitcher (1993). It is perhaps only fair to mention that – as an anonymous referee ofenthusiasm for the ‘Child-as-Scientist’ Program. See in particular Kitcher (1988) where heand and processes to be found in the history of the sciences) and conﬁdent that our underadvanced by research on how they (or their con-speciﬁcs modiﬁed their childhood concep54 In Solomon (2001) Miriam Solomon objects that Kitcher’s analysis often seems overlyscientists have impure motivations, it says less about the possibility that social biases may hbeside the point. For I take it that Kitcher’s institutional science is possible even in the absenhave always succeed in channeling impure motivations in a productive manner.aim is not tothat the institutional science is possible even in the absence of pure motivations. It doechanneling impure motivations in a productive manner.55 Wray (2000). Wray argues for this point by considering Thomas Sprat’s account of theexemplary institution. But the point may seem plausible even if we regard Sprat’s accoun56 There is also not much reason to think of them as having been shaped by natural forcewhy we should not expect natural selection to select for optimal belief producing strategthe existence of a division of cognitive labor in science is not itselfenough to undermine the Child as Scientist Program, suggesting thatthis division of labor might arise from the fact that the sorts of prob-lem with which these scientists are concerned are ones that areeither particularly difﬁcult, and so require either the cognitive re-sources of more than one individual or the collection of data thatis especially hard to come by.However, Kitcher in fact argues thatwehave reasons to reject ECIwhich go beyond the fact that scientiﬁc progress needs collectiveevidence gathering. He argues that scientiﬁc progress is dependenton the existence of institutions which ﬁne tune the sorts of rewardstructures that are required to motivate scientists to research pro-ductively. On Kitcher’s view, the success of science depends on theefﬁcient working of invisible hand mechanisms. Scientists are typi-cally not motivated by a simple and disinterested desire to ﬁnd thetruth. They may be moved by self-interested concerns, such as thedesire for prestige, self-advancement, and power. Nevertheless, pro-vided the social institutions of science have the right sort of rewardstructure, the overall goal of ﬁnding truth will be served. On thisview,whatdistinguishes science fromother formsof cognitiveactiv-ity, and explains its success in arriving at approximately true theo-ries, is that it involves social institutions which have the right sortof reward structure, a reward structurewhich is ﬁnely-tuned to pro-ducing the kinds of results which we value in science.53,54While it is clearly true that children’s theorizing, like that ofadult scientists, takes place in a social setting there is no obviousreason, absent further argument, to think that the social settingsin which children’s theorizing takes place provide them with ananalogous motivational structure. There are at least two reasonsfor thinking that it does not. First, child-rearing practices seem tovary enormously from culture to culture. It would be surprising,to say the least, if all of these different practices gave rise to thesame ﬁnely tuned reward structure, let alone the same ﬁnely-tunedreward structure as that of a practice as culturally speciﬁc as con-temporary Western science. Secondly, as Brad Wray has pointedout, we have good reason to think that insofar as the institutionsof contemporary Western science are ﬁne-tuned to produce moti-vational structures which do contribute to the success of science,we have good reason to think that they do so because they havebeen consciously designed to do so.55 There is no reason to thinkof child rearing-practices as having been shaped by conscious designin this way.56found in the work authors such as Lynn Hankinson Nelson, who argues in Hankinsonity; Helen Longino who has argued that the form of justiﬁcation involved in science2, ch. 4); and Paul Thagard , who has argued that collaboration plays a particularlyitcher and Solomon primarily for reasons of space.One might argue that both Longinoe individual they have in common the idea that science involves a division of cognitiveho himself develops it differently from Harding (1986), who seems to have originatedgnitive labor’ in another fruitful direction.he development of (Western) science has depended signiﬁcantly on wider culturals are essential to the epistemic success of science. While this may be true, it wouldnt is suggestive but hardly conclusive: one might think that science could have beenen my attack on ECI.a predecessor to this paper pointed out to me – Kitcher had earlier expressed somewrites: ‘I’m serious about the symmetry (between children’s conceptual developmentstanding of the processes through which scientists restructure their concepts will bets.’optimistic: while it may explain how good science is possible even when individualave negative effects on the development of science. For my purposes, this is somewhatce of pure motivations. It does not follow - and nor should we take it to –structures weshow that impure motivations are always a good thing, but to explain how successfuls not follow - and nor should we take it to –structures we have always succeed inhistory of the Royal Society. (Wray, 2000, pp. 171–2), which we might regard as ant with more skepticism than Wray does.s which might mimic such conscious design: see pp. 30–1 below for a discussion as toies.526 B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529One might object that these are simply armchair considerations,and that what the argument requires here is empirical evidenceabout the ways in which institutions shape the motivations of chil-dren on the one hand, and mature scientists on the other. Howeverthis response does not help GM much. For it concedes that a de-fense of a plausible version of the Child as Scientist program willrequire empirical study of the role which the social setting of chil-dren plays in enabling their normal cognitive development. GM donot engage in any empirical study of this sort and it is not clear thattheir version of the Child as Scientist Program leaves them anyroom to do so. (GM do hold that the social setting of childrenmay be relevant to their cognitive development. However, theirview of how it might do so is extremely limited: the only possibil-ity they consider is that social interactions provide children withmore data to theorize about.57 If the arguments of this paragraphare correct this is not the only possibility they need to consider inorder to make their case.58)A defender of the Child of Scientist program might argue thatalthough Kitcher’s analysis of the workings of science shows thatsocial factors will play a role in explaining the success of sciencein situations in which a division of cognitive labour is required, sci-entiﬁc enquiry does not always require a division of labour of thissort. If so, and if the sorts of situation in which children are in areones which do not require a division of labour of this sort then thefactors which Kitcher considers can be disregarded.GM suggest that the reason that science typically involves adivision of epistemic labour is that the problems faced by maturescientists are difﬁcult and typically require co-operative evidencegathering. An alternative view, which seems to underpin Kitcher’swork, is that the successful prosecution of scientiﬁc enquiry in-volves the investigation of competing hypotheses by competinggroups.59 If correct, a view like Kitcher’s would explain the extentto which the institutions of science often seem to function in sucha way as to promote competition as well as co-operation; while onGM’s account, this would be at best a merely incidental matter,and at worst somewhat surprising.60A defender of the Child as Scientist program might suggest inresponse that adults and children do not need to be motivated inthe same kinds of ways in order to engage in the sorts of cognitiveprocesses which lead to successful science. Indeed, one possibleexplanation of the extent to which impure motivations play a rolein explaining the success of science is that these impure motiva-tions are needed in order to restore to mature scientists the sortof intense impulse to engage in theory-construction which is nat-ural (and perhaps even explicable in evolutionary psychological57 Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997, p. 209 See Section 7 below for further discussion.58 One thing that seems to be missing from Gopnik and Meltzoff’s discussion of the wdiscussion of the way in which either scientists or young children respond to testimony. It’sthat Goldman’s BABA account of belief acquisition, on which individuals tend to acquire belis a plausible account of belief acquisition in early childhood there is at least some reasonbeliefs. (Goldman, 2004) (I would like to thank an anonymous reader for drawing my atte59 The word ‘partly’ is not simply a ‘hedge’ here: someone moved by this line of thoughtsome role in explaining the division of epistemic labour but only that this is not the whole sepistemic labour across different branches of science: if Gopnik and Meltzoff’s account wasa spectrum from area to area, depending on the subject matter.60 See for example Strevens (2003) on the role of the norm of priority in scientiﬁc publi61 I owe this way of seeing things to conversation with Josh Cowley.62 To make this account at all plausible one would need to provide some account of the rbeyond mere armchair psychology see Schwitzgebel (1999) – although it is worth notmotivational structures.63 As I have already noted, a version of the Child as Scientist program which develops tphilosophically interesting than one that looks for analogies between children and scienc64 One non-question-begging response would be to suggest that the sorts of mechanismduplicate mechanisms which operate at the personal level in young children. But, as Bishnothing to suggest that it is actually true. At best, Gopnik and Meltzoff would need to providparallels on the basis of an ‘inference to the best explanation’ given the data of paralleunderstanding of various domains develop. However, it’s not clear to me how robust the65 Downes (2001).terms) in young children. On this view, the institutions of contem-porary science would be to enable the motivation of competitionagainst other scientists to substitute for a kind of innately supplied‘competition against nature’ in the child.61,62This response involves conceiving of the Child as Scientist pro-gram along lines which see an analogy between the ways in whichchildren and individual scientists develop theories, rather than ananalogy between children’s development and the development ofscience as a whole.63 The underlying idea is that any kind of expla-nation of the success of science will have to appeal to the engage-ment of the right kind of cognitive mechanisms, and that thesemechanisms might be engaged differently in adults and children.However, this begs the question against critics of ECI. For their viewis that some of the key mechanisms that we should appeal to inexplaining the success of science work on an intrapersonal ratherthan an interpersonal level.647.3. Problems with ECI (2): Miriam SolomonThese points suggest that Kitcher’s work presents a major prob-lem to the Child as Scientist Program. However, Kitcher’s accountof the role of institutions in science has been challenged by Ste-phen Downes who argues that Kitcher’s account wavers betweenwhat he calls a ‘thick’ view of agency for the purposes of describingthe phenomena which it sets out to explain, and a ‘thin’ view forthe purposes of explaining those same data.65 By a ‘thin’ view ofagency, Downes means the sort of view of agency which is prevalentin neo-classical economics – in other words, one which views ofagency as involving the rational maximization of some unitary good;while by a ‘thick’ view he means one which takes into account theways in which human beings can be experimentally demonstratedto fall short of full rationality, and the empirical differences that existbetween different forms of motivation.Arguably, Kitcher’s use of a thin view of agency simply involvesa resort to a standard scientiﬁc strategy - that of constructing anidealizing model for explanatory purposes. However, within theparticular dialectical context of a debate with GM about the meritsand defects of ECI, Downes’ point seems particularly signiﬁcant.For it seems reasonable for researchers whose main concern iswith giving a psychologically realistic picture of the sorts of humancognitive capacities that underlie our capacity for engaging in suc-cessful science to discount criticisms of their position which arebased on a model of science which incorporates a psychologicallyunrealistic account of agency. Miriam Solomon has put forward aview which offers a way out of this impasse by offering a line ofay in which social setting can inﬂuence cognitive development is any sophisticatedplausible that there are big and important differences here: where as one might thinkiefs via a contagion-like process from individuals with whom they are socially bonded,to think that at least some scientist operate with a different heuristic for acceptingntion to the relevance of Goldman’s work to the issues discussed here).need not deny that the sorts of considerations that Gopnik and Meltzoff adduce playtory. One good reason for taking this view is simply the pervasiveness of the division ofcorrect one might expect the extent to which this phenomenon occurred to vary acrosscation.elevant mechanisms in each case. For examples of work along these lines which goesicing that his view suggests that children and scientists have surprisingly similarhe idea of an analogy between children and adult scientists seems considerably lesse as a whole. I ignore this point here.s of theory formation and selection that exist at the interpersonal level in scienceop & Downes (2002) have pointed out while this claim may seem attractive, GM saye some evidence here. (It might perhaps be possible to argue for the existence of suchls between the way in which science develops and the way in which individuals’data for which this is supposedly the best explanation actually is.)B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529 527argument against ECI which engages with the psychological litera-ture about agency and cognition in a more nuanced way.66One aspect of Solomon’s 2001 position sets her apart from Kit-cher, and from her earlier work and has an important bearing onthe implications of her view for the Child as Scientist Program.Solomon 2001 argues that a plausible account of the role whichsocial institutions play in explaining the success of science shouldnot start from the assumption that successful science necessarilyinvolves a global community of scientists coming to a consensuson one particular theory in a given area. Instead, she suggests,science is successful when the distribution of belief within thescientiﬁc community matches the distribution of evidence. Sincein many situations competing pieces of evidence point in differentdirections, an epistemically ideal science community will often beone in which there is no consensus.This deﬁnition of a successful epistemic community is contro-versial. If we accept it then it appears to raise problems for theChild as Scientist program, at least if that Program is understoodin the way I have been suggesting that it should be. For on this ac-count there seems to be an important mismatch between the tar-get of a theory of rational belief change in science and the target ofthe sort of explanation that an advocate of the Child as Scientistprogram wants to put forward. Within developmental psychologyof the sort that GM are doing what is to be explained is how chil-dren settle on one particular theory of a target domain, and nothow either individual children or groups of children distribute be-lief between different candidate theories.I shall not explore this line of thought in detail for two reasons.First one might hold that in at least some cases the appropriate dis-tribution of evidence across a community of scientists would in-volve that community coming to form a consensus, and onemight look for analogies between these cases and cases of childrenﬁxing on a single theory in a particular area. Secondly Solomon’swork provides us with reasons for being skeptical of ECI whichare independent of these concerns about the rationality of consen-sus in a particular area.One such line of thought relies on the idea that both motiva-tional biases and what she calls ‘cognitive biases’ – features suchas belief perseverance and salience effects, will very often leadindividuals to accept theories which are less well-supported thantheir rivals, but that under the right sorts of circumstances thesesorts of bias can counteract one another. Whether this happensin any particular case will depend on the form which the socialinstitutions of science take.67 However, insofar as the social institu-tions of science interact with cognitive biases in such a way as to en-sure that the distribution of belief within a society matches thedistribution that would be given if only epistemic factors played arole, they are relevant to explaining the success of science. In theperhaps rare case where consensus is appropriate, it seems asthough this would require social biases and epistemic biases to can-cel one another out.68 And to the extent that cognitive biases areineliminable, it seems to follow that social factors would be involved66 Solomon (1994, 2001).67 Solomon (2001) introduces the terminology of ‘decision vectors’ with both ‘epistemicideal epistemic outcome is one which involves a distribution of belief between differentepistemic decision vectors). But in the special case where the ideal is consensus, which I amto that found in Solomon (1994).68 Solomon insists on several occasions that her 2002 view should not be regarded as aoutcome does not typically involve consensus. In the perhaps unusual case where consensuwould not be appropriate to see here position in the way I have suggested.69 Stich (1990) and Sterelny (2003).70 The sorts of biasses Solomon discusses appear to be topic neutral. If they were not it woset of non-topic neutral biases in areas where children need to theorize successfully wouldwhich were not the same as the mechanisms which underpinned successful scientiﬁc the71 As evidenced by their reliance on the literature from analytic philosophy of science inin explaining the epistemic success of science. In other words ECIturns put to be false.Solomon’s arguments present the advocate of the Child as Sci-entist problem with a dilemma. Either children are subject to thesame kinds of cognitive biases as adults or they are not. If not, thissuggests that children are in an epistemically superior position tomature scientists, and seems to undermine the case for thinkingthat a comparison between children and scientists will be illumi-nating. On the other hand, if, as seems more plausible, they aresubject to these biases, then the Child as Scientist Program seemsimportantly incomplete: it owes us an account of the sorts of coun-tervailing mechanisms which, in the child’s case, do the workwhich is done, on Solomon’s account, by the social institutions ofscience.One somewhat speculative response to this argument may beworth considering. It is that while the sort of biasing factors towhich Solomon draws attention need to be compensated for ingrown-up science, they do not threaten children’s construction ofcommon-sense theories in the same way. Indeed, they might even,on occasion play a positive role in children’s learning. Perhaps evo-lution has provided us with a set of cognitive biases that made usmore, rather than less, likely to come up with true common-sensetheories in the sorts of areas that children needed to theorizeabout.This response has two weaknesses. First, we should not alwaysexpect evolution to set us up to acquire true theories. For theremight be cases in which biases towards falsehood in certain areasmight be more ﬁtness enhancing (for example, if errors of one sortare much more costly than errors of another sort, then we mightexpect evolution to ‘overcompensate’ by giving us a cognitive sys-tem which was much less likely to produce the second sort of erroreven at the expense of giving us more errors of the ﬁrst sort andeven more errors overall)69. Second, it is hard to see how there couldbe a set of more or less ‘topic-neutral’ cognitive biases which im-pacted positively on the sorts of theorizing that children needed toengage in while impacting negatively on the sorts of theorizing thatadults were engaged in.708. Concluding RemarksI have argued that there is a tension between GM’s advocacy ofa picture of science which is committed to a form of cognitive indi-vidualism, and their claim that it is analytic philosophers of sciencewho are best placed to tell us about what science is.71One response would be to suggest that the turn away from cog-nitive individualism in recent philosophy of science is a mistake.This seems unlikely: Epistemic Cognitive Individualism is a doc-trine which should ought to seem implausible once it is explicitlyformulated. To an unprejudiced eye, two features of science seemto stand out. The ﬁrst is the complexity of the division of epistemiclabour which science involves. The second is the degree to whichscience, more than any other ﬁeld of cognitive endeavour, seems’ and non-epistemic’ elements to them. This terminology makes for clarity when thehypotheses (the ideal being when it is distributed in ways which correspond to theconsidering here, it seems to add little to the account given here, which corresponds‘balance of biases view’. I take this to be because she thinks that the ideal epistemics is the ideal outcome – which is the case I’m discussing here, it’s difﬁcult to see why ituld not help GM much at this point. For to suggest that nature has equipped us with ain effect be to suggest that children’s learning in these domains relied on mechanismsorizing.giving an account of what a theory is: see Gopnik & Meltzoff, pp. 32–41.528 B. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529to be clearly progressive. There seems to be a good prima facie casefor thinking that these two are signiﬁcantly linked.72A better response would be to attempt to reformulate the Childas Scientist Program in a way as to avoid any commitment to Epi-stemic Cognitive Individualism. There is no obvious reason whythis should be impossible. I have argued that the Child as ScientistProgram is best understood as a view about analogies betweenconceptual development in science and in young children. Some-one who accepts this needs not thereby be committed to any par-ticular view about the nature of science.Would this entail a drastic a revision of GM’s position? Perhapsnot. One might think that their position, as explicitly stated, iscompatible with something like the following view: both scientistsand young children are - like all cognizers73– embedded in socialsettings which play an important role in scaffolding their cognitivedevelopment, and these social settings play a similar role in scaffold-ing the development of science and in the cognitive development ofchildren.74Nevertheless, the Child as Scientist Program is not simply a setof written views, but a program of research in developmental psy-chology. As Lakatos and Kuhn have taught us, understanding a pro-grams of research involves more than simply understanding viewswhich are explicitly formulated. Programs of research can also in-clude unformulated or half-formulated assumptions which inﬂu-ence the questions which researchers regard as worth takingseriously.If one thinks that the interaction between social settings andthe cognitive mechanisms of individual cognizers plays an impor-tant role in understanding cognitive development, then it seemsplausible that these interactions will merit detailed empiricalinvestigation. GM and researchers inﬂuenced by them have shownrelatively little interest in investigating such matters. Furthermoreeven when they do concede that social setting does play a role incognitive development, they do so in a way which shows justhow committed they are to ECI. For when they consider the roleof social setting in cognitive development they tend treat chil-dren’s relations with others as simply providing themwith anothersort of data to theorise about.75A version of the Child as Scientist program that did not incorpo-rate ECI could, then, be expected to be different from what GMhave given us in two respects. First, we might expect it to empha-sise the interaction between the cognitive and the social to a great-er extent and to make it more explicitly the object of detailedempirical study. Secondly, we might expect it to conceptualisethese interactions as involving more than the acquisition of newkinds of data by enquiring subjects. One might nonetheless hopethat it could be intellectually fruitful, and also that it might attractthe interest of philosophers of science whose sympathy with someaspects of the Child as Scientist Program is in tension with theirrejection of cognitive individualism.76AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank Radu Bogdan, Josh Cowley, Mark AshtonSmith, participants in a work in progress seminar in the centrefor Mind, Culture and Society at Bilkent University, and anaudience at the annual conference of the British Society for the72 I have in mind here the work by Longino, Kitcher, Hull, Solomon, Thagard, and others m73 As Murphy (2006) emphasises.74 I am grateful to an anonymous reader for this point.75 Gopnik & Meltzoff (1997, p. 209).76 Here I have in mind most obviously Philip Kitcher, whose sympathy for the Child as Scialso footnote 17 above.) I’d like to thank an anonymous referee of a previous version of thisthis context.Philosophy of Science, along with a number of readers who I amnot in a position to name for helpful comments on earlier drafts.ReferencesBishop, M., & Downes, S. (2002). The theory thrice over: The child as scientist,superscientist or social institution? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science,33(1), 117–132.Downes, S. (1993). Socializing naturalized philosophy of science. Philosophy ofScience, 60(3), 452–469.Downes, S. (1999). Ontogeny, phylogeny and scientiﬁc development. In V.Hardcastle (Ed.), Where biology meets psychology: Philosophical essays(pp. 273–285). Cambridge: MIT Press.Downes, S. (2001). Agents and norms in the new economics of science. Philosophy ofthe Social Sciences, 31(2), 224–238.Faucher, L., Mallon, R., Nazer, D., Nicholls, S., Ruby, A., Stich, S., et al. (2002). Thebaby in the lab-coat: Why child development is not an adequate model forunderstanding the development of science. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, & M. Siegal(Eds.), The cognitive basis of science. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.Gauvain, M. (1998). Cognitive development in social and cultural context. CurrentDirections in Psychological Science, 7, 188–192.Gauvain, M. (2001). Cultural tools, social interactions, and the development ofthinking. Human Development, 44, 126–143.Giere, R. (1988). Explaining science—A cognitive approach. Chicago IL: ChicagoUniversity Press.Giere, R. (2002). Scientiﬁc cognition as distributed cognition. In P. Carruthers, S.Stich, & M. Siegal (Eds.), The cognitive basis of science. Cambridge UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Glennan, S. (2005). The modeller in the crib. Philosophical Explorations, 8, 217–228.Goldman, A. (1999). Knowledge in a social world. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Goldman, A. (2004). Pathways to knowledge. Oxford: Oxfod University Press.Gopnik, A. (1996). The scientist as child. Philosophy of Science, 63, 485–514.Gopnik, A. (1998). Explanation as orgasm. Minds and Machines, 8, 101–118.Gopnik, A. (2003). The theory as an alternative to the innateness hypothesis. In L.Antony & N. Hornste (Eds.), Chomsky and his critics. Oxford: Blackwells.Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words thoughts and theories. Cambridge MA: MITPress.Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1998). Theories vs. modules: To the max and beyond areply to Poulin-Dubois and to Stich and Nichols. Mind and Language, 13, 3.Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A., & Kuhl, P. (1999). The scientist in the crib: Minds, brains andhow children learn. New York: William Morrow.Gopnik, A., & Schulz, L. (2004). Mechanisms of theory formation in young children.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 371–377.Gopnik, A., & Schulz, L. (Eds.). (2007). Causal learning: Psychology, philosophy, andcomputation. New York: Oxford University Press.Gopnik, A., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Bayesian networks, Bayesian learning andcognitive development. Developmental Science, 10, 281–287.Hankinson Nelson, L. (1990). Who knows: From quine to a feminist empiricism.Philadelphia: Temple University Press.Harding, S. (1986). The science question in feminism. Ithaca and London: CornellUniversity Press.Hull, D. (1988). Science as a process: An evolutionary account of the social andconceptual development of science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge MA: Bradford Books MIT Press.Kitcher, P. (1988). The child as parent of the scientist. Mind and Language, 3,217–228.Kitcher, P. (1993). The advancement of science: Science without legend, objectivitywithout illusions. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Logino, H. (2002). The Fate of Knowledge Princeton. Princeton University Press.Murphy, D. (2006). On Fodor’s analogy: Why psychology is like philosophy ofscience after all. Mind and Language, 21, 553–564.Rogoff, B., & Toma, C. (1997). Shared thinking: Community and institutionalvariations. Discourse Processes, 23, 471–497.Schwitzgebel, E. (1999). Children’s theories and the drive to explain. Science &Education, 8(1999), 457–488.Solomon, M. (1994). Social empiricism. Nous, 28, 323–343.Solomon, M. (1996). Commentary on Alison Gopnik’s ‘The Scientist As Child.Philosophy of Science, 63, 4.Solomon, M. (2001). Social empiricism. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.Staley, K. (2005). The evidence for the top quark. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Sterelny, K. (2003). Thought in a hostile world. Malden, MA: Blackwell.entioned on page 3 and in particular the work I have described in Sections 5–6 above.entist program comes across very strongly in the opening pages of Kitcher (1988). (Seepaper for drawing the views which Kitcher expresses in this paper to my attention inB. Wringe / Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (2011) 518–529 529Stich, S. (1990). The fragmentation of reason preface to a pragmatic theory of cognitiveevaluation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Stich, S., & Nicholls, S. (1998). Theory to the Max. Mind and Language, 13, 421–449.Strevens, M. (2003). The role of the priority rule in science. Journal of Philosophy,100, 55–79.Thagard, P. (2000). How scientists explain disease. Princeton University Press.van Fraassen, B. (1980). The scientiﬁc image. Oxford UK: Clarendon Press.van Fraassen, B. (2002). The empirical stance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Wray, K. B. (2000). Invisible hands and the success of science. Philosophy of Science,67, 163–175.