ABSTRACT: 
In this paper the authors draw on a larger project related to diasporic identification in order to explore the concept of transcultural literacy. They argue that transcultural literacy grows out of border-crossing dynamics that extend beyond the binaries of \u27us\u27 and \u27them\u27 as these are lived within and between nations. In this way it is responsive to, and reflects, the various shifts between the local and the global; between place and space. Transcultural literacy is inseparable from social and cultural practices of meaning- and identity-making on the fault-line between various and often competing cultures. This model of transcultural literacy uses theorisations of space to connect textual practices to the construction of hybrid identities. In so doing, it offers an alternative to models of literacy premised on liberal or neo-conservative understandings of cultural difference. In this paper, we explore transcultural literacy in relation to current literacy debates. <br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 in this paper we argue that diaspora space is a new sphere of semiotic practice that , due to its dialogical nature , in intercultural communication and translation , involves a political strategy of radical cultural creativity . 
 it is disruptive of bounded views on cultural literacy which usually involve the polarisation of essentialised cultural identities and practices . in this light 
 , transcultural literacy is a semiotic practice of textual meaning-making in in-between spaces ; spaces that are difficult to read unless significance is given to the zones of cultural contacts in which people develop new ways to mean , often D ow nl oa 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Keywords: literacy; multiculturalism; space; diaspora Introduction: issues and debates in literacy studies Debates about literacy can become a watermark for levels of antipathy towards cultural differ- ence. In an increasingly globalised world with a resurgent backlash politics, what counts as literacy becomes a topic of heated debate. Increasingly also, the means by which literacy is taught enters the public arena. Most recently, there have been attacks on English curriculum in Australia described as ‘postmodernist goobledygook’ and ‘leftist rubbish’ (Donnelly 2005, 8; 2006, 14; The Australian 2005, 6). This has been posited in contradistinction to an approach that values the ‘basics’ and the canonical. The return to basics is representative of the current neo-liberal politics in education that requires a commitment to the ideology of measurement and public accountability. Yet, this political move cannot be simply explained by educational markets that necessitate a significant intervention of state bureaucracy into education by defining what and how to teach to meet the demands of a stake-holding community. This demonisation of postmodernism in literacy education is also linked to the valuing of differ- ence and a dilution of what it is that marks Australian character and citizenship. Australianness is commonly reiterated with reference to egalitarianism and a ‘fair go’. Most recently the Premier of New South Wales has suggested these as Australian values that need to be taught in schools so that youth can learn respect and responsibility in a multicul- tural society (Clennell 2006, 3). He was prompted to make this comment by a series of violent clashes on the beaches and in the suburbs of Sydney. Gangs of youths have been identified as either Australian or of ‘Middle Eastern appearance’ in media reports which have elicited a sense that these youths have been fighting over what it means to be Australian *Corresponding author. Email: alex.kostogriz@education.monash.edu.au D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 126 A. Kostogriz and G. Tsolidis and who can lay claim to the label and associated lifestyle. The clashes have involved icons of Australianness – beaches, flags, life-savers – and in turn, these have been used to explain the un-Australian nature of the clashes even six weeks after they occurred. Clearly these events have struck a chord and the debates that surround them dramatically crystallise the issues at the heart of literacy education in multicultural conditions – teaching literacy for difference or assimilating differences through dominant ‘cultural literacy’. Advocates of canon transmission see in the knowledge of the dominant cultural episteme and traditional values a solution for social ills and a liberatory social capital that helps people from minority groups to rise economically. Dominant cultural literacy is also seen by neo- conservatives as a solution to the intercultural tensions within the nation, and as an intellectual resource to defend national values and traditions that are ‘under attack’ from without. Hence, dominant knowledge, values and traditions, come to represent democratic culture, and as such stand in opposition to ‘a bastardized version of postmodern literary theory’ and the relativism implicit in multiculturalism (The Australian 2005, 6; Donnelly 2004). By attacking critical and multicultural accounts of literacy, neo-conservatives reify a single cultural literacy and turn this into a powerful instrument for reinscribing the hegemonic cultural order. This presents one of the main hurdles for teaching those literacies and knowledges that are needed in a society constantly evolving in a multiplicity of social forms and cultural practices. Responding to this neo-conservative backlash and its pedagogical clampdown is a complex issue. An immediate reaction may be to call for tolerance and respect for diversity through empathic understanding and intellectual openness. Such an approach draws on liberal traditions which stress particularism, individual autonomy and celebratory views of multi- culturalism (Parekh 2000). In so doing, liberal conceptions of a politics of difference entrench ‘us’ and ‘them’ dichotomies and divorce these from asymmetries of power in interethnic rela- tions (Luke and Luke 1999). As Stuart Hall (1992) has noted, this multicultural strategy of the convenient Othering and exoticisation of minority ethnicity merely confirms the hege- monic cultural order by naming the Other as peripheral to the mainstream. This problematises a liberal response to cultural ‘illiteracy’ of minority groups through its emphasis on a co- existence of multiple cultural literacies. This can be conceived as a solution to the crisis of multicultural education in the post 9/11 world. However, the shift from cultural literacy to multicultural literacy is hardly possible without determining those relations of domination and subordination, incorporation and resistance, which are at play in multicultural societies. In this paper the aim is to use a spatial perspective in order to engage with literacy practices in a multicultural and globalised society. By drawing on contemporary social theory, described by Soja (2000) as the ‘spatial turn’, the intention is to problematise the current cultural mapping of literacy and develop a concept of transcultural literacy that can arguably transcend the binary logic of thinking about difference. In particular, we take a closer look at diaspora as a socio-spatial formation or a network that binds the local and the global, the particular and the abstract, ‘us’ and ‘them’, and, in doing so, transcends these binarisms through cultural-semiotic innovations that cannot be simply captured within a bounded space of nation-states and their cultural politics of literacy education. Instead of assuming the autonomy of national or local communities and their production of literacy, we examine how a community is formed in response to interconnected space and the implications of such a relational understanding of space for literacy practices on and across cultural boundaries. Does ‘space’ matter? Although literacy events occur in certain places such as schools, homes, workplaces, churches or sporting grounds and are obviously a spatial phenomenon, much of traditional D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 Pedagogy, Culture & Society 127 research into literacy has systematically ignored its spatial characteristics. In current debates, too, many politicians avoid, or rather mask, the connection between the politics of literacy and the spatial politics of a nation-state. By drawing on the psychologistic view of literacy, defined as a set of decoding skills that are necessary for ‘taking meaning’ from a text, they promote the conception of placeless or decontextualised knowledge acquisition, emphasising the instrumental role of literacy in accessing the cultural knowledge needed for every citizen of the nation-state. How then do the technologies of dominant knowledge production account for those affective states of ambivalence, detachment and even of non- existence that emerge in minority groups due to their rejection and exclusion from dominant cultural and linguistic norms? It is convenient for dominant culture not to talk about this at all but to formulate and sustain its universalist framework of producing people’s conscious- ness, thus representing mind as an entirely natural and independent processing machine. The decontextualised view of literacy both locates meaning-making in the individual mind and evokes the political neutrality of texts and the singularity of meaning to mediate the production of abstract cultural-textual space that would bind together an imagined totality such as the nation. In this understanding of literacy, in its abstractness, one can easily detect the meeting point of the Cartesian (rational) and Euclidian (abstract) conceptions of space. Because the formation of literacy skills has been conceived as the development of cognitive faculties such as decoding and encoding, there is no need to take into account the material and cultural-semiotic configurations of particular places in which meaning-making occurs. These particular locations of meaning-making are negated in the production of larger national space to insure the key role of cultural literacy in imagining a community of ‘horizontal comradeship’ (Anderson 1991). It is when this space becomes imagined as unproblematically shared, finite and fixed that it enables further development of political and theoretical frameworks that underpin ‘the material enforcement of certain ways of orga- nizing both society and space’ (Massey 1999, 30). In this regard, abstract space comes to acquire the status of an abstract representational system, a form of ‘super-significations’ that erases social and cultural differences. As Lefebvre argues, this dominant form of representational space, ‘that of the centres of wealth and power, endeavours to mould the spaces it dominates (i.e., peripheral spaces), and it seeks, often by violent means, to reduce the obstacles and resistance it encounters there’ (1991, 49) If the production of abstract space, according to Lefebvre (1991), embodies the dominant textual codes that mediate its further re-production, then it is not surprising why neo-conservatives attack critical literacy education. The ‘simpler’ model of literacy education offered by the neo-conservatives emphasises the acquisition of the dominant codes of representation rather than their critical de-coding. This model of literacy education, in effect, enables them to maintain cultural homogeneity while talking diversity. The abstraction of literacy space in this model responds, therefore, in a quite specific way to the decontextualisation and desocialisation of literacy education, particularly through pedagogies that stress knowledge transmission and psychometric means of assessment. The decontextualised model of literacy has been challenged by the New Literacy Studies (NLS), a phrase coined by Street (1993) and Gee (2000) to represent the ‘social turn’ in literacy research. A key theoretical contribution of NLS is a re-definition of literacy as social practice. This understanding has enabled researchers to focus on the workings of the social in meaning-making, challenging the location of literacy learning within the individual mind and contesting the homogenising ideology of decontextualised literacy. By focusing on social uses of literacy, NLS has developed the concept of ‘multiple literacies’ – an assemblage of malleable ideological and semiotically mediated practices (Cope and D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 128 A. Kostogriz and G. Tsolidis Kalantzis 2000). This definitional work, among other things, has put the issue of its social location on the agenda of research, leading to the development of a spatial perspective on literacy events (e.g. ‘situated literacy’ in Barton, Hamilton, and Ivani[caron] 2000). Inspired by these developments many researchers have concentrated on investigating the role literacies play in everyday life. Thus, studies into the literacy practices of different communities and institutional settings, families and workplaces have demonstrated how literacy events are nested within social and cultural practices. One of the implications of these studies is the recognition that literacy is not value-free; ‘some literacies are more dominant, visible and influential than others’ (Barton, Hamilton, and Ivani[caron] 2000, 12). However, there has emerged a tendency to underplay the relational nature of literacies and, in turn, relations of power by focusing on static contexts or bounded places in which literacies are experienced in their local particularity (see, for example, Brandt and Clinton 2002 for a critique of over- emphasising ‘the local’ in some NLS accounts). Talking precisely about ‘the limits of the local’, Street (2003) argues the need to build a more robust and less insular field that would enable NLS to take into account the relations between local and distant literacies. By no means reducing the importance of debates and theoretical developments in NLS that Street (2003) mentions, we would like to argue that spatial theory might also contribute in a significant way to rethinking the limits of the local in NLS. Similar to the ‘social turn’ in literacy studies, spatial theory has experienced the proliferation of radical ideas as a reac- tion to the empirico-physical concept of spatiality that dominated geography up until the 1970s. The main efforts of this spatial ‘revolution’ were directed towards a re-positioning of ‘space’ into the centre of social-political life. It was necessary to breathe life into the spatial configurations of human environments to counteract the positivist notions of space as a natural backdrop for human actions (Kent 2003) and to explore, instead, the social production and consumption of space. And similar to NLS, this ‘social turn’ in spatial theory has produced a binary between social space (the larger scale of spatial production) and place (the local scale of phenomenological relations between people and places). Arguably, the works of Henri Lefebvre and Yi-Fu Tuan, among others, can be seen as illustrative of the Marxist and humanistic geographies associated with social space and place, respectively. The Marxist theorist Lefebvre supplemented the idea of physical space with the social production of spatiality, maintaining that every society produces its own spatiality in rela- tion to its mode of economic and ideological production. Apart from anything else, his analysis of the production of space paved the way for a new generation of human geogra- phers, by obliging them to move beyond the conception of space as absolute and pre-given and to treat it instead as relative (Smith 2004). According to Lefebvre (1991), abstract space cannot exist unchanged; it becomes relativised in and through social activities. Hence, the local (i.e. place) emerges from these activities as the constellation of ‘culturally specific ideas’ about the world and lived experiences of being embodied in it (Massey 1994). In contrast, Tuan shifted the focus of spatial analysis from social space to place as an a priori of human existence. Focusing on the phenomenological relations between people and places, Tuan (1977) argued that the sense of place is created and maintained through the field of care – that is, through desires or fears that people have in relation to particular places. Because the sense of place from this perspective is often derived from individual experiences, the individual turns out to be a point of reference in constructing an essentialised sense of place for a group of people. There is a relationship between power and a sense of place in expressing what counts as being located somewhere and by who. The humanistic approach has been criticised for its emphasis on the subjective and often normative, xenophobic and masculinist construction of spatiality. While places have been very often romanticised as ‘safe’ and ‘homely’ locations for those who belong to them, ˇ ˇ D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 Pedagogy, Culture & Society 129 such representations also embody the politics of identity, often leading to the acts of racial exclusion, gender domination and other forms of discrimination (Massey 1997). How can then these debates about space and place in spatial theory inform NLS debates about local and distant literacies and their relationality? One important implication of attempts to resolve this ‘either–or’ tension is to look at how the boundaries of spaces and places have been conceived. Binary logic is limiting in many cases precisely for its emphasis on sharp spatial boundedness. Boundaries are habitually imagined and often presented as ‘Berlin walls’ that separate sameness from difference, self from the Other, like-minded souls from strangers, the multiple social and cultural totalities of ‘us’ from the differentially perceived totalities of ‘them’. Boundaries have a dual role in establishing insiders and a sense of belonging as well as outsiders, those who do not belong. This construction has been carried out on multiple scales of spatial imagination and practice, from the most intimate and private to the most exoteric and global. In doing so, people come to understand places as bounded, separable and independent domains within a wider sphere called ‘space’. Bounded places have been considered as indicative of stability that is fundamental to providing a sense of belonging (cf. Tuan 1977). But what this perception neglects is how places, or rather groups of people that are situated in them, occupy social space and hence enter into relationships with other places. As de Certeau (1984) argues, conceiving of space as a realm of practices, the fixity of rigid mapping is counterpoised by mobility and travel that disturb both the univocality of places and the fixity of identities. He uses the term ‘trajectory’ to define the temporal dimension of real and imagined movement through space. In his agency-centred account of spatiality, people make sense of space through their memory of travel, and this mediates spatial trans- formation. Talking about the texture of space in the city, de Certeau argues that people come to perceive it as ‘a piling up of heterogeneous places. Each one, like the deteriorating page of a book, refers to a different mode of territorial unity, of socioeconomic distribution, of political conflicts and of identifying symbolism’ (1984, 201). In this regard, the ways of reading the text of social space – that is, the wor(l)d – cannot be simply captured through their placement in bounded places. Spatial movement, dialogical encounters with alterity and communication networks have become so extended, intensified and available, that the boundaries of the local have to be reconceived as porous rather than rigid. Thinking about boundaries as porous can also clarify why people, who are less mobile than de Certeau’s flâneur, can experience the ‘intrusion’ of alien texts and meanings in their communal environments. This is one of the main foci of Castells’ (1996) work on the social consequences of globalisation and information capitalism where he describes contemporary society as a network society. He argues that we are witnessing the emergence of the ‘space of flows’, and this impacts dramatically on the ‘space of places’. Castells attributes the reconstructed logic of spatiality to the flow of information, consumer goods, images and lifestyles that undermine local practices. Massey provides a similar, but possibly more nuanced account of place under conditions of globalisation. Her argument is that in new times of increasing cultural complexity and stretched out social relations, it becomes more difficult to distinguish coherent places within a social space. This, however, does not mean that local places have lost their value in shaping meanings and identities of people. Rather, the compression of space and time (Giddens 2002) requires thinking about locality and re- presenting places in new ways. Massey (1994) uses a ‘global sense of place’ to clarify the relationship between space and place, questioning the notion of places as settled and enclosed and replacing this by a concept of place as a meeting-place. Invoking the notions of hybridity and diaspora, Massey argues that places are locations where different social activities and cultural practices intersect; they become the nodal points of connections and interrelations, of influences and movements. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 130 A. Kostogriz and G. Tsolidis From this perspective we can re-imagine both the abstract space of literacy referred to above, and rethink the territorial boundedness of local literacies. With regard to the former, Lefebvre’s conceptualisation of social space is particularly useful as this explicates how the politics of literacy are necessarily the politics of space. As soon as dominant literacy acquires the status of the abstract or decontextualised, attempting to homogenise and reduce differ- ence within the boundaries of the nation-state, literacy practices become historicised and relativised (this possibly accounts for why historiography and ethnography are the two main traditions in literacy studies). This point echoes the Bakhtinian idea about the dialectical tension between centripetal and centrifugal forces in producing the cultural-semiotic space of a nation. Interestingly enough, both Lefebvre and Bakhtin use the dialectics of triplicity to illustrate the emergence of a new space, emanating from the lived experiences of these tensions. For Lefebvre the third is a constant quest for ‘counter-space’ – a differential space that rises on the margins of the homogenised realm, either in the form of resistance or in the form of heterotopia (Foucault 1986). As Soja argues in his analysis of Lefebvre’s work, this is ‘a Thirdspace of political choice that is also a meeting place for all peripheralized or marginalized “subjects” wherever they may be located’ (1996, 35, emphasis in original). In a similar vein, Bakhtin (1981) evokes ‘thirding’ in his concept of linguistic and textual hybridity. Rejecting the production of formal boundaries, he argues that ‘even one and the same word [can] belong simultaneously to two languages, two belief systems that intersect in a hybrid construction – and consequently, the word has two contradictory meanings, two accents’ (1981, 305). Furthermore, he differentiates two forms of hybridity that are also related to Lefebvrian ideas about the production and transformation of social space. While the first form of hybridisation occurs unintentionally on larger time-scales as a syncretism of languages and cultures (cf. ‘differential space’ in Lefebvre 1991), the second form is an intentional hybridity to which Bakhtin assigns a political power of fusing the unfusable to subvert the dominant forms of ideological discourse (cf. ‘counter-space’ in Lefebvre 1991). In this respect, both Bakhtin and Lefebvre construct a particular vision of spatial-discursive opposition to the production of abstract and homogeneous space by the socio-political, economic and cultural centre(s), assigning a source of contestatory power to spatial margins and agency to the spatially marginalised. At the same time, they do not put emphasis on antag- onistic, mutually exclusionary struggle between the centre and the periphery, but rather high- light agonistic, combinatory or inclusive relations where the moments of becoming and unfinalisability are fundamental (cf. Mouffe 1994). The complex interplay between margin- ality and centrality defines a distinctive brand of political thinking described by Soja as ‘constantly open and flexible, always reactive to dogmatic closure, never content with any permanent construct or fixed totalization’ (1996, 32). What is peculiar about this political stance, Soja continues, is that it commences as ‘taking sides’ with the marginal, in common with Marxist perspectives, but it also departs from the constrains of binary logic of either/ or to produce a Thirdspace of resistance that would counter the authority of the centre(s) through its spatial ‘in-betweenness’ characterised by cultural dynamics and linguistic ambivalence (see also Bhabha 1994). In this regard, the political strategy of thirding transcends dualisms through an openness to ‘the both/and also …’, where the opposite or antithesis of the process is contained within it and at the same time set against it (Soja 1996). This double- ness of social-semiotic space infects, as it were, the perceived purity of the dominant system, undermining the entire edifice of its power to control the social production of meaning. The spatial imagination of literacy has therefore significant implications for how we envisage the future of literacy education in a multicultural, global society and, indeed, the future of multiculturalism. While boundary politics are important tools in understanding inequalities and technologies of power in literacy education, they can be also a means of D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 Pedagogy, Culture & Society 131 portraying places and spaces as homogeneous and uniform. Consequently, if we are dealing with the project of nation building by re-presenting the dominant literacy in abstract terms as normative and suitable for everyone or searching for essential differences in the literacy practices of local communities, it is difficult to escape the discourses of cultural-semiotic purification. The maintenance of strong boundaries, both national and local, is a strategy to construct ever new ‘strangers’ as polluting elements and to expel them, or assimilate them in the name of restoring the original purity and normative certainty (Bauman 2000). The production of a literacy crisis by neo-conservative governments assumes this logic. Rather than re-inscribing a binary logic that offers expulsion or assimilation by constructing the Other as perpetual stranger, we need to situate the politics of literacy in relation to the poli- tics of social and cultural space. This requires a shift in focus from boundary maintenance to boundary crossing. Looking at places as meeting points would mean accepting the enrich- ing potential of difference rather than fixating on boundary control and surveillance. This would also suggest more numerous and more fluid relationships between people using liter- acies in multiple ways and contributing to the production of new meanings that in turn medi- ate the construction of new spaces. We need to imagine a new spatiality of literacy, referred to here as transcultural literacy. While the idea of dominant cultural literacy is central to the (b)ordering politics of the nation-state, transcultural literacy acknowledges the political and semiotic work people do at and across cultural borders. This requires a recognition of textual practices through which they make connections between their identities, border-crossing events and semiotic hybrid- isation visible. The Latin prefix ‘trans’ invokes therefore the motion of people and texts that transcends the bounded view of cultural spaces and sanitised representations of communities and their textual practices. This prefix also invokes the productive points of cultural overlap rather than merely the points of contestation. Transcultural literacy enables people to operate effectively across cultural borders and, by doing so, contributes to the messiness of becoming that challenges backlash politics and attempts to re-inscribe normative understandings of ‘them’ and ‘us’. Towards transcultural literacy Our interest in the concept of transcultural literacy has emerged through a current project related to the Greek diaspora in Melbourne, Australia. The aim is to understand how identity is shaped through and in response to a range of cultural literacy practices, particularly those established through various forms of schooling. This project has involved multiple scales of analysis including the transnational and the community levels, as well as the micro technol- ogies of self-making. We understand the influence of Greek and Australian national politics to operate at all these scales, for example, permeating the cultural-linguistic politics in the Greek-Australian community through the pedagogies of schooling (state, private and ethnic ‘after-hours’ schools) and the family pedagogies of the everyday. Rather than discuss our findings in detail, our aim here is to conceptualise a transcultural literacy that is, arguably, crucial for this diasporic community. While drawing on a specific community, we believe that this exploration of diasporic experience provides a robust heuristic device in thinking about the dynamics of identity and belonging in cultural ‘contact zones’ more generally (Pratt 1998). Diaspora space becomes an important adjunct to our argument about the need to inject a spatial dimension into debates about literacy. In this context, diaspora space is crucial for re-conceptualising literacy education in the contexts of increased flow of people across the borders of nation-states and, hence, for thinking about the location of literacy in relation to ‘new geographies of identity’ and belonging (Levie and Swedenburg 1996). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 132 A. Kostogriz and G. Tsolidis Our conception of transcultural literacy arises from new geographies of identity that are characterised by the multiple spatial and temporal scales of identification. For example, in our project teachers conducted a unit of work on identity in several schools, and at the end of this unit students were asked to construct their self-representations. In writing about their sense of belonging, students created multimodal representations by using text and photo- graphs, cultural artifacts and drawings through which they tried to capture their trajectories across different places and spaces. One of the prominent themes was a transcultural scale of identification as they evoked experiences of travel, communication networks with family members in Greece, learning about their cultural heritage, visiting picturesque islands and being influenced by Greek pop-culture. In these representations, their sense of belonging was co-ordinated, often largely defined, by memories of landscapes and journeying, by the historical narratives of dramatic destinies and enduring traditions. At the same time, they had clearly located themselves outside the time-space of the Greek nation-state. Integral to their sense of belonging was a double identification with Greece and Australia simulta- neously. To illustrate this ‘in-betweenness’ they very often used percentile representations such as ‘60% Greek and 40% Australian’ or ‘100% Australian at school and 100% Greek at home’. Interestingly enough, most students did not evoke a ‘here versus there’ logic within their texts. Their sense of belonging and their self-representations could not be captured by the bounded spaces of nation-states; their real and imagined trajectories have been decidedly transnational as these exceed national borders. The ways in which these students position themselves as diasporic subjects sits in contradistinction to views that position them as ‘strangers within’. Similarly, their view bears little resemblance to views of diaspora as national outposts of the countries of origin. Instead, these students’ self-conceptions seem to be more compatible with theorisations of diaspora that draw on the rhizome as a metaphor. Gilroy (2000), for example, draws on Deleuze and Guattari’s (1984) idea of rhizome to represent diaspora as a heterogeneous and multidirectional (‘smooth’) space characterised by the distinctly multilocal mapping of belonging. It is a space of contacts that is complexly networked and transacted by multiple social and cultural boundaries, breaking the simple explanatory sequence between place, identity and cultural literacy. Hybrid diasporic identities emerge at the nodal points of this network. For that reason, we believe, the concept of transcultural literacy is responsive to the dynamic, contradictory and relational nature of place-, meaning- and identity-making by diasporic people; people who struggle to come to terms with their ambivalent position. Such ambivalence is related to a range of differences in how people operate in the semiotic world transacted by the flow of multiple cultures and textual representations. Diaspora space is a classic example of such a world for here one faces and ‘translates’ different texts and others and is confronted by a bewildering multiplicity of meanings and identities (Papastergiadis 2000). It is in this space that we can observe the literacy events of creative meaning-making, venturing into transculturation. Transcultural literacy is a phenomenon of the contact zone which, according to Pratt, refers to the space ‘where cultures meet, clash, and grapple with each other, often in contexts of highly asymmetrical relations of power’ (1998, 173). Her idea of the contact zone contrasts with ideas of community, which have been used as a driving force in both political and academic discourses about literacy. Textual practices in the contact zone are not constituted in separate communities but rather in relations of cultural differences to each other – that is, in their co-presence and dialogical interaction. Central to this process are the ways the Other is recognised. While dialogical interaction starts initially from locations that are outside the contact zone, power relations between self and the Other can intervene so that this zone becomes an are(n)a of conflict and struggle for meaning. This, according to D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 Pedagogy, Culture & Society 133 Bakhtin (1984), represents a clash of the extreme forms of monologism because both self and the Other do not transcend their preoccupation with self-consciousness, enclosed within itself and completely finalised. However, even though there is a clash of different meanings, the self cannot negate the Other completely because alterity is the main source of self-under- standing. To engage in dialogue is to listen and to be open to the Other; it is to be immersed in the discursive space where the self becomes responsive and answerable when face-to- face with alterity. The Other, therefore, is the origin of our experience, for we become conscious of ourselves only while revealing ourselves to another, through another and with the help of another (Bakhtin 1984). Besides this ethical dimension of the contact zone, the Bakhtinian perspective explains the interdependence of self and the Other in spatial-temporal terms, in particular through the concept of chronotope (time/space). The chronotope of dialogical encounter is a point where the spatial paths and temporal trajectories of different people intersect. In this encounter people find themselves in the same time-space dimension (e.g. here and now) where their social and cultural differences may crop up (Bakhtin 1981). The chronotope of dialogical encounters is a creative space; it is not just a meeting point between self and the Other but rather is a point of departure in meaning- and identity-making. The creative potential of the chronotope depends on the degree of its openness to difference and on the acknowledgement of various ‘experienced horizons’ that participants in interaction have (Bakhtin 1990). Due to these differences, as Bakhtin clarifies further, one can always see and know something that the Other cannot see: parts of his [sic] body that are inaccessible to his own gaze (his head, his face and its expres- sion), the world behind his back, and a whole series of objects and relations, which in any of our mutual relations are accessible to me but not to him. (1990, 23) This unique ‘excess of seeing’ by participants in a dialogical mode of meaning-making may provide them with a more complete understanding of their selves and is central to transcultural literacy events. Again, self is dependent for its existence on the Other who provides a source of new meanings and a new semiotic basis for becoming, or enabling new selves to become. Transcultural literacy is inseparable therefore from this complex identity work in dialogical encounters between self and the Other, between two cultures and two systems of meaning-making. Bakhtin (1986) locates such chronotopic encounters in the space of ‘outsidedness’ that is produced by the very act of inner distancing in order to meet the external Other: In order to understand, it is immensely important for the person who understands to be located outside the object of his or her creative understanding – in time, in space, in culture … In the realm of culture, outsidedness is the most powerful factor in understanding. It is only through the eyes of another culture that foreign culture reveals itself fully and profoundly. (Bakhtin 1986, 7, emphasis in original) Outsidedness – a space between self and the Other – is for Bakhtin the only location where a genuine dialogue between differences can take place and, in turn, where new transcultural meanings can be created. This is a Thirdspace of dialogical meaning-making that transcends the initial, finalised or closed perspective of either self or the Other. For Bakhtin, this is a location of actual transformation of perspectives that is realised in opening up a new semantic depth of meaning. His position on cultural hybridisation acquires a paramount significance for studying textual-semiotic practices in diaspora. Because members of diasporic commu- nities are caught in a double bind between ‘here and there’, between Australian culture and homeland, the paradoxical nature of transcultural literacy is that it can never be understood D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 134 A. Kostogriz and G. Tsolidis as ‘pure’. It evolves as a distinctly new cultural-semiotic way of making sense of multicul- tural complexity. Recognising the relational and hybrid nature of literacy in multicultural societies, some researchers have started to develop a thirdspace perspective on literacy learning as nested within inter-actions between institutionalised literacy (e.g. school) and local textual prac- tices (e.g. home and community) to address social, cultural and political issues involved in the literacy education of migrant, minority and socially disadvantaged students (Erickson and Gutierrez 2002; Kostogriz 2005a, 2005b; Moje et al. 2004; Pahl 2002). In different ways, these studies argue that thirding and transculturation are similarly relevant to the members of the cultural mainstream as these features of literacy events are characteristic of multicultural conditions, in general, rather just of literacy practices in diasporic communi- ties. Transcultural hybridisation is a central process of cultural transformation itself. For this reason, the focus on transcultural thirdspace between ‘us’ and ‘them’ becomes increas- ingly important in order to imagine the principles of literacy pedagogy that would enable students to understand and negotiate differences, their connectedness and meaning dynam- ics in a dialogue of recognised differences, on the cultural crossroads. As Pratt emphasises, ‘our job … remains to figure out how to make that crossroads the best site for learning that it can be’, looking for the ‘pedagogical arts of the contact zone’ in order to foster a dialogue between differences in schools and beyond (1998, 184). What we are witnessing now, however, is that cultural contact zones become again more visible as a bitterly contested space. This prompts us to increase our scholarly and political efforts in conceptualising a pedagogy of transcultural literacy that is still to come. Today, we need, more than ever before, to posit some key questions in thinking about literacy education for cultural differ- ence – what is ultimately at stake and being struggled over, in these times of major cultural and spatial transformations. Concluding remarks We started this paper with an argument for the need for a spatial take on literacy debates that by and large have revolved around conceptions of cultural-semiotic spaces and places as bounded, unified and homogeneous. By bringing to these debates some key concepts from spatial theory, we have contested conceptions of space as bounded. Instead we have argued that the intensified flow of texts and people across the boundaries of nation-states stimulates the semiotic activity of transculturation on multiple scales of textual practice. This process of ever-changing textual representation on the fault line between cultures provides a location for a set of malleable identities, in particular hybrid identities in diaspora space. The semiotic activity of diaspora no longer has to be cemented by exclusive territorial claims. Rather, diaspora can be held together through cultural-semiotic artefacts, travel and the new tech- nologies of communication. In this way, identification with the diaspora serves to bridge the gap between the global and the local. Diaspora space becomes a material-semiotic space in which transcultural literacies are practised through interlocking histories and cultures and by a transformed sense of belonging to several sociocultural places – and thus to no partic- ular place. Diaspora space is a new sphere of semiotic practice which, due to its dialogical nature, in intercultural communication and translation, involves a political strategy of radical cultural creativity. It is disruptive of bounded views on cultural literacy which usually involve the polarisation of essentialised cultural identities and practices. In this light, we have identified transcultural literacy as a semiotic practice of textual meaning-making in in-between spaces; spaces that are difficult to read unless significance is given to the zones of cultural contacts in which people develop new ways to mean, often D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 Pedagogy, Culture & Society 135 in response to asymmetrical relations of power. It is probably this point that enables us to be mindful about distinctions between more and less powerful, between the mobile transnationals and those who are locked in certain spaces and less mobile, between those who can transcend borders relatively easily and those who feel how borders are backed up by force of law, economic and political power. This also makes us mindful about other axes of difference such as different histories of migration and/or displacement, and certainly about social, gender, religious and other differences within diasporic communi- ties. If transcultural literacy is seen in this way rather than as unproblematic mixing, we believe it can contribute productively to debates about education in multicultural states. This is particularly so when, through transcultural literacy, mainstream cultural groups can identify themselves as part of diaspora space. Therefore, we are arguing that transcultural literacy, while transcending the lure of the national and the local, has to do with the development of a global sense of location and with ‘routes’ rather than ‘roots’. As a way of meaning-making and as a political strategy, transculturation becomes a more relevant model in challenging the very spatial-discursive technologies of power by which we see the process of meaning and identity as being ‘naturally’ formed and imagined in bounded places and spaces. Acknowledgement This research was supported under Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP0557512). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not neces- sarily those of the Australian Research Council. References Anderson, B. 1991. Imagined communities. London: Verso. Bakhtin, M. 1981. The dialogic imagination: Four essays. Ed. M. Holquist. Trans. C. Emerson and M. Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press. ———. 1984. Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics. Eds. C. Emerson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ———. 1986. Speech genres and other late essays. Eds. C. Emerson and M. Holquist. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. ———. 1990. Art and answerability. Austin: University of Texas Press. Barton, D., M. Hamilton, and R. Ivani[caron] , eds. 2000. Situated literacies. London: Routledge. Bauman, Z. 2000. Liquid modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press. Bhabha, H. 1994. The location of culture. London: Routledge. Brandt, D., and K. Clinton. 2002. Limits of the local: Explaining perspectives on literacy as a social practice. Journal of Literacy Research 34, no. 3: 337–56. Castells, M. 1996. The information age: Economy, society and culture. Vol. 1, The rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell. Clennell, A. 2006. Teachers scorn anthem idea for schools. Sydney Morning Herald, January 23. Cope, B., and M. Kalantzis, eds. 2000. Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social futures. Melbourne: Macmillan. de Certeau, M. 1984. The practice of everyday life. Trans. S. Rendall. Berkeley: University of California Press. Deleuze, G., and F. Guattari. 1984. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and schizophrenia. London: Athlone Press. Donnelly, K. 2004. Why our schools are failing: What parents need to know about Australian education. Sydney: Duffy & Snellgrove. ———. 2005. The wacky curriculum. The Age, March 7. ———. 2006. Gobbledygook a poor swap for old school ways. The Australian, June 16. Erickson, F., and K. Gutierrez. 2002. Culture, rigor and science in educational research. Educational Researcher 31, no. 8: 21–4. ˇ D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 136 A. Kostogriz and G. Tsolidis Foucault, M. 1986. Of other spaces. Diacritics 16, no. 1: 22–7. Gee, J. 2000. The New Literacy Studies: From ‘socially situated’ to the work of the social. In Situated literacies, ed. D. Barton, M. Hamilton, and R. Ivani[caron] , 180–96. London: Routledge. Giddens, A. 2002. Runaway world. 2nd ed. London: Profile. Gilroy, P. 2000. Between camps: Nations, culture and the allure of race. London: Penguin. Hall, S. 1992. New ethnicities. In ‘Race’, culture and difference, ed. J. Donald and A. Rattansi, 252– 60. London: Sage. Kent, M. 2003. Space: Making room for space in physical geography. In Key concepts in geogra- phy, ed. S. Holloway, S. Rice, and G. Valentine, 109–30. London: Sage. Kostogriz, A. 2005a. Dialogical imagination of (inter)cultural spaces. In Dialogue with Bakhtin on second and foreign language learning: New perspectives, ed. J.K. Hall, G. Vitanova, and L. Marchenkova, 189–210. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. ———. 2005b. (Trans)cultural spaces of writing. In Writing=learning, ed. B. Doecke and G. Parr, 104–19. Adelaide: Wakefield. Lefebvre, H. 1991. The production of space. Oxford: Blackwell. Levie, S., and T. Swedenburg. 1996. Between and among boundaries of culture: Bringing text and lived experience in the third timespace. Cultural Studies 10, no. 1: 154–79. Luke, C., and A. Luke. 1999. Theorizing interracial families and hybrid identity: An Australian perspective. Educational Theory 49: 223–49. Massey, D. 1994. Space, place, and gender. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ———. 1997. A global sense of place. In Reading human geography, ed. T. Barnes and D. Gregory, 315–23. London: Arnold. ———. 1999. Imagining globalization: Power-geometries of time-space. In Global futures – Migration, environment and globalization, ed. A. Brah, M. Hickman, and M. Mac an Ghaill, 27–44. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan. Moje, E., K. Ciechanowski, K. Kramer, L. Ellis, R. Carrillo, and T. Callazo. 2004. Working toward third space in content area literacy. Reading Research Quarterly 39, no. 1: 38–70. Mouffe, C. 1994. The return of the political. London: Verso. Pahl, K. 2002. Habitus and the home: Texts and practices in families. Ways of Knowing Journal 2, no. 1: 45–53. Papastergiadis, N. 2000. The turbulence of migration. Cambridge: Polity. Parekh, B. 2000. Rethinking multiculturalism: Cultural diversity and political theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pratt, M. 1998. Arts of the contact zone. In Negotiating academic literacies, ed. V. Zamel and R. Spack, 171–86. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Smith, N. 2004. Space and substance in geography. In Envisioning human geographies, ed. P. Cloke, P. Crang, and M. Goodwin, 11–29. London: Arnold. Soja, E. 1996. Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and other real-and-imagined places. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. ———. 2000. Postmetropolis: Critical studies of cities and regions. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. Street, B. 1993. Introduction: The New Literacy Studies. In Cross-cultural approaches to literacy, ed. B. Street, 1–21. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 2003. What’s ‘new’ in New Literacy Studies? Critical approaches to literacy in theory and practice. Current Issues in Comparative Education 5, no. 2, 1–14. The Australian. 2005. Schools should foster the love of reading. July 25. Tuan, Y.-F. 1977. Space and place: The perspective of experience. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ˇ D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 1:1 5 1 8 O cto be r 2 01 1 