ABSTRACT: 
The pharmaceutical industry has been battling a negative reputation and has been confronted with accusations such as putting profits before patients and manipulating clinical trial results. In this study, we focus on how pharmaceutical companies address what we define as the Bad Pharma discourse. Drawing on interviews, press releases, corporate documentation and ethnographic fieldwork, we analyse the main themes that are used by the Belgian pharmaceutical industry to construct its reputational discourse, and we focus on how this discourse is shaped by the Bad Pharma discourse. Our results illustrate that on the one hand, the industry contests the Bad Pharma discourse by generating an alternative discourse. On the other hand, they also partly embrace and reframe this Bad Pharma discourse. This way, current societal debates are entextualised in the reputational discourses of the pharmaceutical industry. 
 
PREDICTION: 
 in this study , we focus on how the pharmaceutical industry constructs its reputational discourse . 
 we define this as a set of claims and state- ments constructed by a company to anticipate , react to and improve social evaluations about the company . 
 these reputational discourses are social constructions ; they come into being through interactions with the outside world . by drawing on an extensive Van den Bogaert et al. 129 dataset of corporate communication documents , we map the main discursive themes in the industry�s reputational discourse , and in doing so , we aim to gain understanding of how larger societal 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords Corporate communication, corporate reputation, discourse, pharmaceutical industry, qualitative methods, thematic analysis Introduction The pharmaceutical industry is an important asset for the Belgian economy. With its 35,000 employees, it is Belgium’s second largest industry (Pharma.be, 2016). In 2016, Corresponding author: Sarah Van den Bogaert, Department of Sociology, Ghent University, Korte Meer 5, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. Email: Sarah.VandenBogaert@UGent.be 774588 PRI0010.1177/2046147X18774588Public Relations InquiryVan den Bogaert et al. research-article2018 Full Research Article 128 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) the Belgian pharmaceutical industry invested 2.89 billion euro in research and develop- ment (R&D) and exported 40 billion euro worth pharmaceuticals and vaccines, which makes Belgium the third largest exporter of pharmaceuticals in Europe (EFPIA, 2017; Pharma.be, 2016). More generally, the industry plays a key role within the European economy as in 2016 it employed almost 745,000 people and invested 35,000 million euro in R&D (EFPIA, 2017). At the same time, the Edelman Trust Barometer (2017) shows that globally few consumers trust the pharmaceutical industry. The barometer indicates that 80 percent of the mass public believes that the industry puts profits before patients (Edelman, 2017). This tension between the pharmaceutical industry’s focus on profit, their economic interests and their societal function to serve the needs of patients is the main focus of this article. Compared to other industries, the pharmaceutical industry is unique as its products are necessary, indispensable and often even life-saving (Droppert and Bennett, 2015; Kessel, 2014; Nussbaum, 2009). This unique societal function creates a high ideal stand- ard that pharmaceutical companies have to live up to in order to be perceived positively by the public. This standard consists of attributes of what a pharmaceutical company should do and allows to distinguish between highly and less esteemed companies (King and Whetten, 2008). It is important to note that in the case of pharmaceutical companies, this standard is not used as an ‘ideal’; a standard to which companies can live up to be perceived more positively than other companies, but do not necessarily have to reach. This standard is used as a baseline; pharmaceutical companies have to meet these require- ments. Over the past decade, a combination of various factors has resulted in claims that pharmaceutical companies do not meet this standard (Busfield, 2010; Droppert and Bennett, 2015; Kessel, 2014), which has led to, as the Edelman Trust Barometer (2017) illustrates, very negative perceptions of the pharmaceutical industry. For example, con- sumers increasingly demand and feel entitled to access to medicines, and journalists have started to focus on conflicts of interest and drug pricing. Moreover, pharmaceutical com- panies have mainly damaged their reputation through ‘self-inflicted wounds’ (Busfield, 2010; Kessel, 2014: 984). In 2013, two Belgian journalists found out that the company Alexion hired a public relations (PR) company who used a sick child and his parents to pressure the Belgian government to reimburse Soliris, an expensive medicine to treat atypical haemolytic-uraemic syndrome (FlandersToday, 2013). In 2014, the pharmaceu- tical companies Novartis and Roche were accused by a Belgian consumer organisation of working together to strengthen the position of Lucentis, a medicine of Novartis to treat macular degeneration. Roche produces a similar and cheaper medicine (Avastin), which is used to treat different types of cancer. By working together, they avoided that this cheaper medicine could be licenced to treat macular degeneration (Test-Aankoop, 2014). These reputational issues and strong societal expectations of how an industry should behave make the pharmaceutical industry an interesting case study to analyse the social construction of corporate reputations. In this study, we focus on how the pharmaceutical industry constructs its reputational discourse. We define this as a set of claims and state- ments constructed by a company to anticipate, react to and improve social evaluations about the company. These reputational discourses are social constructions; they come into being through interactions with the outside world (Deephouse et al., 2016; Fombrun, 1996; Gray and Balmer, 1998; Palazzo and Richter, 2005). By drawing on an extensive Van den Bogaert et al. 129 dataset of corporate communication documents, we map the main discursive themes in the industry’s reputational discourse, and in doing so, we aim to gain understanding of how larger societal discourses shape reputational discourses. Corporate reputation and reputational discourse Corporate reputation, identity and image are related, but different concepts that are often used interchangeably and are difficult to conceptualise (Balmer and Greyser, 2006; Barnett et al., 2006; Brown et al., 2006; Fischer and Reuber, 2007; Walker, 2010; Whetten, 1997). Identity is constructed inside the company, by the company and its employees (Brown et al., 2006; Walker, 2010; Whetten, 1997). Identity deals with the question ‘Who do we [as a company] believe we are?’ (Whetten, 1997: 27). Image is the intended mental picture a company projects to an external audience (Walker, 2010). Reputations are the result of how others perceive and evaluate a company and refer to how audiences actually think about the company (Balmer and Greyser, 2006; Fischer and Reuber, 2007; Walker, 2010). Reputations come into being through interactions of the company with the outside world (Deephouse et al., 2016; Fombrun, 1996; Gray and Balmer, 1998; Palazzo and Richter, 2005). At this point, it becomes clear that these three concepts are interrelated and mutually shaping (Abratt and Kleyn, 2012; Walker, 2010). In this study, although we will sometimes refer to the image pharmaceutical companies want to create, we focus on reputation, as we are interested in how pharmaceutical com- panies deal with perceptions of the outside world. Walker (2010) defines corporate reputation as ‘a relatively stable, issue-specific aggregate perceptual representation of a company’s past actions and future prospects compared against some standard’ (p. 370). De Castro et al. (2006: 367) distinguish between two dimensions of corporate reputation: (1) business reputation, which is the perception of a company by stakeholders that are closely linked to a company such as customers, and (2) social reputation, which entails the perception of a company by stake- holders that are not closely linked to the company, such as the general public. In this study, we focus on the latter. We focus on how the general public and the media perceive the pharmaceutical industry. Reputations thus entail a social evaluation of the company based on a comparison with an ideal standard of what a certain type of company should look like and how it should behave (King and Whetten, 2008; Walker, 2010). Kennedy et al. (2012) state that companies will have a bad reputation when they ‘fall short of expectations for various elements of the standard’ (p. 71). Having a good reputation is important for companies as it establishes trust towards the company and its products, attracts employees and influ- ences investments by shareholders (e.g. Hillenbrand et al., 2013; Palazzo and Richter, 2005). Companies that have to deal with a bad reputation often have to deal with nega- tive headlines, hostility, the risk of more restrictive legislation and social activism (e.g. Fooks et al., 2013; Grougiou et al., 2016; Miller, 2013). In order to enhance their reputation, companies use several communication tools, such as corporate social responsibility (CSR) reports and PR campaigns (De Vries, 2016; Droppert and Bennett, 2015; Fooks et al., 2013; McDaniel et al., 2016; Sones et al., 2009; Waller and Conaway, 2011). Several scholars have theorised reputation building as 130 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) a signalling process in which these communication tools are used to send signals to stakeholders which are then used by these stakeholders to form an impression about the company (Basdeo et al., 2006; Musteen et al., 2010; Walker, 2010). In other words, com- munication tools are used to construct reputational discourses. These reputational dis- courses can act as defensive practices with which companies try to draw away attention from the negative effects of certain activities or products, rationalise or excuse their activities and influence decision-making (De Vries, 2016; Fooks et al., 2013; Grougiou et al., 2016). These scholars thus conceptualise reputational discourses as strategic inten- tional actions that are used to enhance reputations and to improve competitive advantage (Basdeo et al., 2006; Walker, 2010). Studies on reputational discourse mainly focus on micro-social interactions of the corporation with internal and external stakeholders and intentional signals produced by these companies (Dhanesh, 2015). This study draws on a social constructivist and dis- course-oriented approach towards reputation building (Lähdesmäki and Siltaoja, 2010). In our study, we define discourse as a specific way of structuring, thinking, speaking and writing about reality that defines how individuals and institutions think about and behave in relation to certain phenomena, but that also restricts certain ways of thinking or behav- ing (Hall, 2001; Hodges et al., 2008; Lähdesmäki and Siltaoja, 2010). Laclau and Mouffe (1985) argue that in society, several discourses co-exist and compete for dominance with each other. They explain that in this constant struggle over meaning, even though com- plete dominance is impossible, all discourses try to take on a hegemonic position. Macgilchrist (2007) and Livesey (2001) illustrate that this struggle is a dynamic process that goes beyond discourse versus counter-discourse. In order to counter mainstream discourses, alternative discourses often deliberately embrace or reframe elements of mainstream discourses (Livesey, 2001). In this study, we argue that reputational discourses are shaped not only by individual or group perceptions but also by larger societal discourses, such as global discussions on climate change or discussions on healthcare expenditures, which shape reputational discourses and thus social reputations. These larger societal discourses are historically and contextually situated (Alvesson and Karreman, 2000). Hence, this approach to rep- utation allows us to analyse how reputational discourses are historically and contextu- ally developed. In what follows, we describe the larger societal discourse with which the pharmaceutical industry is confronted and which serves as a starting point for us to analyse how the industry’s reputational discourse counters, embraces and reframes this societal discourse. The pharmaceutical industry’s reputation As mentioned above, the pharmaceutical industry has, in comparison to other industries, a unique societal function (Kessel, 2014). Pharmaceutical companies are expected to produce innovative, affordable and effective medicines and thus to improve and/or save lives (Kessel, 2014; Nussbaum, 2009). These expectations set a high ideal standard that the industry has to live up to. The industry’s activities are constantly compared with this standard, which has resulted in a collection of criticisms on the industry’s activities and motivations, which we define as the Bad Pharma discourse. Several scholars have Van den Bogaert et al. 131 already analysed and described the attributes of this Bad Pharma discourse (Batt, 2016; Declercq and Jacobs, 2018; Kessel, 2014; Parker, 2007). First, the expenses of pharma- ceutical companies are questioned. Over the past decades, the number of new innovative medicines entering the market has slowed down (Cockburn, 2004). Pharmaceutical com- panies explain this by arguing that research on unmet medical needs has become increas- ingly complex and difficult, and therefore, also more expensive. However, this argument is (partly) subverted by the fact that the industry’s marketing budget has significantly increased across time (Kessel, 2014). Second, the earnings of pharmaceutical companies are criticised. Although the development of new innovative medicines has become more expensive, pharmaceutical companies are still highly profitable, which can be explained by the large number of ‘me-too drugs’ or variations of already existing medicines that keep entering the market (Angell, 2004) and the fact that the prices of these medicines are based on willingness to pay instead of their development costs or added value (Alexander et al., 2017; Kantarjian et al., 2014; Light and Kantarjian, 2013). Third, the industry has been accused of disease mongering or ‘the selling of sickness’, which can be achieved in two ways (Moynihan and Cassels, 2006: 425). Pharmaceutical companies can expand the definition of disease in order to include milder or presymptomatic forms, such as pre-diabetes. Or they can narrow the definition of health in order to label previ- ously non-medical problems as medical problems, such as baldness (Moynihan et al., 2002; Woloshin and Schwartz, 2006: 452). Meanwhile, diseases that are more frequent in poor countries remain under-researched (Bauchner and Fontanarosa, 2013; Goldacre, 2012; Leisinger, 2005) and undertreated. Fourth, the research done by the pharmaceuti- cal industry has been criticised for manipulating trial protocols, unreported negative results (Leisinger, 2005) and ethical issues such as harmful clinical trials and animal testing (Akhtar, 2015; Emanuel et al., 2000). Finally, the lack of transparency in terms of pricing policy and collaboration with academics, physicians, medicine agencies and patient organisations has been criticised (Garattini, 2016; Goldacre, 2012; Horton, 2013). Methods Sampling As we are interested in how the pharmaceutical industry constructs its reputational dis- course and how this discourse is shaped by the Bad Pharma discourse, we collected corporate communication documents and information that provided insight into the con- struction of this reputational discourse. More specifically, we combine official corporate communication documents, such as press releases and an annual report, with information in which representatives of the industry discuss their communication strategies, such as interviews and ethnographic fieldwork. These data were gathered as part of a larger inter- disciplinary research project that analyses the different interconnected stakeholders involved in the chain of health news discourses, that is, health-policy stakeholders, news media and the general public. Table 1 provides an overview of our sample. First, we draw on in-depth interviews, which discuss the pharmaceutical industry’s communication strategy. Four representatives of the pharmaceutical industry were inter- viewed between March and August 2015: ‘a managing director’ and ‘communication 132 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) officer’, representing a major international pharmaceutical company, and the ‘communi- cation officer’ and ‘secretary general’ of the industry’s trade association. We selected both the communication officer and a high-rank management representative as they are the ones who are mainly dealing with reputational issues. Second, we collected all the press releases released by the four largest pharmaceutical companies in Belgium and the pharmaceutical industry’s trade association in 2015.1 We chose these companies because they are anchored within the Belgian economy and also work together in a special lobby group that, among others, focuses on creating a positive investment climate for the Belgian pharmaceutical industry. However, most of these companies did not provide press releases on their Belgian websites. When contacting the Belgian press liaisons, we were referred to their international websites. These international press releases were often only meant for shareholders or specific populations (e.g. United States citizens); we therefore only used press releases targeting a Belgian audience, written in Belgium’s official languages (Dutch/French/German). In 2015, the Ministry of Public Health and the pharmaceutical industry’s trade association agreed on several measures to reduce healthcare spending and to stimulate the development of new medicines, which they summarised in a policy document. We included these documents (both the full-length version and the brochure) as well, since they are regularly used to promote the Belgian pharmaceutical industry. Finally, we draw on ethnographic fieldwork at one of the pharmaceutical companies. The second author (JD) conducted fieldwork there between May 2015 and July 2015 and collected data over the course of 15 non-consecutive days. The data set consists of inter- views, audio-recorded meetings, informal conversations, field notes, documents col- lected on site and extracts from the website. The fieldwork was overt and mainly consisted of participant observation. For this analysis, we selected both written and spo- ken communication from the fieldwork that dealt with external communication. First, we selected two corporate communication documents, an annual (CSR) report (intended to reach the general public) and a booklet titled ‘facts & figures’ used by employees of the company to answer questions of journalists or other third parties, and four meetings on external communication. These six sources were scrutinised for the codes as identified by the first author (SVDB; see next section for detailed information on the method of analysis). After coding these sources, we selected one audio-recorded meeting for further in-depth analysis in order to better understand the relationship between the themes that emerged from our thematic analysis. During the meeting, two of the communication Table 1. Sample overview. •• Interviews: Two representatives of a major international pharmaceutical company and two representatives of the pharmaceutical industry’s trade association. •• 28 press releases of the four largest pharmaceutical companies in Belgium and the industry’s trade association. •• Two policy documents (general report + brochure). •• Corporate communication documents: annual CSR report and booklet ‘facts & figures’. •• Ethnographic fieldwork: four meetings. CSR: corporate social responsibility. Van den Bogaert et al. 133 officers met with two editors of a TV channel dedicated to business news. The editors were producing a show on cities and their local economies. The pharmaceutical company under scrutiny was invited to participate in the episode on a neighbouring city, as they recently started to use geothermal energy to make their production process more sustain- able. This particular meeting was selected because (1) the meeting contained all the themes that emerged from our thematic analysis and contained some interesting interac- tions between them and (2) the context – during the meeting the company’s geothermal energy project was discussed – was slightly different from the documents’ review con- text but still highly relevant for the analysis. Data gathering and analysis During the interviews, a semi-structured guide with open-ended questions was used and the interviews were transcribed verbatim. Before the interviews and the ethnographic fieldwork, each respondent signed a confidentiality agreement which not only allowed us to record the interviews and the meetings but also guaranteed the respondents’ per- sonal anonymity as well as the organisation’s anonymity. We therefore do not mention the names of the organisations in our sample, even though the press releases and policy documents are public information. This agreement was accompanied by a document that explained the research project’s scope and privacy procedure. Since the interviews and meetings were in Dutch, the quotes used in this article were translated into English and paraphrased if idiomatic language use made literal translations impossible. Our analysis was guided by the principles of thematic analysis (Boyatzis, 1998; Braun and Clarke, 2006). Braun and Clarke (2006) describe thematic analysis as ‘a method for identify- ing, analysing, and reporting patterns (themes) within data’ (p. 6). Our study uses this approach to map common themes within the pharmaceutical industry’s reputational dis- course. We see these themes as focal elements that can be combined and adapted to construct reputational discourses. Depending on the combination and adaptation, they allow for high- lighting specific aspects or implicitly or explicitly reacting to other, external discourses. An important asset of thematic analysis is that it can be applied to all forms of data (Boyatzis, 1998; Braun and Clarke, 2006). Since we used various forms of corporate com- munication, it was important to find a method that allows us to combine and compare information from different data sources. A second asset is that in comparison to content analysis, it is not necessary to use a predefined codebook (Vaismoradi et al., 2013). We used a data-driven, inductive approach to develop the codes (Boyatzis, 1998; Braun and Clarke, 2006). More specifically, we used our whole sample to develop the codes, instead of selecting a subsample. Previous research has indicated that recurring themes within the corporate communication of pharmaceutical companies are transparency, the industry as a job creator and showing that the industry cares for patients and society (Esteban, 2008; Nussbaum, 2009; Sones et al., 2009). Although we were aware of these themes, we did not predefine the codebook based on these themes. This allowed us to look more openly at our data. A final asset is the systematicity of the coding procedures (Braun and Clarke, 2006). First, each data source was read and coded with the aid of NVivo 11. This step ended when a first list of themes was established. Subsequently, these main themes were compared, overarching themes were clustered and this resulted in a list of four thematic 134 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) codes. For each thematic code, a definition as well as a description, inclusion and exclu- sion criteria were provided (see Appendix 1). Once these thematic codes were established, the researchers went through each data source again. All text fragments that fit under a specific thematic code were identified and placed with the corresponding thematic code (Boyatzis, 1998; Braun and Clarke, 2006). Finally, each thematic code and the relation- ship between these codes were further analysed by the researchers. Findings The common threads addressed within the reputational discourse of the Belgian pharma- ceutical industry can be summarised in four discursive themes: Belgium Pharma country (BPC), Innovation, Patient Orientation (PO) and Ethical Issues (EI). These discursive themes often overlap and enhance each other, but, for the purpose of our analysis, we will discuss each theme separately. We will first discuss the salient aspects of each discursive theme, followed by a discussion of the relationship between each discursive theme and the Bad Pharma discourse. We propose that by ignoring the Bad Pharma discourse and formulating an alternative discourse, the discursive themes contest the Bad Pharma dis- course. Nevertheless, by recognising the issue at hand but changing the focus of the discussion, the discursive themes reframe the Bad Pharma discourse as well. Finally, we discuss how the themes interact and strengthen each other. Belgium Pharma country The BPC theme consists of all references to the important position and contribution of the pharmaceutical industry to the Belgian economy. The industry is described as a stable industry that creates jobs for individual citizens, generates tax revenue and creates pres- tige for Belgium and its economy. The BPC theme does not explicitly embrace or contest the Bad Pharma discourse, but can be seen as an alternative discourse that competes with the Bad Pharma discourse for dominance. In doing so, it implicitly contests a central attribute of the Bad Pharma dis- course; it contests the idea that making profit should be considered to be negative and problematic. The BPC theme emphasises the positive effects of the large profits these companies make and has several salient aspects that are foregrounded depending on the context in which the theme occurs. A first way of highlighting the economic contribution of the Belgian pharmaceutical industry is exemplified in the following extract: These new statistics illustrate that Belgium is a leading country in the pharmaceutical industry worldwide. Not only when looking at the GDP [Gross Domestic Product], but also in relation to the population, the sector is doing exceptionally well. With more than 200 pharmaceutical companies and more than 34,000 employees, the pharmaceutical sector is a first-class industry, both on the Belgian and on the European level. (Press release – trade association) The BPC theme highlights the fact that the pharmaceutical industry not only costs society money, as claimed in the Bad Pharma discourse. Therefore, the focus is on the jobs created and the tax revenue generated by the industry. Van den Bogaert et al. 135 Second, the BPC theme emphasises the strength and vitality of the sector. The numbers show the vitality of the Belgian pharmaceutical industry as a driver of growth and constant innovation for the Belgian economy. (Press release – trade association) Nowadays the innovative pharmaceutical industry in Belgium is top of the class. However, there is not a single reason for complacency. Other (European) countries are determined to attract innovative industries. If we want to keep and strengthen the pharmaceutical industry in Belgium, we constantly have to monitor its competitiveness. (Brochure policy document) These arguments are also related to an implicit fear of regulation. Several arguments of the Bad Pharma discourse suggest the need for increased regulation of the pharmaceuti- cal industry. Like most industries, the pharmaceutical industry wants to avoid increased regulation as this could have consequences for the profits they are making. Therefore, in the BPC theme, the consequences of unfavourable regulation are highlighted. The above excerpt from the policy document consists of two implicit references to these consequences. The excerpt mentions that Belgium could lose its leading economic posi- tion and that if the economic conditions become unfavourable, the industry will leave Belgium. The third aspect of the BPC theme refers to the local ties of these companies. Within the Bad Pharma discourse, ‘Big Pharma’ are framed as large and threatening multina- tional companies. However, several pharmaceutical companies have Belgian roots and started as small, local companies. These companies have strong historical and economic ties with Belgium and the Belgian economy, which are, as the following excerpt illus- trates, used in the BPC theme to reframe the pharmaceutical sector as local, close to the Belgian population: [name of the company] in Belgium is one of the most outstanding companies of the [name]- group. The company which was founded by [name of the founder] when in 1953 he started his own research, has significantly influenced the evolution of medicine. [Name of the company] has several branches in our country. (Annual report – pharmaceutical company) When considering the BPC theme in the meeting from the ethnographic fieldwork, it could be argued that the theme is embodied in the very idea of collaboration between the pharmaceutical company and the business news TV channel, as the show’s central focus was on strong local economies. The company considered this a suitable opportunity to highlight their leading economic position as well as the strong ties they had with the region. The main campus of the company is still in the same area where the founder started his small lab. The two spokespeople raised this connection several times with the editors as an important element to foreground in the documentary, talking about their ‘local anchorage’. This is further illustrated in the following quote by the company spokesperson during the meeting, which also shows that the BPC theme is strongly inter- twined with the theme of Innovation: We intend to depict [city] as an innovative region, which it certainly is because of the third generation geothermal energy technology. From there you can take it even further by referring 136 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) to the biggest innovator in the region [i.e. the company] […] because of our fourth generation geothermal energy technology. (Spokesperson pharmaceutical company – meeting) A final dimension of the element of local roots and authenticity is that the idea of hav- ing a long local history also strengthens the idea of stability and trustworthiness. For example, in several informative boxes, the brochure of the policy document gives a his- torical overview of the pharmaceutical industry in Belgium. These ‘intermezzos’ carry titles such as ‘a legacy from our ancestors, a duty towards our children’ and ‘the rise of the giants of the Belgian pharmaceutical industry’. These references to history and local- ity reframe pharmaceutical companies as familiar, local and trustworthy companies, which can be seen as an alternative discourse for the Bad Pharma discourse. Finally, these references of familiarity, locality and trustworthiness also strengthen the Patient Orientation discursive theme, as being local also means being close to patients, and the Ethical Issues discursive theme, as being trustworthy refutes the claim that the industry behaves unethically. Innovation A second common thread is made up of references to the importance of Innovation. The industry is described as being innovative in two ways. First, they use new technologies and produce new treatments that are different from existing treatments. Second, they use new technologies to make their production process more sustainable. Although using innovative and environmentally friendly technology is not directly related to the Bad Pharma discourse, the pharmaceutical industry uses these examples to emphasise their credibility as an innovative and scientific player, to highlight their commitment to inno- vation and to shift the attention away from the Bad Pharma discourse. The Innovation theme responds to the Bad Pharma discourse in several ways. First, by emphasising the innovativeness of the sector and its products, the Innovation theme contests the idea that the industry is only interested in profit and developing me-too drugs. The following quote illustrates this practice: The most important task is, of course, being the driver of research for diseases for which there hasn’t been developed a solution yet. That’s the challenge for innovative industries. To find cures that offer an added value for patients. Nobody is waiting for another me-too drug. Especially not the people who have to pay for these cures. They are waiting for really innovative medicines that make a difference. (Representative 1 – pharmaceutical company) The idea of being innovative depicts the pharmaceutical industry as bringing together scientists who are genuinely interested in discovering how the human body works and who use their knowledge to create new medicines, as this excerpt of the annual report shows: We believe that great innovation involves a convergence of the best people, research, technology and care. Together with our parent company, we create strong networks of people capable of combining ideas, technology, and resources in new ways. Our internal scientific research team draws on the best external know-how, science, and ideas. Using this knowledge pool, we develop answers to pressing medical challenges. (Annual report – pharmaceutical company) Van den Bogaert et al. 137 Hence, innovation is linked to curiosity and responding to healthcare challenges, rather than to money. So far, both the BPC theme and the Innovation discursive theme can be seen as attempts to mobilise an alternative discourse. However, the pharmaceutical industry sometimes recognises and incorporates some elements of the Bad Pharma discourse. Within the Innovation theme, it is recognised that prices of their products are high. Nevertheless, by highlighting the complexity of the development of new innovative medicines, the Innovation theme does reframe the issue. New technologies and the com- plexity of diseases complicate the development of pharmaceuticals. Therefore, as the following quote illustrates, it is unavoidable that innovative medicines are expensive: The pricing policy of pharmaceutical companies, I think, is something that is often represented in one-sided ways. One only looks at the price a company asks for a medicine and the price to produce them. These are two things you can’t compare just like that. You have to take into account all the research that preceded the production process and also all the research that took place but that failed. These are things that also have a price and that are often discussed in one- sided representations. (Representative 2 – trade association) This example similarly shows how the innovation argument is used to reframe and partly contest the Bad Pharma discourse: As pharmaceutical industry we often have a bad reputation. Which is not entirely unjust, I admit. Luckily, we have learned from our mistakes. I believe there is a great need for transparency and we have to keep communicating about what, why and how we do it. For example, when it comes to our pricing policy. We do not wake up in the morning and then decide that the price of our products has to be high. This is the result of a 10-year process where you have, unfortunately, certain factors … I believe that communication and constantly explaining to people what we do, how and why we do things, remains very important. (Representative 2 – pharmaceutical company) In this example, the Bad Pharma discourse is reframed as an issue of communication. During our conversation, the representative did not contest the Bad Pharma discourse and even explicitly recognised that the pharmaceutical industry had made mistakes. Nevertheless, when the representative starts talking about innovation and their pricing policy, this pricing issue is reframed as a problem of communication and transparency. In other words, the price of these products is not too high, and the industry just fails at explaining how their prices are determined. This is an argument that JD also often heard during the fieldwork, and it is closely linked to transparency. While the Bad Pharma discourse frames a lack of transparency as a conscious decision to hold back information, the representative frames it as clumsy communication, which is less intentional, and therefore, also less problematic. The Innovation theme also strengthens the BPC theme as being innovative is part of economic strength. The previous section already illustrated how the theme of innovation is highlighted in the meeting with the TV channel in which the geothermal energy project is discussed. Throughout the meeting, the company spokespeople repeat that the geother- mal energy project is ‘a pioneer project’ or something ‘people might be familiar with 138 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) already’, but to which the company ‘adds real innovation’. One of the spokespeople aims to provide proof of their innovative position with the following quote: We are now talking with people in Gothenburg who have a similar project. We have to go to Scandinavia, really, to find expertise that can follow and add to our way of thinking. (Spokesperson pharmaceutical company – meeting) Having to travel to find the right expertise is a strong argument for innovation. It also implies that the company is bringing in new expertise locally, strengthening their ties with the local economy, and the local economy itself, and finally also their leading position. Finally, this Innovation theme also strengthens the Patient orientation discursive theme, as being innovative will also help more patients for which no treatment is avail- able yet: This way pharmaceutical companies can keep focusing on the development of innovative pharmaceuticals for rare diseases, and we can avoid that this will leave Belgian patients with a rare disease in the lurch. (Press release – trade association) Patient Orientation The third theme relates to the industry being patient oriented. It emphasises the benefits of pharmaceuticals for patients’ health and the fact that the industry enables patients worldwide to get access to medicines. This discursive theme also relates to the pricing and reimbursement of medicines, as expensive treatments need to be reimbursed by the government in order for patients to get access to these medicines. The PO theme is more explicitly linked to the Bad Pharma discourse. First, by empha- sising that patients are what drives these companies, this PO theme refutes the idea of being solely profit-driven. The PO theme offers an alternative discourse which puts patients before profits: Of course the patient is what counts patients are very important stakeholders, if not the most important ones. I mean… in the end they are what counts. What matters is how you can help patients, and everything else are means to an end. (Representative 1 – pharmaceutical company) The PO theme also emphasises that the industry enables patients worldwide to get access to medicines. These arguments reject the idea that the industry is only interested in developing lucrative solutions for diseases in rich countries: We also develop solutions for patients outside the classic Western world. Tuberculosis is a classic example, but also several solutions for worm diseases, HIV gels. We develop a lot of medicines for very specific and severe conditions in countries where there often is no one to pay for them. We work together with the people of UNICEF and the Red Cross to get these medicines to patients in a responsible way. This is an important consequence, which I think is the right one. And one that relates to the fact that we sometimes have to go back and forth between R&D investment and pricing, but so far it has been going quite well. (Representative 2 – pharmaceutical company) Van den Bogaert et al. 139 Second, the PO theme emphasises that medicines are being developed for patients who are in urgent need of a treatment. Hence, by focusing on patients and diseases for which there are no treatments yet, the issue of me-too drugs is addressed: Our team has managed wonderfully to turn the company in a worldwide scientific pioneer who helps patients with serious diseases to live a normal live. (Press release – pharmaceutical company 2) The booklet from the ethnographic fieldwork further illustrates how pharmaceutical companies actively engage with the Bad Pharma discourse. This booklet offers many examples of our four themes and more specifically relates to the PO theme as follows: [name of the company] puts patients first, and makes every effort to develop and market innovative medicines that meet the most challenging medical needs. (Booklet facts & figures – pharmaceutical company) In this example, the PO theme is linked to the Innovation theme; when responding to unmet medical needs, companies are forced to be more innovative as well. Finally, the PO theme accounts for the high prices of pharmaceuticals. We illustrate this by using an excerpt of a press release These innovative, short-term antiviral therapies have an exceptional high chance of complete recovery, and have significantly fewer side effects, and a 95 per cent success rate. We plead for an extension of the conditions of reimbursement of this essential therapy in order to provide wider access for infected patients. (Press release – trade association) By emphasising the innovativeness and benefits of these new therapies, its price is legitimised. Moreover, by referring to the government and their role in gaining access to new therapies, this responsibility is transferred to the government. In other words, it is not the price of these therapies that prevents patients to access new therapies, it is the government. Furthermore, by referring to the responsibility of the government, the industry does not address the Bad Pharma discourse. They merely keep repeating the argument that access to new therapies instead of the price of these therapies is the key problem. In this example, the PO theme is linked to innovation as well; only with true innovation can patients be helped. When turning to the ethnographic data and the recording of the meeting, we also see that, more generally, the pharmaceutical industry tries to construct a discourse that puts society, and thus also patients, before profits. Although the patient is not discussed, as the subject of the documentary is geothermal energy, the spokespeople do construct a closely related discourse on social engagement and CSR, as illustrated by the follow- ing quote: Additionally, there’s a social engagement, that we have to discuss carefully and thoughtfully, because we could make some of the warmth available for society. […] It’s an industrial project, but with possible social engagement outcomes too. We have to be careful here not to make any promises we can’t keep or to seem like we’re not authentic. We shouldn’t go too far, but social 140 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) engagement is essential for our company; we just should be very thoughtful when speaking about it. (Spokesperson pharmaceutical company–Meeting) The social engagement aspect of the project is important and mentioned several times. Interestingly, we see a lot of hedging and a fear to miscommunicate this aspect and, con- sequently, to be accused of not being authentic. The spokesperson seems to be aware of the Bad Pharma discourse and the danger of strengthening it, as a result of potentially exaggerating the societal outcomes and benefits. Hence, the aspects of social engage- ment and transparency intersect here. EI A final common thread is made up of references to EI. These arguments refer to two types of ethical behaviour. First, the industry draws on ethical frameworks to guide their activities in terms of patient and animal rights, ethical pricing and respect for the envi- ronment. A second type of arguments concern transparency, in terms of research, con- flicts of interest, marketing and in terms of profit and expenditures. The EI theme is more implicitly related to the Bad Pharma discourse and can be seen as an alternative, competing discourse. There are varying degrees in which it refutes and recognises the Bad Pharma discourse. First, the EI theme consists of several references to the ethical frameworks that guide the industry’s activities. By referring to ethical guidelines, the industry suggests that as they have to conform to these guidelines, it is impossible for the industry to act unethically. Hence, this EI theme refutes the idea that the pharmaceutical industry behaves unethically: Responsible marketing is an integral part of these principles. It is also based on the ethics codes of [name of trade association], the Mdeon directives (Mdeon is the common ethical platform constituted of associations of physicians, pharmacists, veterinarians, dentists, nurses, the pharmaceutical and medical devices industry) and the relevant Belgian legislation. (Annual report – pharmaceutical company) Nevertheless, these guidelines are mostly self-regulatory and seldom binding. By refer- ring to these guidelines, pharmaceutical companies try to avoid more restrictive legislation. Second, the EI theme regularly refers to transparency. These assertions more overtly recognise the transparency issue. Nevertheless, they reframe a lack of transparency as something from the past, as clumsy communication (see section on innovation) or as a result of society that has changed. We use an example from the policy document to illus- trate this: Of course in 2015 the project is not finished. Although most pharmaceutical companies act ethically and responsibly, unfortunately, several incidents, in Belgium but also abroad, have illustrated that some companies still find it difficult to act inherently responsibly in the societal field in which they are finding themselves in. Also the context changes rapidly. An example: 50 years ago patient organisations were unknown and did not participate in the healthcare system. Nowadays, they are valuable stakeholders with which pharmaceutical companies try to build solid business relations. (Policy document) Van den Bogaert et al. 141 Finally, when considering the ethnographic data, the previous example of the meeting already illustrated the importance of transparency and the company’s careful approach to communicating concrete social participation plans. Another example of this careful approach can be found in the following example. The communication officer of the phar- maceutical company tells the journalist that the current mayor used to work for their company. Although this was more than 10 years ago, the journalist seems to think this is a fun fact and wants to include it in the news item: Editor: Yeah well I think it’s quite fun it immediately connects the dots. Spokesperson 1: Yes but I would discuss with him whether he wants to be on the show Spokesperson 2: We shouldn’t create the impression that it’s a way to- Spokesperson 1: Because it isn’t; there is no conflict of interests. Our main local governments are [names of two other cities], not [the city that is the subject of the series], or only to a lesser extent. It’s a fun fact for you guys, but I wouldn’t mention it in the show. There is a particular interplay of different aspects of the EI theme in this fragment: the imperative of being transparent and the imperative of avoiding conflicts of interest. There is no actual conflict of interest as the mayor is no longer involved in the company’s management, and the information on the mayor’s current and past mandates is publicly available online, and in that sense, there is no issue of transparency either. However, the spokespeople are afraid to create the impression that there is a conflict of interest. This fragment suggests that pharmaceutical companies have internalised some parts of the Bad Pharma discourse. This EI theme is also linked to the other themes. For example, by referring to the ethi- cal guidelines to which the industry conforms, some of the aspects of the BPC theme are strengthened. More specifically, it suggests that no extra regulation is necessary and it strengthens the arguments around the trustworthiness of the industry (see section on the BPC theme). Discussion and conclusion In this study, we have illustrated how the pharmaceutical industry’s reputational dis- course is shaped by the Bad Pharma discourse. More specifically, our case study reveals how the industry formulates an alternative discourse that contests, (partly) embraces and reframes the Bad Pharma discourse. This study used a social constructivist and discourse-oriented approach towards reputation building. We show that the pharmaceutical industry’s reputational dis- course is shaped by a large societal discourse that is linked to attributes of how a pharmaceutical company should act. We have illustrated that reputational discourses address these expectations. Reputational discourses refer to, and are shaped by, cer- tain historically and contextually situated societal discourses and are, therefore, products of current societal debates. More specifically, a few decades ago, pharma- ceutical companies were highly respected (Li, 2014; Parker, 2007). Now, 142 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) due to self-inflicted wounds, changes within pharmaceutical companies and several societal changes, the industry is contested and their reputational discourse reflects these societal discourses. Hence, in order to fully grasp the meaning behind reputa- tional discourses, it is necessary for researchers to map larger societal discourses that transcend individual and group perceptions, such as the Bad Pharma discourse or discourses on climate change. This approach to reputation building can offer more insight into how, and why, reputations and reputational discourses change over time. Furthermore, our study illustrates that the pharmaceutical industry’s reputational discourse is more than a defensive practice or strategic business tool. We have shown that besides reacting to the Bad Pharma discourse, pharmaceutical companies also internalise the attributes of this discourse, which means that the Bad Pharma dis- course also becomes part of how the spokespeople think and act. It becomes part of their identity. Although this illustrates that identity and reputation are interrelated concepts and it suggests that identity plays a role in the construction of reputational discourses, this goes beyond the focus of our study. Since our sample focused on external communication, we were not able to study identity formation within phar- maceutical companies. Future research could focus on this relationship between reputational discourse and identity. Although we have only focused on the pharmaceutical industry – which is unique as it produces products that are necessary, life-enhancing and/or life-saving for individuals – and on the Belgian context, some of these discursive themes transcend the specific characteristics of the pharmaceutical industry and are also relevant for other industries and contexts. For example, after several incidents (e.g. the collapse of the Rana Plaza building in Bangladesh), the matters of transparency and ethical behaviour have become more important for the clothing industry. Several studies illustrate that these themes are used by other industries and in other contexts (e.g. Berens and van Riel, 2004; Livesey and Kearins, 2002; Waller and Conaway, 2011). For example, Nike used the job creator argument in its communication campaign (Waller and Conaway, 2011), which is similar to the BPC theme. Berens and Van Riel (2004) find that scales measuring the expecta- tions of stakeholders regarding companies often include ‘leadership in the industry’ and ‘doing something good for society’. Livesey and Kearins (2002) illustrate that ‘transpar- ency’ and ‘care’ are metaphors that are often used in reputational discourses, which relate to our EI and PO theme. Our study, therefore, offers opportunities for comparative research into the content and construction of reputational discourses. Quantitative, cross- industry comparative studies could examine these themes in order to compare the repu- tational discourses of various industries. Finally, we were only able to gain insights into the construction and not in the recep- tion of these corporate messages. Further research could address how this reputational discourse actually leads to a better reputation and increased trust in the pharmaceutical industry. Schmeltz (2017) illustrates that a tight fit between CSR communication and consumer values contributes to the success of CSR communication. This illustrates the importance of the discourse-oriented approach used in our study. Since reputational dis- courses are shaped by societal discourses, this also means that reputational discourses that address these societal discourses will be more closely aligned with the ideal stand- ards of how a company should behave. Van den Bogaert et al. 143 Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to all the members of the Health, Media & Society research centre for their insights and advice. They are also grateful to the Special Research Fund (BOF) of Ghent University for providing funding for the research on which this article is based. Funding The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/ or publication of this article: This work was supported by the Special Research Fund (BOF) of Ghent University (Grant No. BOF14-GOA-014). Note 1. As our interviews and ethnographic fieldwork took place in 2015, we decided to only use press releases and other types of corporate communication released in 2015. ORCID iD Sarah Van den Bogaert https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5671-8642 References Abratt R and Kleyn N (2012) Corporate identity, corporate branding and corporate reputations: Reconciliation and integration. European Journal of Marketing 46(7–8): 1048–1063. Akhtar A (2015) The flaws and human harms of animal experimentation. Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 24(4): 407–419. Alexander GC, Ballreich J, Socal MP, et al. (2017) Reducing branded prescription drug prices: A review of policy options. Pharmacotherapy 37(11): 1469–1478. Alvesson M and Karreman D (2000) Varieties of discourse: On the study of organizations through discourse analysis. Human Relations 53(9): 1125–1149. Angell M (2004) The Truth about the Drug Companies. New York: Random House. Balmer JM and Greyser SA (2006) Corporate marketing: Integrating corporate identity, corporate branding, corporate communications, corporate image and corporate reputation. European Journal of Marketing 40(7–8): 730–741. Barnett ML, Jermier J and Lafferty BA (2006) Corporate reputation: The definitional landscape. Corporate Reputation Review 9(1): 26–38. Basdeo DK, Smith KG, Grimm CM, et al. (2006) The impact of market actions on firm reputation. Strategic Management Journal 27(12): 1205–1219. Batt S (2016) Pharmaceutical company corruption and the moral crisis in medicine. Hastings Center Report 46(4): 10–13. Bauchner H and Fontanarosa PB (2013) Restoring confidence in the pharmaceutical industry. JAMA 309(6): 607–609. Berens G and van Riel C (2004) Corporate associations in the academic literature: Three main streams of thought in the reputation measurement literature. Corporate Reputation Review 7(2): 161–178. Boyatzis RE (1998) Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code Development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Braun V and Clarke V (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3(2): 77–101. 144 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) Brown TJ, Dacin PA, Pratt MG, et al. (2006) Identity, intended image, construed image, and repu- tation: An interdisciplinary framework and suggested terminology. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 34(2): 99–106. Busfield J (2010) ‘A pill for every ill’: Explaining the expansion in medicine use. Social Science & Medicine 70: 934–941. Cockburn IM (2004) The changing structure of the pharmaceutical industry. Health Affairs 23(1): 10–22. De Castro GM, Navas López JE and López Sáez P (2006) Business and social reputation. Journal of Business Ethics 63(4): 361–370. De Vries H (2016) Corporate social responsibility and public health: An unwanted marriage. Preventive Medicine 89: 345–347. Declercq J and Jacobs G (2018) ‘It’s such a great story it sells itself’? Narratives of vicarious expe- rience in a European pharmaceutical company. Journal of Pragmatics. Epub ahead of print 17 February. DOI: 10.1016/j.pragma.2018.01.008. Deephouse DL, Newburry W and Soleimani A (2016) The effects of institutional development and national culture on cross-national differences in corporate reputation. Journal of World Business 51(3): 463–473. Dhanesh GS (2015) Corporate social responsibility (CSR) in India. Public Relations Inquiry 4(3): 287–303. Droppert H and Bennett S (2015) Corporate social responsibility in global health: an exploratory study of multinational pharmaceutical firms. Globalization and Health 11: 15. Edelman Trust Barometer (2017) Trust in healthcare: Making progress. Available at: https://www. edelman.com/post/trust-healthcare-making-progress/ (accessed 14 December 2017). EFPIA (2017) The Pharmaceutical Industry in Figures. Brussels: EFPIA. Emanuel EJ, Wendler D and Grady C. (2000) What makes clinical research ethical? JAMA 283(20): 2701–2711. Esteban D (2008) Strengthening corporate social responsibility in the pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Medical Marketing 8(1): 77–79. Fischer E and Reuber R (2007) The good, the bad, and the unfamiliar: The challenges of reputation formation facing new firms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(1): 53–75. FlandersToday (2013) Drug campaign for sick child was PR stunt. Available at: http://www.flan- derstoday.eu/business/drug-campaign-sick-child-was-pr-stunt (accessed 27 March 2018). Fombrun CJ (1996) Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate Image. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Fooks G, Gilmore A, Collin J, et al. (2013) The limits of corporate social responsibility. Journal of Business Ethics 112(2): 283–299. Garattini S (2016) The European medicines agency is still too close to industry. British Medical Journal. Epub ahead of print 6 May. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.i2412. Goldacre B (2012) Bad Pharma. London: Fourth Estate. Gray ER and Balmer JM (1998) Managing corporate image and corporate reputation. Long Range Planning 31(5): 695–702. Grougiou V, Dedoulis E and Leventis S (2016) Corporate social responsibility reporting and organizational stigma. Journal of Business Research 69(2): 905–914. Hall S (2001) Foucault: Power, knowledge and discourse. In: Wetherell M, Taylor S and Yates SJ (eds) Discourse Theory and Practice: A Reader. London: Sage, pp.72–81. Hillenbrand C, Money K and Ghobadian A(2013) Unpacking the mechanism by which corpo- rate responsibility impacts stakeholder relationships. British Journal of Management 24(1): 127–146. Hodges B (2008) Discourse analysis. British Medical Journal 337: a879. Van den Bogaert et al. 145 Horton R (2013) Offline: Falling out with pharma. The Lancet 381(9864): 358. Kantarjian H, Steensma D, Sanjuan JR, et al. (2014) High cancer drug prices in the United States: Reasons and proposed solutions. Journal of Oncology Practice 10(4): e208–e211. Kennedy MT, Chok JI and Liu J (2012) What does it mean to be green? The emergence of new criteria for assessing corporate reputation. In: Barnett ML and Pollock TG (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Corporate Reputation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.69–93. Kessel M (2014) Restoring the pharmaceutical industry’s reputation. Nature Biotechnology 32(10): 983–990. King BG and Whetten DA (2008) Rethinking the relationship between reputation and legitimacy: A social actor conceptualization. Corporate Reputation Review 11(3): 192–207. Laclau E and Mouffe C (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics. London: Verso Books. Lähdesmäki M and Siltaoja M (2010) Towards a variety of meanings – Multiple representa- tions of reputation in the small business context. British Journal of Management 21(1): 207–222. Leisinger KM (2005) The corporate social responsibility of the pharmaceutical industry. Business Ethics Quarterly 15(4): 577–594. Li JJ (2014) Blockbuster Drugs: The Rise and Fall of the Pharmaceutical Industry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Light DW and Kantarjian H (2013) Market spiral pricing of cancer drugs. Cancer 119(22): 3900– 3902. Livesey SM (2001) Eco-identity as discursive struggle. Journal of Business Communication 38(1): 58–91. Livesey SM and Kearins K (2002) Transparent and caring corporations? A study of sustainabil- ity reports by The Body Shop and Royal Dutch/Shell. Organization & Environment 15(3): 233–258. McDaniel PA, Cadman B and Malone RE (2016) Shared vision, shared vulnerability: A con- tent analysis of corporate social responsibility information on tobacco industry websites. Preventive Medicine 89: 337–344. Macgilchrist F (2007) Positive discourse analysis: Contesting dominant discourses by reframing the issues. Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis across Disciplines 1(1): 74–94. Miller JE (2013) From bad pharma to good pharma. The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 41(3): 601–610. Moynihan R and Cassels A (2006) Selling Sickness. New York: Nation Books. Moynihan R, Heath L and Henry D (2002) Selling sickness: The pharmaceutical industry and disease mongering. British Medical Journal 324(7342): 886–891. Musteen M, Datta DK and Kemmerer B (2010) Corporate reputation: Do board characteristics matter? British Journal of Management 21(2): 498–510. Nussbaum ASK (2009) Ethical corporate social responsibility (CSR) and the pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Medical Marketing 9(1): 67–76. Palazzo G and Richter U (2005) CSR business as usual? The case of the tobacco industry. Journal of Business Ethics 61(4): 387–401. Parker J (2007) The reputation, image and influence of the pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Medical Marketing 7(4): 309–313. Pharma.be (2016) Pharma Figures 2016. Brussels: Pharma.be. Schmeltz L (2017) Getting CSR communication fit: A study of strategically fitting cause, consum- ers and company in corporate CSR communication. Public Relations Inquiry 6(1): 47–72. Sones M, Grantham S and Vieira ET (2009) Communicating CSR via pharmaceutical company web sites. Corporate Communications: An International Journal 14(2): 144–157. 146 Public Relations Inquiry 7(2) Test-Aankoop (2014) Test-Aankoop dient klacht in tegen farmareuzen Roche en Novartis. Available at: https://www.test-aankoop.be/action/pers%20informatie/persberichten/2014/avastin (accessed 27 March 2018). Vaismoradi M, Turunen H and Bondas T (2013) Content analysis and thematic analysis: Implications for conducting a qualitative descriptive study. Nursing & Health Sciences 15(3): 398–405. Walker K (2010) A systematic review of the corporate reputation literature: Definition, measure- ment, and theory. Corporate Reputation Review 12(4): 357–387. Waller RL and Conaway RN (2011) Framing and counterframing the issue of corporate social responsibility: The communication strategies of Nikebiz. com. Journal of Business Communication 48(1): 83–106. Whetten DA (1997) Part II: Where do reputations come from? Theory development and the study of corporate reputation. Corporate Reputation Review 1(1): 25–34. Woloshin S and Schwartz LM (2006) Giving legs to restless legs: A case study of how the media helps make people sick. PLoS Medicine 3(4): e170. Author biographies Sarah Van den Bogaert is a PhD researcher at the Department of Sociology of Ghent University (Belgium), affiliated with the HeDera and Health, Media & Society Research Group. Her research focuses on the political–economic and institutional relations between different stakeholders that are active in the broad field of health and health news and the discourses on health problems that are articulated by these various interest groups. Jana Declercq is a PhD researcher at the Linguistics Department of Ghent University (Belgium) working on an interdisciplinary research project on health news. Drawing from a linguistic ethno- graphic perspective, she focuses on how health news is produced and which discourses relevant stakeholders in health settings produce. Thierry Christiaens is a professor in Clinical Pharmacology at Ghent University (Belgium) and editor in chief of the Belgian Centre of Pharmacotherapeutical Information (BCFI/CBIP), an organisation that disseminates medical information to physicians and pharmacists. During his whole career, he mainly lectured and published on the rational use of drugs in the context of evi- dence-based medicine in different domains. Geert Jacobs is a full professor at the Department of Linguistics at Ghent University (Belgium) and head of the international NewsTalk&Text Research Group, which brings together researchers from all over Europe in the field of media discourse studies. His research focuses on the study of professional and institutional discourse in a pragmatic perspective, with special interest in news production processes. Piet Bracke is a full professor at the Department of Sociology of Ghent University (Belgium), where he directs a health sociological and social demographic research group, HeDera. Apart from focusing on gender and family sociology, on mental health, on stigmatisation and on mental health service use, his health sociological interests are in theories of population health and health service use of the general population. Van den Bogaert et al. 147 Appendix 1 Table 2. Thematic codes. Name of theme Definition Description Inclusion and exclusion criteria Belgium Pharma country The text or person refers to the important position and contribution of the pharmaceutical industry within/to the Belgian economy Indicators are all references such as ‘Belgium is an important pharma country’ or ‘the leading position of Belgium’ Inclusion: All references to the important contribution of the industry to the Belgian economy Exclusion: References to the economy in general. The statement has to highlight how important the pharmaceutical industry is for Belgium Innovation The text or person describes how innovative the pharmaceutical industry is and/or stresses the importance of innovation Indicators are all references to innovation and revolutionary therapies by the pharmaceutical industry Inclusion: All references to innovation by the pharmaceutical industry Exclusion: References to the development of medicines in general, references that do not highlight the innovative or revolutionary character Patient Orientation The text or person refers to the fact that everything the industry does is, in the first place, for patients. They do these things for patients to get access to medicines and to improve their health Indicators are references that state ‘for patients’ Inclusion: References that highlight that it is good for patients and patients will get access to medicines or will become healthier Exclusion: References that mention patients but do not stress their centrality or importance Ethical Issues The text or person refers to the need for the pharmaceutical industry to develop or follow ethical guidelines and to be more transparent Indicators are all references to ‘transparency’, ‘ethics’ and ‘conflict of interests’ Inclusion: References mentioning the need for transparency, ethical guidelines or conflicts of interests Exclusion: References that mention transparency or ethics but that do not relate to the behaviour of the industry 