{'rouge1': 0.34975794403076, 'rouge2': 0.14784462486831845, 'rougeL': 0.24268602220782398, 'rougeLsum': 0.24240302307537143}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
This article examines the apron and the life of William Palace Franklin, and the apron men who resented the control of the towns’s affluent artsmen and workers in the a-yet unfinished multi-volume work by John C. Franklin, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George, George George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges, George Georges,
ABSTRACT (sample)
Purpose - Contemporary outdoor rock and popular music festivals offer liminal spaces in which event participants can experience characteristics associated with the carnivalesque. Festival goers celebrate with abandonment, excess and enjoy a break from the mundane routine of everyday life. The aim of this conceptual paper is to explore the way gender is negotiated in the festival space. Design/methodology/approach - The rock and popular music tribute festival, known as ‘Glastonbudget’ provides the focus for this conceptual paper. A pilot ethnographic study at the event utilising photographic imagery was used to understand the way in which gender is displayed. Findings - It is suggested that liminal zones offer space to invert social norms and behave with abandonment and freedom away from the constraints of the everyday but neither women nor men actually take up this opportunity. The carnivalesque during Glastonbudget represents a festival space which consolidates normative notions of gender hierarchy via a complicated process of othering. Research limitations/implications - This is a conceptual paper which presents the need to develop social science based studies connecting gender to the social construction of event space. The ideas developed in this article need to be further explored further building upon the research design established here. Originality/value – There is currently a paucity of literature surrounding the concept of gender within these festival spaces especially in relation to liminality within events research.
PREDICTION (sample)
This article provides the need to develop social science based articles connecting gender to the social construction of event space. This ideas developed in this article need to be further explore using more investigative modes of fieldwork. This is a conceptual paper that presents the need to develop social science based articles linking gender to the social construction of event space. This ideas developed in this article need to be further explore using more investigative modes of fieldwork.
