{'rouge1': 0.3875876380322163, 'rouge2': 0.17730715662748278, 'rougeL': 0.26975358000945615, 'rougeLsum': 0.26930941844028267}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
This article examines Franklin’s self-revelation and self- concealment in the British North American American period. It argues that Franklin’s self-graphical and skilled craftsmanship is the most identified as a human-made man, and that the author contends that the author he kept hidden. Perhaps, however, these very processes of self-revelation and self- concealment are what draw us to Benjamin Franklin.
ABSTRACT (sample)
In this article I hope to cast some light on the relationship between religious faith and education by a preliminary mapping of the field. There are three parts to the article. First, I lay out the assumptions from which the rest of the article builds. Second, I seek to identify possible links between religion and education. As a sub-set of this, I explore a range of ways that theology might relate to education. Third, as a step towards a more healthy relationship between education and religious faith, I offer reasons why the church needs the academy and the academy needs the church. In the light of a convergence of the concerns that I show are shared by religious believers and educators, it is suggested that religious faith in the context of education should be considered an asset rather than an enemy.
PREDICTION (sample)
This paper explores the relationship between religious faith and education in different ways. It argues that the relationship between religious faith and education is a positive relationship between religion and education. It argues that the relationship between religious faith and education is a positive relationship, but the community is a significant relationship, but the church is a enriched if it was willing to learn from and collaborate with the church. The paper argues that the academy is enriched if it was willing to learn from and collaborate with the church. The paper argues that the academy is enriched if it was willing to learn from and collaborate with the church.
