ABSTRACT: 
Research leadership in Australian universities takes place against a backdrop of policy reforms concerned with measurement and comparison of institutional research performance. In particular, the Excellence in Research in Australian initiative undertaken by the Australian Research Council sets out to evaluate research quality in Australian universities, using a combination of expert review process, and assessment of performance against &lsquo;quality indicators&rsquo;. Benchmarking exercises of this sort continue to shape institutional policy and practice, with inevitable effects on the ways in which research leadership, mentoring and practice are played out within university faculties and departments. In an exploratory study that interviewed 32 Australian academics in universities in four Australian states, we asked participants, occupying formal or informal research leadership roles, to comment on their perceptions of research leadership as envisioned and enacted in their particular workplaces. We found a pervasive concern amongst participants that coalesced around binaries characterized in metaphoric terms of &lsquo;carrots and whips&rsquo;. Research leadership was seen by many as managerial in nature, and as such, largely tethered to instrumentalist notions of productivity and performativity, while research cultures were seen as languishing under the demoralizing weight of reward and punishment systems. Here, we consider what is at stake for the future of the academic workforce under such conditions, arguing that new models of visionary research leadership are urgently needed in the &lsquo;troubled times&rsquo; of techno-bureaucratic university reforms.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article explores the challenges of research leadership and research leadership in the development and production of innovation, ideas and knowledge. It argues that new models of visionary research leadership are urgently needed in the ‘troubled times’ of techno-bureaucratic university reforms. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 ‘carrots and whips’. Research leadership was seen by many as managerial in nature, and as such, largely tethered to instrumentalist notions of productivity and performativity, while research cultures were seen as languishing under the demoralizing weight of reward and punishment systems. Here, we consider what is at stake for the future of the academic workforce under such conditions, arguing that new models of visionary research leadership are urgently needed in the ‘troubled times’ of techno-bureaucratic university reforms. Keywords: higher education; neoliberalism; leadership; management; research performance; research culture Introduction: research leadership in context Research leadership in the development and production of innovation, ideas and knowledge is crucial to a nation’s people as well as its economic, social and cultural capital. Universities have been regarded as traditional epicentres of scholarly research and the dissemination of knowledge, with public expectations that current research leadership is providing sound foundations for future research initiatives. As noted in the final report of the recent Review of Australian Education, also *Corresponding author. Email: sue.saltmarsh@acu.edu.au ISSN 1744–9642 print/ISSN 1744–9650 online  2011 Taylor & Francis http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17449642.2011.632722 http://www.tandfonline.com D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 known as the Bradley Report (December 2008), ‘A unique role of universities within the knowledge economy is . . . training the next generation of researchers with their direct role in research and development as the principal creators and disseminators of new knowledge’ (Bradley et al. 2008, 123). The preparation of the next generation of research scholars is thus clearly seen as essential to the task of universities, requiring academic leadership that will continue to support the ongoing development of new knowledge, and contribute to the maintenance and ongoing renewal of the higher education workforce. However, in an era when scholarly research is circumscribed by innovation and knowledge economy policies that treat knowledge as a commodity and research as a mode of commodity production (Kenway et al. 2006), research leadership is confronted with numerous tensions and contradictions. In both concept and practice, the ‘ethical university’ is continually placed under erasure, as managerialism and competitive individualism become entrenched as everyday, albeit contested, aspects of research activities, workplace practices and academic cultures. In this article, we draw on a qualitative study conducted with Australian academics and research leaders, to consider how university research cultures are faring under current conditions. We consider how ethical norms of scholarly research, collegiality and leadership are being reconfigured by sector-wide preoccupations with produc- tivity and prevailing systems of reward and punishment to which such preoccupa- tions have given rise. Research leadership is often spoken about as though it were a universally understood and unproblematic term. A number of research studies indicate that the concept of research leadership is ‘ill-defined’, ‘under-recognised and invisible’ (Debowski 2010), ‘under-developed’, ‘varied and without collective leadership guidelines’ (Keka¨le 1997, 1998, 2001, 2003); ‘individualistic’ and ‘lacking systemic training’ (Henkel 2002) and driven by constant change (Coates et al. 2010). Indeed, research studies in higher education institutions in a number of global settings indicate dissonance between concepts of research leadership and of management, . . .where management refers to an orientation towards results and goals, organising tasks and systems, while leadership alludes to an orientation towards human relations and organising people. In an academic context however, leadership and management functions have been closely integrated at departmental or school level. (Yielder and Codling 2004, 319) In many university settings, conflicts may occur where there are differing expectations between management and academic staff, where hierarchical divisions exist between those occupying managerial positions of authority and those occupying other leadership roles, and where there are contradictions between institutional policies, mission and vision statements and the experiences and expectations of academic staff. Distinctions between the roles and responsibilities of managers, those of research leaders, and in some cases administrators, may be poorly delineated. Increasingly, these roles are seen to ‘require different, but overlapping skills, knowledge and abilities. However, on an operative level they are often poorly differentiated’ (Yielder and Codling 2004, 320). Such situations ‘may give rise to conflict of interest, inequities in workload and inappropriately applied expertise’ (Yielder and Codling 2004, 320). Other concerns expressed in the research literature include increasing managerialism in the higher education sector, external 294 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 audits and pressures on internal functions and regulatory quality assurance measures and the introduction of league tables by governments to evaluate research performance (see for example, Dobson 2001; McWilliam 2002 in Australia; Clegg 2009; Crawford 2010 and MacFarlane 2007 in the UK; Keka¨le 2001, 2006 in Finland; Teelken and Lomas 2009 in the Netherlands; Temple and Ylitalo 2009 in the USA and Finland). Part of the problem in clearly articulating what research leadership involves is, as Keka¨le (2003, 286) notes that ‘leadership is not an action with an inherent value’. Indeed, Shelda Debowski observes that ‘there are few resources allocated within universities to promote the development of research leadership capabilities. While there are research offices that focus on grant management and research protocols, they largely emphasise the research process, rather than its leadership’ (Debowski 2010, 214, original emphasis). While research leadership is expected to occur within tertiary institutions, it is not necessarily directly funded, evaluated or rewarded in meaningful ways. As has been observed in relation to the lack of formal preparation for department chairs, there is a tendency on the part of universities to assume that ‘If you are good at being a faculty member, then you are bound to be good (or at least adequate) at being a department chair’ (Wolverton, Ackerman, and Holt 2005, 229). Similarly, promotion to positions of research leadership can also take place on the basis of academics proving themselves as capable researchers, a practice underpinned by the assumption that research competence implies an understanding of how to lead, inspire and/or manage the research of others (Yielder and Codling 2004, 315). As Yielder and Codling (2004, 320) note, in many cases, ‘academic leaders have gravitated into managerial roles at the expense of any real leadership’. At the same time, as Debowski (2010, 214) observes, ‘research leaders are not formally inducted into their role’ and generic leadership programmes may not be directly relevant to the specificities of tertiary settings or for addressing needs that are specific to research leadership roles. This is not to suggest that there is no attention paid by universities to the cultivation of research leadership. Rather it is to suggest that the provision of research leadership development is uneven across the sector, mirroring a similar lack of systematic induction or training available for those who occupy positions in middle and senior management, such as department chairs (Wolverton, Ackerman, and Holt 2005) and faculty deans (Harrison and Brodeth 1999). The lack of clarity about what constitutes research leadership, together with the limited availability of leadership preparation, poses particular problems for a university sector that is operating in a period of intensive and ‘relentless’ (Groundwater-Smith and Sachs 2002) policy reforms. Knowledge economy policies under neo-liberal regimes of governance have given rise to an intensification of audit cultures (Kenway et al. 2006), requiring that academics must increase account for their research productivity in terms of both quality and quantity. These changes have been accompanied by an intensification of managerialism, contributing to concerns ‘that academic leadership has been subsumed by corporate management practices on the basis of an unchallenged assumption that leadership automatically goes with position in a management hierarchy’ (Yielder and Codling 2004, 319). In the Australian context, the impositions of policy reforms and the institutional and Ethics and Education 295 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 cultural changes they engender are also coupled with imperatives to cultivate the next generation of researchers in light of a rapidly ageing and highly mobile academic workforce (Bradley et al. 2008; Coates et al. 2010; Saltmarsh and Swirski 2010). The changes thus brought about require considerable attention to the development, roles and practices of research leaders, as well as to the impacts of these on the everyday working lives of academics. As Harrison and Brodeth pointed out with regard to university leadership over a decade ago, ‘As with all organisations, the quality of leadership may be more crucial in effecting successful change than other important factors, such as adequate resources’ (Harrison and Brodeth 1999, 206). Bearing in mind these imperatives in the Australian tertiary sector, and the kinds of institutional and leadership practices to which, according to the broader research literature, they give rise, we now turn to a consideration of findings from a study of research leadership conducted by our research team in 2009–2010.1 Here, we consider how those who participated in our study perceived questions of academic leadership as it is currently practised in their workplaces, and in response to the policy contexts outlined above. Following a brief description of the project, we analyse findings that show pervasive concern amongst participants that coalesced around binaries characterized in metaphoric terms of ‘carrots and whips’. Research leadership was seen by many in our study as tethered to managerial roles and instrumentalist notions of productivity and performativity, while research cultures were seen as languishing under the demoralizing weight of systems of reward and punishment. On the basis of these findings, we argue that new models of visionary research leadership are urgently needed in the ‘troubled times’ of techno- bureaucratic university reforms. We conclude the article by asking readers to consider with us what is at stake for the future of the academic workforce under such conditions. Researching leadership and mentoring: project details In 2009–2010, our research team conducted an exploratory study of research leadership and mentoring across a range of professional practice-based fields, including teacher education, nursing, business and management. These fields were selected for the study because their orientation towards practitioner preparation and professional relevance presents particular challenges and opportunities in relation to meeting the demands of research intensive outputs demanded in the current climate. In particular, university faculties in fields serving the professions are under increasing pressure to formalize capacity-building in research and community engagement. Our interest in this study, then, was to better understand how research capacity is being developed in these fields, which in many cases have what might be described as emergent research cultures, and whose academic staff members often have a history of professional practice and industry experience prior to their transition to the tertiary sector. To that end, we interviewed 32 Australian academics in 16 universities in the Australian states of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia about their perceptions of research leadership as it was envisioned and enacted in their particular workplaces. Recruitment took place initially via department heads, who were contacted by email with information about the project, and who were 296 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 asked to nominate members of staff who were actively involved, either formally or informally, in research leadership roles. Our rationale for this approach was based on our own experience of research activity within our respective university departments, in which research leadership was at times part of initiatives such as mentoring or writing programmes, with designated members of the professoriate and/or faculty executive taking responsibility for delivery of workshops and seminars. At other times, however, we were aware of research leadership that took place in less formal, albeit powerful ways, such as on occasions when informal activities were arranged through collegial initiatives that were not dependent upon or linked explicitly to more formalized capacity-building programmes. This range of experiences contributed to our decision not to strictly limit participation on the basis of, for example, level of appointment or formal leadership roles. In some cases, department heads responded by nominating one or more members of their staff whom they saw as taking responsibility for some aspect of research leadership, either through formalized leadership roles or through informal initiatives that demonstrated personal leadership. In other cases, department heads responded by circulating our email query to all the staff members in their department, opening up the possibility for staff members to self-nominate to participate in the research. This resulted in a diverse range of participants in the study, including early career academics, department heads, members of university support units, members of the professoriate, and senior faculty executives. Where feasible, interviews were conducted face-to-face, and on other occasions interviews were arranged on our behalf by a research assistant and conducted by telephone. All interviews were audio-recorded, with participants’ consent, using hand-held digital recorders, and all were transcribed using professional transcription services. In accordance with ethical guidelines concerning the need to ensure that the identities of participants and their institutions were not disclosed, interview transcripts were subsequently anonymized through the use of pseudonyms for individuals, and care was taken to refer to departments and institutions using general terms to minimize the potential for participants or their workplaces to be identified by an informed readership. Carrots and whips: troubling metaphors of dis/incentives A number of participants in our study talked candidly about the ways that their departments and faculties had responded in recent years to external impositions regarding research output and quality assessments. For many, the external pressures that produced competition between universities in the higher education sector were seen as encouraging competition within institutions—between faculties, departments and individual academics. In particular, cultures of incentive and reward ostensibly intended to increase motivation with respect to research output were generally regarded with skepticism, indifference and, in some cases, disenchantment. The instrumentalist emphasis on quantity of research output and compliance with quality measures operated as a demoralizing disincentive that curtailed, rather than improved, productivity for many. As Kenway et al.’s (2006, 62, original emphasis) recent analysis of university sectors under knowledge economy policies points out, ‘commodity exchange exerts a disintegrating influence on the spirit and the social Ethics and Education 297 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 bonds of a community’, a view supported by data from our study. One of the metaphors most frequently used by participants in our study to describe the various systems of incentive and reward pertained to the familiar folk story about the dilemma confronting a farmer whose mule refused to walk—should he use a carrot to motivate the mule with enticement, or a whip to motivate the mule with punishment? As one participant noted the range of practices employed by his department to motivate academics to produce research considered of quality and relevance, We’ve got carrots, and we’ve also got a whip. [Phil, Research Director, Business/ Management department] Participants’ views on the efficacy and desirability of the ‘carrot and whip’ approach varied considerably. When asked to comment on factors that facilitate or constrain the development of research leadership, for example, one participant explained that shifting goal-posts in the ways that research is formally ‘counted’ in the Australian context make it difficult for some to know where or how to move forward. This is compounded by the complex intersections between the orientations of individuals and those of management with respect to the need to generate research: . . . I guess it’s a tough role being research active, you’ve got to be pretty well motivated and a self starter and so on, and that’s lots of energy; it’s awfully tough business trying to write things up, and so on. And so, I think there’s an issue of morale boosting, and this idea of being told that you have to versus inspiring people to be self starters, so something that would, you know, is a negative thing for research leadership is a culture of compliance and counting, rather than support and, probably that whole mentor sort of approach. [Leila, Senior Lecturer, Business/ Management] Leila is keenly aware of the requirements associated with research activity, and offers an account of research culture that is predicated on personal binaries of motivation/obligation, and on leadership binaries of requirement/inspiration. Intrinsic desire to produce research is juxtaposed with the struggle to find time and energy not only to produce publications but also to self-start. While Leila sees this tension potentially aided by the provision of leadership of a sort that might boost morale, approaches focused on compliance can simultaneously work to undermine this possibility. When asked about these juxtapositions in her own workplace, she replies: . . .You know, I think there’s a bit of both, and in some respects they still need to have the [whip] as well as the carrot, because we’re all different characters and we all respond to different motivations, I suppose. [Leila, Senior Lecturer, Business/Management] Leila’s feelings of ambivalence seem in part connected to feelings of low morale when attempts to meet the criteria of quality auditing of research outputs, in particular those measures associated with journal rankings, are undermined by changes within the rankings process itself. . . . and you know, you produce a publication and all of a sudden it slips from being a B to a C, and then it’s not counted, you know, it’s just that kind of mentality that, yeah I think an over emphasis on the unimportance of ratings and counting. [Leila, Senior Lecturer, Business/Management] 298 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 The quality attributed to research publications in Australia is a high-stakes issue, with promotion to more senior levels determined in no small part by an academic’s ability to demonstrate the status and prestige of their work on the international stage. For women, this can be an additionally fraught process, with feminist scholars of higher education arguing that recent developments in higher education ‘have tended to promote a masculinised culture extolling values and practices such as highly competitive, rather than collegial, reward-oriented striving, especially for maximal publication output’ (Wilson et al. 2009, 537).2 Unable to intervene in the external processes that change the journal rankings, hence the quality assessment of her work, Leila appears to accept the ‘whip and carrot’ as a kind of necessary technology when motivations wane. For other participants, the tensions and potential for over-emphasis on compliance models alluded to by Leila are denounced more emphatically. For example, a more senior academic working in a different department, but in the same university faculty as Leila, reports a considerably different point of view, referring to what he routinely sees as: . . . research dictatorship, rather than leadership [Gene, Associate Professor, Business/ Management] This view is echoed in the comments by James, a junior academic who, despite having an impressive career track record outside academia, is now working in a lecturer’s position in the same university faculty. For James, the emphasis placed on meeting research targets and outputs by his superiors undermines his confidence and enthusiasm for academic work: Where you would want to be inspired and assisted, there is a tendency to berate and destroy, you know, if you’re having trouble with your research, you’re not producing research papers in line with their expectations, they would prefer to berate, rather than assist and that’s my experience, which I find pretty – well I find very difficult, very, very hard, and it’s that issue that’s led me to want to just give up on the whole research thing on more than one occasion; probably three occasions in the last six years, and probably on one occasion I’ve been close to resigning from the job and heading back to industry. [James, Lecturer, Business/Management] James’s comments show the damaging effects of leadership models that use derision and denigration under the guise of inspiration. Disheartened by unsupportive and critical research leaders, he finds it difficult to maintain enthusiasm for a career in academia. There is, as Christopher Holligan points out, ‘limited scope for collegiality in a commercialized and intensely competitive knowledge society’ (Holligan 2011). For academics such as James, who is struggling to establish a career under conditions in which he feels devalued and demoralized by those who are well- placed to offer encouragement and support, a return to non-academic work remains a viable option. Not all participants see the carrot and whip approach as inappropriate or undesirable, however. For example, one senior academic with a considerable degree of responsibility for research leadership in a different university described the approach to leadership taken in his department in the following way: I think we’re in a different position than a lot of people you’ll probably interview in the sense that we’ve got a whip; we’ve got carrots and we’ve also got a whip, and the whip can be quite substantial when it comes to the back pocket. And so, if you don’t produce Ethics and Education 299 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 work of value to the university, well in particular to the faculty, the faculty requires for it to meet its own key performance indicators. . .then there is a monetary penalty involved. [Phil, Research Director, Business/Management department] Phil goes on to describe an elaborate system of benchmarking, measurement and audit through which research activity at departmental and faculty levels is determined and rewarded or punished accordingly. Through a system of incentives, which include salary bonuses up to one-third of their base salary range, academic staff members are rewarded for publications seen to be in the interest of the faculty’s key performance indicators. The inverse is also true, insofar as bonuses can be withheld where performance is deemed unworthy of reward. In such a scenario, ‘work of value’ is reduced to nothing beyond its use value in a system of commodity exchange. Incentives function simultaneously as implied threats, and leadership is stripped of human relationality in order to rationalize its function as a technology of power. ‘To inspire or command?’: leadership perspectives on performative dilemmas In addition to binaries centred on notions of incentive and reward, a number of the participants in our study shared perspectives on some of the dilemmas with which they are confronted when taking on more formalized leadership roles and responsibilities. As discussed in the introduction, there can be considerable overlap between the roles, expectations, accountabilities and responsibilities of managers and research leaders, requiring a range of skills and orientations. In her study of 24 senior research leaders from a research-intensive university in Australia, Debowski (2010) found that research leaders recognized that their role demanded a number of skills. These included developing sustainable collaborations; seeking alternative funding sources; creating linkages with different stakeholders; inspiring research teams with visionary research agendas while having the persistence and drive to attain outcomes; mentoring; and finally, assisting the various members of their research groups attain their full research potential. Despite the considerable mandate of such a portfolio, these researchers reported that their ‘complex leadership roles are little acknowl- edged in their university settings, and even less so in the broader competitive research context’ (Debowski 2010, 215). In this section of this article, then, we want to engage with some of the complexities associated with occupying such roles. As discussed in the previous section, there is a great deal of pressure on research leaders to demonstrate that outputs ‘count’ according to quality frameworks at department, faculty, institutional and national levels – hence the metaphorical use of carrots and whips by many in research leadership positions. These systems of reward and punishment are designed to increase internal competition and instill a sense of individuals and teams striving for more ‘carrots’ and thereby avoiding the ‘whips’. However, the kind of leadership frameworks put in place and the messages that carrots and whips send to staff, ‘affects how people think about themselves not just their interactions with others’ (Temple and Ylitalo 2009, 284). This is also clear from our study—where research leaders indicate that they are at times uncertain about how to lead in the context of institutions that expect them to have an innate sense of what leadership is and how their knowledge of research can be passed on to others. 300 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 Many of these participants’ responses illustrate research leaders’ struggles to engender a sense of research community within their departments or disciplines and to avoid the reward/punishment dichotomy. One of our participants described a recent meeting with his dean of research, where these struggles were articulated in the following way: [The Dean has] got [several hundred] researchers for example, or [several hundred] staff members who are meant to be researchers but only about half are, what can she do because she can’t work with them individually, she can inspire or she can command or she can, you know tell them if they don’t perform, they are out of here so it’s difficult at that level. [Daryl, Associate Research Director, Business/Management Department] Daryl sympathetically encapsulates the dilemma faced by his faculty’s research dean, which is to either ‘inspire’ staff through collegial support or to simply ‘command’ staff to achieve the required research outputs. According to Daryl, both he and the research dean would like to foster a research environment that is inspired by leadership and by the desire to produce quality research. However, desire and ambition on the part of the leadership team is not enough—in order for the research status of staff to be improved, individuals must themselves contribute to the transformation of the faculty’s research culture. The large numbers of staff involved present an additional challenge, as personalized mentoring and support on a more individual basis is deemed impracticable. Where leadership efforts to motivate with inspiration do not result in the desired productivity, a managerialist insistence on outcomes is taken up as the default position, and this in turn is underscored by placing job security under threat. As discussed in the previous section, inspiration in this sense functions as a euphemism for what is in reality a threat, in this case, a threat of having employment terminated. Some participants described how their universities set clear targets for research activity. Leila, for example, observes that: . . . there is fairly clear expectations in terms of outputs about research activity that are set by the university through [performance review] processes and other measures, and so on. [Leila, Senior Lecturer, Business/Management] She goes on to say that such measures need to balance . . . the supportive mentoring leadership type environment versus the more of a punitive counting. [Leila, Senior Lecturer, Business/Management] For Leila, quantitative performance targets and research outputs must be attained, but they must also be balanced with qualitative support so that ‘punitive counting’ does not ‘dictate’ research agendas. Fostering a supportive, mentoring environment allows researchers to take some control over how they negotiate performance indicators. Exercising management of researchers through what Leila refers to as ‘punitive counting’, may be regarded as fulfilling institutional requirements for meeting productivity targets. However, the view voiced by the majority of those we interviewed is that punitive approaches largely overlook the substantive factors that motivate staff to undertake research activities, and neglect the range of intellectual, collegial and infrastructure needs required by staff in order to develop their research capabilities. Moreover, as Holligan notes, ‘systems of governance which impose directive cultures of leadership’ lead to ‘an abandonment of collegial forms of governance’ (Holligan 2011). Indeed, Leila goes on to say that if Ethics and Education 301 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 research leadership focuses too heavily on ‘counting’ rather than mentoring, staff will become ‘turned off’ research altogether—an attitude echoed by many of our participants. As research leaders struggle to manage the competing demands of institutional research targets while fostering a supportive research environment, the academic staff they manage can in turn contribute to these institutional pressures and attempt to manipulate them to their own advantage. In the following interview excerpt, a department head discusses how the external university and internal faculty pressure contribute to a climate of competition amongst staff in his department: . . . in my [department] . . . some staff are or certainly perceive themselves to be more research active than others. . .[which results in] conflict between staff. So, as a head [of department] you’ve then got to manage the relationships of staff in your [department], if there’s allegations of bullying or harassment, research active staff bullying or harassing non-research active staff, over their performance and contribution, and so, as the head of school you’ve got to intervene and tell people that’s not your job it’s my job to worry about those sorts of things. But you know, you find all these sorts of competitive pressures, if academics feel themselves under a lot of pressure to produce, and some don’t produce, as you can say, and that can lead to depression or people being stressed . . . [Ivan, Head of Business/ Management department] Ivan describes here the ways in which institutional demands for research activity are deployed by staff members seeking to differentiate themselves from their colleagues based on research productivity. Managers in such situations are caught in a double-bind of being responsible, on one hand, for the implementation of policy, university and faculty directives regarding staff productivity, and on the other, for ensuring the well-being of individual employees and of the departmental culture as a whole. As competition between individual academic staff members intensifies, the responsibilities of managers become additionally complex. As Kenway et al. (2006, 45) note, ‘the competitive environment associated with innovation pol- icy . . . has the effect of compressing time and producing a sense of urgency’. For staff in Ivan’s department, the sense of pressure and urgency is implicated in turning hierarchies based on research activity into abusive institutional cultures. In addition, the competitive research environment created by a neoliberal culture of benchmarking and measuring outputs against institutional performance targets also potentially adds another layer of responsibility to a research leader’s role. This role now includes exercising a greater vigilance in identifying and alleviating stressful experiences, including intervening in conflicts amongst staff members. Such situations can have a range of effects that undermine, rather than support, research productivity. As others have pointed out, left unchecked, staff alienation has the potential to develop into a more serious problem and ‘can involve reduced quantity and quality of work, absenteeism, stress-related illness such as alcoholism, and even sabotage’ (Harrison and Brodeth 1999, 206). The comments of these participants in our study foreground the desire of both research leaders and the staff they manage to foster a collegial and supportive research culture. Such a culture is seen by the majority of those we interviewed to be threatened by institutional policies and procedures centred on quantitative assess- ments of research activity. The academics in research leadership positions interviewed for our study understand that clear performance targets must be met by individual staff. Yet most describe struggling to implement these targets in ways 302 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 that will inspire staff to produce quality research. Their interview excerpts thus reveal the ways in which discourses on academic leadership are understood ‘as consisting of general, naturalised and self-evident ways of expressing academic leadership but also specific and conflicting means of doing the same’ (Haake 2009, 294). Academics in senior management positions generally understood institutional requirements through a conflicting set of binaries, ‘inspire or command’, ‘punitive counting’ versus ‘supportive mentoring’, and ‘carrots and whips’. That institutional requirements were understood in pejorative, bureaucratic terms underscores Westbrook’s (2008, 138–39) assertion that ‘there are huge problems with rationalistic bureaucracy as a model of intellectual life . . . [and] the place that the bureaucratic university has carved out for itself in contemporary global society. Bureaucracy is hardly a term of affection’. While not all participants viewed the use of bureaucratic terms to describe research management as negative per se, the majority of participants nevertheless recognized that this form of management stood in opposition to more qualitative understandings of leadership and research. Conclusion Research leadership plays a crucial role in the management and organization of research staff, and is critical to maintaining ethical relationships, research activities and workplace practices in universities. In our study of academic views and experiences of research leadership, we found a troubling conceptualization of research incentives framed in terms of ‘carrots and whips’ and either/or binaries of supporting research or counting research output. Rather than constructing an unhelpful binary opposition between academic staff and research leaders and managers, however, we are instead aiming to explore some of the complexities and challenges associated with research leadership and research activity under intensified regimes of accountability within the higher education sector. There is a need to revisit research leadership structures so that university research agendas enable rather than constrain the agency of both leaders and staff (Crawford 2010). The academics interviewed for our study perceived the lack of a qualitative framework within which to implement research policy as producing overly competitive research environments where staff feel stressed, under-appreciated and isolated from their peers. Without a supportive, inspiring and collegial research culture, research productivity can decline and in the case of the profession-based disciplines in this study, too much ‘counting’ and use of the ‘whip’ from research leaders tempts academic researchers to return to their professions. It is imperative that research leadership involves the skills and capacity to manage and organize staff in such a way that research is motivated by the desire to produce quality work rather than meeting arbitrary, externally imposed targets. Otherwise research runs the risk of being driven by agendas and processes, rather than the thinking and acting scholars who produce it. Our findings support those of other international research studies that indicate, for example, that the implementation of neoliberal research reforms such as the Research Assessment Exercise in the UK resulted in ‘data massaging’ (Crawford 2010) and in the Netherlands, ‘window dressing, increased workload, and lack of attention for the implicit ‘‘real’’ quality’ which resulted in ‘less instead of enhanced Ethics and Education 303 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 quality of teaching and research’ (Teelken and Lomas 2009, 272). Renewed emphasis on quality measures means that ‘notions of education as a public good’ leading to the ‘advancement of knowledge, and accessibility to education’ are increasingly ‘obscured by new needs of profitability, marketisation, and commercialization’ (Kok et al. 2010, 100). We see such situations at work in the Australian context, where universities are currently labouring under the demands of the federal government’s Excellence in Research for Australia initiative and its agenda of assessing the quality of Australian research outputs. On the basis of findings from this study, we contend that such exercises and the cultures of compliance and competition to which they give rise fail utterly as catalysts for achieving the designated goal of ensuring quality research outcomes. Further, structuring research activity according to business models also fails to take into account the qualitative factors which actually drive research production (Dever and Morrison 2009, 51). This can erode the very climates of intellectual stimulation, collegial support and ethical conduct that make research an attractive endeavour for so many. Indeed, participants in our study provide some striking and provocative examples of the detrimental effects of reducing research to a matter of outputs to be counted, and of discursively constructing researchers as nothing more than metaphoric mules to be rewarded or punished according to their degree of perceived motivation to comply. Indeed, we would argue that the ‘carrots and whips’ employed in various ways by research leaders in all of the universities included in our study have identical functions—that is to say, the carrot that fails to entice researchers into greater productivity is redeployed against them as the flagellating instrument of punishment. We are not, it should be noted, attempting to dismiss as insignificant the impositions of the global knowledge economy on universities, and the imperatives these bring into play in the everyday working lives of university managers, research leaders and academic staff members. International credibility and institutional viability rest, in no small part, on the research produced by university workers, and we acknowledge the complexity of changing sectoral demands and institutional cultures for those who are part of the mobile and highly competitive international academic workforce. However, we see the current reliance on systems of reward and punishment as largely counterproductive both to research productivity and to the very notion of the ‘ethical university’. We would argue that new models of research leadership based on principles of ‘inclusion and dialogue’ are needed in order to ‘enable the universities to flourish in their unique roles’ (Temple and Ylitalo 2009, 281). In short, what is needed are visionary approaches to research leadership that can inspire and assist, rather than berate and destroy, those who labour in today’s universities. Notes 1. Interview excerpts discussed in this study are drawn from a study conducted in 2009– 2010, in which we interviewed 32 academics from 16 universities in the Australian states of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia. The study, Examining Mentoring and Research Leadership in Tertiary Professional Practice Fields, was funded by the Gippsland Small Grant Research Support Scheme, Monash University. The research team also acknowledges with thanks the generous contribution of those who agreed to participate in interviews. 304 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 2. A number of female participants in the study mentioned their involvement in mentoring and leadership programmes that specifically targeted women. These programmes differed from the more formal programmes offered through their universities by focusing on collegial support rather than outcomes. In one interview, Lena describes a mentoring scheme she implemented as ‘non-elitist’ and ‘collaborative’ which for her, constituted a ‘feminist model’ of research leadership [Lena, Head of Department, Business/ Management]. These understandings of leadership support the conclusions of a recent study which found that ‘leader identities develop in an increasingly gendered way the longer the leader positions are held’ (Haake 2009, 301). References Bradley, D., P. Noonan, H. Nugent, and B. Scales. 2008. Review of Australian higher education: final report, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, ACT. Clegg, S. 2009. Forms of knowing and academic development practice. Studies in Higher Education 34, no. 4: 403–16. Coates, H., I. Dobson, L. Goedegebuure, and L. Meek. 2010. Across the great divide: What do Australian academics think of university leadership? Advice from the CAP survey. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 32, no. 4: 379–87. Crawford, K. 2010. Influences on academics’ approaches to development: Voices from below. International Journal for Academic Development 15, no. 3: 189–202. Debowski, S. 2010. Leading research in an evolving world: Implications for higher education development, policy and practice. In Research and development in higher education: Reshaping higher education, eds. M. Devlin, J. Nagy and A. Lichtenberg, Vol. 33, 213–22. NSW: HERDSA. Refereed papers from the 33rd HERDSA annual international conference, July 6–9, Melbourne, Australia. Dever, M., and Z. Morrison. 2009. Women, research performance and work context. Tertiary Education and Management 15, no. 1: 49–62. Dobson, I. 2001. How has massification changed the shape of Australian Universities? Tertiary Education and Management 4: 295–310. Groundwater-Smith, S., and J. Sachs. 2002. The activist professional and the reinstatement of trust. Cambridge Journal of Education 32, no. 3: 341–58. Haake, U. 2009. Doing leadership in higher education: The gendering process of leader identity development. Tertiary Education and Management 15, no. 4: 291–304. Harrison, B.T., and E. Brodeth. 1999. Real work through real collegiality: Faculty seniors’ views on the drive to improve learning and research. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 21, no. 2: 203–14. Henkel, M. 2002. Current science policies and their implications for the concept of academic identity. In Proceedings of the international workshop on science, training and career: Changing modes of knowledge production and labour markets, ed. CHEPS, 55–70. Enschede: CHEPS, University of Twente. Holligan, C. 2011. Feudalism and academia: UK academics’ accounts of research culture. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education 24, no. 1: 55–75. Keka¨le, J. 1997. Leadership cultures in academic departments. Publications in Social Sciences No. 23, University of Joensuu. Keka¨le, J. 1998. Academic leaders and the field of possibilities. International Journal of Leadership in Education 1, no. 3: 237–55. Keka¨le, J. 2001. Academic leadership. New York: Nova Science Publishers. Keka¨le, J. 2003. Academic leaders as thermostats. Tertiary Education and Management 9, no. 4: 281–98. Ethics and Education 305 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 Keka¨le, J. 2006. Academic leadership in perspective. New York: Nova Science Publishers. Kenway, J., E. Bullen, J. Fahey, and S. Robb. 2006.Haunting the knowledge economy. London and New York: Routledge. Kok, S.-K., A. Douglas, B. McClelland, and D. Bryde. 2010. The move towards managerialism: Perceptions of staff in ‘‘traditional’’ and ‘‘new’’ UK universities. Tertiary Education and Management 16, no. 2: 99–113. Macfarlane, B. 2007. Defining and rewarding academic citizenship: The implications for university promotions policy. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 29, no. 3: 261–73. McWilliam, E. 2002. Against professional development. Educational Philosophy and Theory 34, no. 3: 289–99. Saltmarsh, S., and T. Swirski. 2010. ‘Pawns and prawns’: International academics’ observations on their transition to working in an Australian university. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 32, no. 3: 291–301. Teelken, C., and L. Lomas. 2009. How to strike the right balance between quality assurance and quality control in the perceptions of individuals lecturers: A comparison of UK and Dutch higher education institutions. Tertiary Education and Management 16, no. 3: 259–75. Temple, J.B., and J. Ylitalo. 2009. Promoting inclusive (and dialogic) leadership in higher education institutions. Tertiary Education and Management 15, no. 3: 277–89. Westbrook, D. 2008. Navigators of the contemporary: Why ethnography matters. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. Wilson, J.Z., G. Marks, L. Noone, and J. Hamilton-Mackenzie. 2009. Retaining a foothold on the slippery paths of academia: University women, indirect discrimination, and the academic marketplace. Gender and Education 22, no. 5: 535–45. Wolverton, M., R. Ackerman, and S. Holt. 2005. Preparing for leadership: What academic department chairs need to know. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 27, no. 2: 227–38. Yielder, J., and A. Codling. 2004. Management and leadership in the contemporary university. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 26, no. 3: 315–28. 306 S. Saltmarsh et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:2 2 0 7 O cto be r 2 01 2 