ABSTRACT: 
This paper argues that Judith Butler’s post structuralist theory of performativity provides a valuable tool for understanding how students might contest prevailing hegemonic gender discourses in media education classrooms. It suggests an alternative to structuralist "empowerment" and "critical pedagogy" approaches, which continue to motivate many media educators, despite serious questions being asked about their effectiveness. The paper draws on data collected from a unit of work about video games, completed by year ten students at an all boys’ secondary school in Brisbane. It argues that many media related activities fail to elicit genuinely "critical" responses because they are complicit in the regulation of hegemonic discourses. It suggests that teachers are more likely to create the potential for variation in their students’ gender performances if activities are dialogic and open-ended and avoid placing emphasis on discourses of excellence and competition. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper explores the connection between media learning, the performance of identities and the potential for variation within this. It argues that performative variation, particularly relating to gendered identity performance, can be considered a form of critical response by students and that certain types of activities are more likely than others to promote it. The paper reports some initial findings from a larger project focusing on a group of middle class male high school students working with video games in a media and technology education classroom. The paper reports some initial findings from a larger project focusing on a group of middle class male high school students working with video games in a media and technology education classroom. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Judith Butler’s theory of performativity provides a potentially productive means for moving beyond the impasse that has preoccupied media educators concerned with the question of agency for their students. Her post structuralist theory of gender offers an alternative to “empowerment” models that have traditionally motivated media educators. Orthodoxies have been developed around media resistance, processes of discrimination and demystification in attempts to modify the perceived power imbalance between young people and popular media culture (Buckingham, 2003: 12). This paper explores the connection between media learning, the performance of identities and the potential for variation within this. It argues that performative variation, particularly relating to gendered identity performance, can be considered a form of critical response by students and that certain types of activities are more likely than others to promote it. The paper reports some initial findings from a larger project focusing on a group of middle class male high school students working with video games in a media and technology education classroom. 3 Butler suggests that the body gains meaning within discourse (Butler, 1990: 92) and that it is through cultural performance, as an ongoing discursive practice, that gendered identities are formed, “… if gender is something that one becomes – but can never be – then gender is itself a kind of becoming or activity, … an incessant and repeated action of some sort” (Butler, 1990: 112). She also argues “…that the gendered body is performative suggests that it has no ontological status apart from the various acts which constitute its reality” (Butler, 1990: 136). Therefore, there are no core or essential identities, apart from those that are expressed through bodily actions. Individual agency must be located within the system of discourse and it is impossible to step outside discourse to oppose or alter it. However, Butler argues that because “signification is not a founding act, but rather a regulated process of repetition” it is open to intervention and resignification (Butler, 1990: 145, original emphasis). It is through the very repetition of signification that opportunities for variation in signification, and hence agency, become possible (Butler, 1990: 145). The critical task is, rather, to locate strategies of subversive repetition enabled by those constructions, to affirm the local possibilities of intervention through participating in precisely those practices of repetition that constitute identity and, therefore, present the immanent possibility of contesting them (Butler, 1990: 147). This reinforces Foucauldian theories of power which suggest that it is impossible to step outside the disciplinary practices of social control associated with institutional discourses, and yet individuals and groups assert power within these practices, potentially changing the nature of the discourse (Foucault, 1984b: 64). From this perspective, it could be argued that media education should provide students with opportunities to experience subversive 4 variation through local interventions, rather than rely on more ambitious, and perhaps fanciful, discourses of empowerment. The project – Animation and Video Games Immersion Unit The research informing this paper took place at Independent Boy’s College* (IBC), an upper middle class, Catholic boys’ school in inner city Brisbane for ten to seventeen year olds. The school has relatively low cultural diversity and a focus on “academic excellence”. I chose to gather data in such a specific context because I was the media studies teacher at the school when the project began. Data were collected from students in a year ten unit focusing on video games that I developed with the school’s technology studies specialist. This was one of several three-week intensive units chosen by year ten students as a special program of study during which there was a flexible timetable, no uniforms and non-traditional assessment. This unique structure provided the flexibility to integrate media and technology education objectives and approaches and the opportunity to work with an Information Technology specialist. This was desirable because new media forms increasingly play a significant role in the lives of young people and I wanted to explore the possibilities of developing curriculum drawing on the strengths of both media and technology education. As Carmen Luke has suggested, it would seem to be in the interests of students and teachers for media and technology educators to work together (Luke, 2001). From a media education perspective, activities developed for the unit aimed to challenge aspects of the relationship between teenage boys and video games relating to hegemonic 5 gender relations and practices. In an all boys’ school, hegemonic masculinity is clearly central to the performance of gendered identities. The intention was to have students explore inequitable gender and race relations, and discourses reflecting managerial practices and economic structures favourable to what Fairclough has termed “new capitalism” (Fairclough, 2003: 4,5). However, rather than promoting student empowerment, an almost impossible task according to Buckingham (Buckingham, 1998: 11) and Turnbull (Turnbull, 1998: 90) the focus was on providing opportunities for creativity, dialogue and the recognition of difference, as suggested by researchers such as Robert Morgan (Morgan, 1998: 124-128) and Bill Green (Green, 1998: 189-194). Despite the intention to critique these dominant discourses, the analysis suggests the design of some activities incorporated hegemonic discourses of gender, which simply reinforced existing social hierarchies and gendered identity performances. Data Analysis The analysis described here focuses on students’ journal reflections, completed as an online web log (blog), and aims to identify examples of performative variation and the types of activities which encourage it. These were year ten students all in the fourteen to sixteen years age group, with fourteen of the students having Caucasian cultural backgrounds and four having Chinese cultural backgrounds. Each student completed approximately forty reflections, including responses to specific questions and more open-ended responses. All responses were assumed to provide evidence of the hegemonic and variational performance of masculinity and were not analysed to provide direct insights into the students’ understanding of the topic or skills, addressed in the learning episodes, or as evidence of conceptual understanding. Student learning journals, rather than interviews, were chosen as 6 a data source because the researcher was interested in how male students performed masculinity in classroom learning situations rather than in interviews. Figure 1 A Blog reflection space in the school’s Moo. The data were analysed using Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) methods. CDA is considered to be a “shared perspective” on doing various forms of linguistic, semiotic and discourse analysis (Wodak, 2001: 2). Fairclough’s approach to CDA focuses on the ways in which language is used socially, and particularly how it is used to maintain power relations in society and within specific historical and social contexts (Fairclough, 2003: 21-29). This is consistent with performativity theory because Butler recognises the linguistic and semiotic aspects of identity performance, and the role of discourse. She suggests semiotic resources are “cultural tools”, arguing that ‘the self’ is non existent until entering discourse and “taking up the tools where they lie, where the very ‘taking up’ is enabled by the tool lying there” (Butler, 1990: 145). In addition, Butler’s post-structuralist perspective allows for agency within this, addressing CDA’s potential tendency towards structuralist determinism. This combined approach suggests that learning about video games involves the use of available semiotic resources for the performance of masculinities. Particular types of learning 7 experiences may enhance the possibility for variation in the performance of masculinity and this is potentially identifiable within the linguistic structures of students’ written, spoken and visual language work. “My team…” The social context at IBC includes a very specific network of practices, involving discourses of masculinity, which work against some of the fundamental objectives of media education. The school characterises itself as preparing graduates who are productive in relation to the managerial and economic imperatives of new capitalism. Discourses of leadership, competition, team work, achievement and “excellence” are promulgated through the classroom and co-curricular sport and cultural activities, and continuously rehearsed at school assemblies, awards ceremonies and in school publications. The performance of particular types of masculinity leads to further rewards in this context. According to Connell: “’Masculinity’, to the extent the term can be briefly defined at all, is simultaneously a place in gender relations, the practices through which men and women engage that place in gender, and the effects of these practices in bodily experience, personality and culture”. (Connell, 1995: 71). Discourses of success in relation to schooling and work have been identified as prominent within a version of hegemonic masculinity associated with middle class males (Connell, 1995: 165). It seems likely that media education’s questioning of discourses associated with masculinity and patriarchy would be marginalised in the context of a middle class boys’ school like IBC. 8 Evidence of this can be found in the following reflection by Dogolas*, completed after a two hour planning session on the second day of the immersion unit. The students were required to use teamwork to develop some initial ideas for a video game, deciding on genre, characters, and broad story outline and setting. Dogolas constructed a sense of optimism based on the group’s ability to work together to achieve their goals: I think this game will be a success as our group has great teamwork, we communicate with each other well, we don’t waste time fooling around and we have conquered most of the problems we have faced for the present moment (Dogolas). In this reflection agency is developed through the repetition of “we”, with the group attributed with having “great teamwork”, good communication and time management skills and the ability to solve problems. Time wasting and “fooling around”, which arguably have the potential to lead to variation, are suppressed. According to Dogolas, such “problems” have been “conquered”, a metaphor suggestive of domination and the demonstration of group power. A successful game is one that will be complete, functional and appealing to both the group members and its intended audience. It will meet the unit’s assessment requirements and will be better than other groups’ games. “Success” is not likely to equal experimentation and difference. Individual variation, especially from less powerful members of the team, is unlikely. This presents a challenge for media education aiming to provide opportunities for creativity, dialogue and the recognition of difference. Dogolas’ performance of middle class masculinity, invokes discourses relating directly to the social context of IBC, which promotes all round excellence that extends beyond academic performance. The school’s most celebrated students are those who excel academically, on 9 the sporting field, in cultural pursuits and socially through “mateship” and the concept of the “renaissance man” is actively promoted at school assemblies and awards nights. In this context, masculinity is defined as much in relation to subordinate forms of masculinity as it is to femininity. Dogolas’ performance of masculinity constructs time wasting and “mucking around” as subordinate because they undermine good teamwork, which is crucial to success. Mucking around means letting your mates down. This goes beyond performing academically for the teacher and self-consciousness about evaluation and assessment, although these remain important. For individual students, this has consequences at the level of material social relations. They must work with other students to achieve goals while competing with both other groups and individuals within the group. Students are under constant peer surveillance, in relation to behaviour with other males, with females and with teachers and learning. This influences how they dress, speak, act like “blokes” and use, play and discuss video games and technology. The performance of masculinity is a key aspect in the formation of teenage boys’ identities, which is central to the ways in which they orientate themselves to others, learning and career and life trajectories. For the upper middle class students at IBC, these are closely aligned to the school’s invocation of discourses associated with new capitalism. In this context, media education’s objectives are likely to be ignored, challenged or marginalised by students, unless unique and challenging learning activities are designed. “Be very kind and charming to females…” Analysis of student journal responses to two different gender-related activities demonstrated that the variational performance of masculinities is reliant on the opportunities to experience 10 difference afforded by the activity itself. The first activity, discussed below, required students to work in groups to design and draw a character for a specific video game genre and audience and provide a list of skills, props and traits for the character. This activity aimed to encourage students to start considering genre conventions, audience and representations. This is the type of activity often designed for students in media education classrooms to develop “critical skills”. Despite the teachers’ intentions, this activity encouraged hegemonic performances of masculinity, largely because the activity itself permitted the reiteration of gender categories. A second activity, completed the following day, involved students in a live online chat about gender and video games with female university students. The year ten students were located at school and the female students at university. Each team had its own chat room and different female students visited the different rooms to discuss the topic with the male students. This activity had a media education focus in that the teachers believed it would broaden the students’ perspective on gender and video games. It demonstrated that it is possible to design learning activities that create the potential for variation in the performance of masculinity. Dogolas’ team, “Final Fantasies”, was required to design a character for a role playing game (RPG) for 18-year-old females. Dogolas expressed the ease with which he thought the group was able to target a female audience: Since my team members and I feel like we constantly play RPGs we knew the basic concept we just needed to go inside the mind of a female on “why would I buy the particular RPG” (Dogolas). 11 Agency belongs to the all male team in this reflection. Masculinity is discursively constructed through expertise relating to game play and power over the female mind. The team has a relationship of solidarity, it is claimed, through shared game play, and through working together to reach a common goal. The implication is that regular game play has allowed the mastering of the concept of RPGs and that this is easily transferable to mastering female preferences. The metaphor “to go inside the mind of a female” is suggestive of exposure and the objectification of the female mind. It suggests exploration, conquest and colonisation, particularly read in the context of the activity, which requires the students to target a female audience and exploit it for commercial gain. Despite the intention that this activity aimed to help students to somehow become more critical of institutional targeting and audience exploitation, it actually provided an opportunity for the hegemonic performance of masculinity, through insisting that the male students target a female audience. Mambofaith, also a member of Final Fantasies, explains the character the group designed for their audience: … our main character is a knight which serves in a king’s army, he is attractive young man with muscular look also lean and brave, he ride on a horse with a sword and a shell. Due to the target audiences are 18 year old female, we decided that young knight must look handsome and attractive as well as polite and kind (Mambofaith). Females are represented as desiring of the heroic masculine ideal. Agency belongs to the male archetypal character whose attributes are conventional within the fairy tale genre. These characteristics, along with his phallic sword and shield, are definitive within hegemonic masculinity. A discourse of patriarchy is invoked, with a fantasy-based character 12 constructed by the students and assumed to be desirable by eighteen-year-old females. This masculine ideal draws on a discourse evident in children’s fairy tales, and more recently in popular culture and RPGs such as the Lord of the Rings film trilogy and associated games and through characters such as Link from the Legend of Zelda series. The annotations accompanying the character sketch below support this, with the use of descriptions such as “perfect white teeth”, “very kind and charming to females” and “look good (like prince charming figure)”. Figure 2 Main character for RPG game for 18 year old females created by team “Final Fantasies”. It can be argued that there is evidence of variation here because of the parodic nature of the representation, particularly the playfulness of the annotations, which are arguably “sending up” the stereotype of heroic masculinity. However, as Buckingham has shown, parody is often ambiguous (Buckingham, 1998: 68). It may be impossible to identify the extent to which the representation is knowingly critically parodic and therefore subversive. The reference to “ugly women” and “looks are not important” are particularly ambiguous in relation to hegemonic masculinity. Furthermore, while the activity provides some potential for performative variation, it also requires students to target females for commercial gain and to use conventions generic within Role Playing Games, which call for the use of stereotypes. The activity does not invite students to experience dialogue and difference through processes 13 of creativity. Therefore, there are limits to the extent to which students can perform identity in a subversive manner. A reflection by mad[z], a member of a different group who had to design a sports game for a thirty year old female audience, provides another example of a hegemonic performance: One of our teachers said it was a “bastard of a topic”, and we felt this was definitely an understatement. Somehow we decided a 30 year old female would be interested in a male ping pong player, so that’s what we ended up designing (mad[z]). Here female games players are represented as an abstract object, a “topic” rather than a subject. Hegemonic masculinity is performed by the student in solidarity with the male teacher’s performance. The problem is “othered” through the use of “bastard”, reducing thirty-year-old females’ interest in sports related video games to a dismissible inconvenience. In this case the female “mind” is impossible to understand and therefore impossible to commercially exploit. The students’ repertoire does not include a model for this group of females and they seem unable to conceive of an appropriate masculine hero. Rather than design a female character, they offer a subordinate representation of masculinity, a male “ping pong player”. “Ping pong” is a derogatory term for table tennis, which has much less status in Australian sporting culture than tennis, where it lacks tradition and is recognised as a sport played indoors and in non-Western countries. It has no national sporting heroes in Australia and is not played at IBC in official inter-school competitions. It might be argued that the students have varied their performance of masculinity here, demonstrating a distance from hegemonic masculinity, but again, this is ambiguous. It is just 14 as likely that thirty-year-old females are dismissed as being an unimportant target market, represented as being completely outside the video games community, and deserving of a subordinate character. In this case, the performance of masculinity marginalises both female games players and variational forms of masculinity. In either case, the task provided limited opportunities for dialogue and the experience of difference. One explanation for the representations constructed by these students is that they relied on what Fairclough calls interdiscursivity, which relates to the ways in which individuals transform discourses and language use through genre mixing and recontextualisation (Fairclough, 2003: 35). The students’ work might be read as an attempt to recontextualise the discourses used in commercial video game productions and associated popular culture forms. However, the responses also reflected that they worked in a closed classroom, with an all male audience, reliant on the discourses in operation at IBC and made available to them through the activity itself. The female target audience was abstract and inauthentic, an object of study rather than a genuine presence. Reflecting the design cycle process, the aim was to design a new game for sale, rather than create a game to deliver player satisfaction. This drew on a technology studies orthodoxy in which students learn to use technology to meet the social, cultural or economic needs of individuals or groups of people. The task also required the students to compete with other groups, who were designing characters for different audiences, thus creating a sense that there was a correct way to design the characters in order to excel in the task. “Yes, I agreed with Natasha…” The second activity was different from the character design activity because it brought the students into direct contact with people they would rarely encounter in their all boys school 15 context – female university students. It also introduced a new space, not regulated by the discourses of IBC, and the activity was completed specifically for the purpose of promoting discussion, which would expose the male students to different perspectives. It was open ended in the sense that there were no “correct” answers. After the session, Rhysay focused on what he had learnt about games and sexism: I almost always agreed with what Natasha* had to say, as she had quite a knowledge of what was the purpose of video games and their relation with sexism. One of the things I learnt today was that, just because Tomb Raider gave precedence to a main female character, it still didn’t necessarily appeal to females (Rhysay). In this example agency is shared between the participants. In the first phrase “I” (Rhysay) has agency as he gives legitimacy to Natasha’s point of view. In the second phrase, agency is shifted to Natasha as her knowledge of games and sexism is recognised: “she had quite a knowledge”. This leads Rhysay to suggest that he has learnt something, if not directly from Natasha (he does not say she taught him), at least from the overall interaction. In the second sentence, agency is given to Tomb Raider over the “main female character”. However, this is qualified in the next phrase in which Tomb Raider doesn’t “necessarily appeal to females”. The qualification is possible due to Rhysay’s new knowledge of the game and female players, resulting from his interaction with Natasha. This is significant because she is given a degree of status and agency in Rhysay’s reflection. Sexism is marginalised and Rhysay’s performance of masculinity is variational, as he describes the possibility for different male and female responses to video games. 16 A similar reflection was constructed by dekz, who also chatted with Natasha: Yes I agreed with Natasha that a lot of games out there are sexist, and made mainly for guys for example the one Natasha suggested, Tomb Raider. And that sexism is a major topic which needs to be thought about. We agreed that there should be more multi sexed games out there! (dekz). Again, Natasha is given agency, with her knowledge of video games and sexism recognised as legitimate. Sexist games and male audiences are linked in the reflection and effectively de-centred. Thinking about sexism is also legitimised, which is variational to dekz’ other reflections in which theory work is marginalised in favour of practical production work. There is also recognition of the importance of variety and diversity, with the call for more “multi sexed” games. Dekz effectively creates a partnership with Natasha by saying “We agreed…”, forming a solidarity arrangement generally reserved for other males. NosferatuAlcard also varies his performance of masculinity in recognising this session as interesting, rather than rejecting it in favour of practical production work. Like Rhysay, his performance includes a description of the diversity of female responses to video games: This session was interesting. Female gamers are as varied as the male ones. Our group talked to two QUT students. One liked story-driven games like Final Fantasy and the other liked shooting games and strategy games. They said there is a place in games for all types of characters, stereotypical and non- stereotypical … One of them recommended that games should get into niche markets like anime and mange fans, while there are a fairly large number of 17 these games, hardly any get released in Australia. I can relate to the previous sentence as I am an anime and manga fan (NosferatuAlcard). The student’s reflection demonstrates he has an affinity with the female student who is a fan of similar types of popular culture. Again, this creates a form of solidarity relationship typically formed with other males. NosferatuAlcard gives legitimacy to the female student’s opinion, that there is a place for diversity in games characters. The analysis of journal responses to these two activities suggests teachers need to be aware of their own reliance on hegemonic discourses if they want students to vary their performances. The second task was open-ended, less reliant on correctness, it was dialogic, and it provided the unique experience of hearing distinctly different voices and this provided the potential for variation in the performance of masculinity. Critical reflection According to Butler, the prevailing dominant social order includes discourses that reinforce hegemonic gender roles and institutional and technological processes to regulate social positions (Butler, 1990: 144, 145). As teachers working within the context of IBC, and within the subject area disciplines of media studies and technology education, we relied on discourses of competition, excellence and authenticity. We used competition to structure the activities with the expectation that students would compete with each other to produce high quality responses. We also aimed to provide authentic contexts by having students simulate commercial marketing strategies. This was an approach that provided limited opportunity for students to be exposed to genuinely unique or challenging cultural experiences. Therefore, 18 despite the researcher aiming to move beyond “empowerment” models to identify the types of activities that would lead to more authentic critical responses, the extent to which existing institutional and discursive formations regulate the performance of masculinity was underestimated. We were complicit in reinforcing discourses of hegemonic masculinity, through relying on it, to ensure the activity was “successful” in terms expected by the school and students. Furthermore, structured learning activities can be seen as a process of initiation into the discourses of discipline areas (Foucault, 1984a: 197-205). The version of media education used in this unit aimed to incorporate discourses of critical reflection and this was often in tension with the version of technology education, in which students learn to use the design cycle process. In the latter, specific processes and skills are mastered to enable the solution of a problem. In Queensland, students involved in Technology education “create products in response to needs, wants or opportunities, and evaluate their products and those of others” (QSA, 2003: 4). This can be summarised as a problem identification and solution process (QSA 2004). From a technology education perspective, the immersion students’ aim was to design and develop components of a video game for a specific audience. This included mastering software skills in multimedia programs such as the digital animation software Flash, two-dimensional games software Game Maker and the three-dimensional object creation software Bryce. The students were also encouraged to appraise the strengths and weaknesses of particular software packages as tools for completing specific tasks. The students responded positively to the practical nature of this work and a number stated in their blog reflections that the development of skills was the primary reason for choosing the unit. They responded less enthusiastically to “theory” tasks where the emphasis was on critical thinking about games. The immediate usefulness and practicality of technology- 19 based skills seemed to have much more value within the performance of hegemonic masculinities than critical reflection activities. From this perspective, the discourses associated with technology education can been seen as more consistent with the social context of IBC, and the performance of hegemonic masculinities, than media education because technology education ostensibly prepares students for the economic requirements of new capitalism through providing them with “authentic”, “practical”, “real world” learning experiences. However, the chat room activity provided a successful alternative, engaging the students and providing a potential space for variations in the performance of masculinity. It would therefore seem useful for media educators aiming to challenge discourses associated with new capitalism and patriarchy to reconsider orthodox approaches to media activities and to consider the role subversive variation might play in relation to critical response. Technology education’s focus on real problems, authentic audiences and hands on engagement seem to have much to offer a version of media education which also aims to provide a space for the experience of dialogue and difference. Conclusion This paper has explored the connection between learning, the performance of identities and the potential for variation within this and suggests that students perform their identities as they respond to particular learning activities. It has demonstrated the potential to use the post structuralist theory of “performativity” as an approach for incorporating a “critical” component in media and technology education classrooms. While this analysis has focussed on the performance of masculinities, it is not unreasonable to generalise across the performance of gendered identities, as suggested by Butler’s theory. Encouraging subversive variation will require teachers to be creative in designing learning activities, including less 20 emphasis on the discourses of excellence, competition, team work and “othering” associated with the performance of identities and more emphasis on open dialogue and access to genuine difference and diversity. Developing such activities will be a challenge for educators who use the discourses associated with hegemonic masculinity to motivate, organise and assess students. However, unless this occurs, activities which claim to develop students’ “critical” abilities will continue to reinforce existing social hierarchies. *All original names have been changed to maintain anonymity. The aliases chosen by the students for use online have been used instead of their actual names. 21 Buckingham, D, 1998, 'Fantasies of Empowerment? Radical Pedagogy and Popular Culture', in (ed.) D. Buckingham, Teaching popular culture : beyond radical pedagogy, UCL Press, London. Buckingham, D, 1998, 'Pedagogy, Parody and Political Correctness', in (ed.) D. Buckingham, Teaching popular culture : beyond radical pedagogy, UCL Press, London. Buckingham, D, 2003, Media Education: literacy, learning and contemporary culture, Polity Press, Cambridge. Butler, J, 1990, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity, Routledge, New York. Connell, R. W, 1995, Masculinities. , Allen & Unwin, St Leonards N.S.W. Fairclough, N, 1989, Language and Power, Pearson Education, Essex. Fairclough, N, 2003, Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research, Routledge, London. Foucault, M, 1984a, 'The Examination', in (ed.) P. Rabinow, The Foucault Reader, Penguin, London. Foucault, M, 1984b, 'Truth and Power', in (ed.) Rabinow, The Foucault Reader, Penguin, London. Green, B, 1998, 'Teaching for Difference: Learning theory and Post-Critical Pedagogy', in (ed.) D. Buckingham, Teaching popular culture : beyond radical pedagogy, UCL Press, London. Luke, C., 2001, 'New Times, New Media: Where to Media Education?', Media International Australia incorporating Culture and Policy, no. 101, November, pp. 87-100. Morgan, R., 1998, 'Provocations for a Media Education in Small Letters', in (ed.) D. Buckingham, Teaching popular culture : beyond radical pedagogy, UCL Press, London. Queensland Studies Authority, 2003, Years 1 – 10 Technology Sourcebook Guidelines, The Office of The Queensland Studies Authority, Brisbane. Queensland Studies Authority, 2004, Senior Syllabus - Information Processing and Technology, The Office of The Queensland Studies Authority, Brisbane. Turnbull, S., 1998, 'Dealing With Feeling: Why Girl Number Twenty Still Doesn't Answer', in (ed.) D. Buckingham, Teaching popular culture : beyond radical pedagogy, UCL Press, London. Wodak, R. and Meyer, M., (eds), 2001, Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, Sage, London. 