ABSTRACT: 
Contemporary debates about ideal and nonideal theory rest on an underlying consensus that the primary practical task of political theory is directing action. This overlooks other urgent practical work that theory can do, including showing how injustice can be made bearable and how resisting it can be meaningful. I illustrate this important possibility by revisiting the purpose for which John Rawls originally developed the concept of ideal theory: reconciling a democratic public to living in a flawed world that may otherwise seem more of a home for catastrophe than justice. However, Rawls’s account of reconciliation is flawed; because of his methodology, the realistic utopia he constructs as a source of hope can be used to defend an unjust status quo. By drawing lessons from Theodor Adorno’s contrasting view of reconciliation after the Holocaust, I offer a more democratic method for political theory to offer sources of hope to the public. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article examines the purpose for which John Rawls originally developed the concept of ideal theory: reconciling a democratic public to living in a flawed world that may otherwise seem more of a home for catastrophe than justice. However, Rawls’s account of reconciliation is flawed; because of his methodology, the realistic utopia he constructs as a source of hope can be used to defend an unjust status quo. By drawing lessons from Theodor Adorno’s contrasting view of reconciliation after the Holocaust, I offer a more democratic method for political theory to offer sources of hope to the public. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 q1Ideal Theory after Auschwitz? The Practical Uses andIdeological Abuses of Political Theory as ReconciliationBenjamin L. McKean, Ohio State UniversityContemporary debates about ideal and nonideal theory rest on an underlying consensus that the primary practical taskof political theory is directing action. This overlooks other urgent practical work that theory can do, including showinghow injustice can be made bearable and how resisting it can be meaningful. I illustrate this important possibility byrevisiting the purpose for which John Rawls originally developed the concept of ideal theory: reconciling a democraticpublic to living in a ﬂawed world that may otherwise seem more of a home for catastrophe than justice. However,Rawls’s account of reconciliation is ﬂawed; because of his methodology, the realistic utopia he constructs as a source ofhope can be used to defend an unjust status quo. By drawing lessons from Theodor Adorno’s contrasting view ofreconciliation after the Holocaust, I offer a more democratic method for political theory to offer sources of hope to thepublic.Why does political theory matter in a world ofurgent and overwhelming injustice? Contempo-rary answers to this question often assume thattheory should guide our response to injustice by directing usto particular actions. In this framework, the debate concernswhether ideal or nonideal theorizing is better suited to thistask. Partisans of the former argue that, without an appro-priate ideal, we will not know whether or not we are on theright path to justice (Simmons 2010); partisans of the lattercontend that such ideals are uninformative about the prac-tical choices we face today (Sen 2009). This underlying con-sensus that the primary practical task of political theory isdirecting action crucially overlooks how theories can shapeattitudes toward what is possible in politics. As a result, theemotional and affective dimensions of responding to injus-tice are often marginalized, and imaginative reﬂections onpossible futures are wrongly presumed to be practically inert.In this article, I seek to rectify these exclusions and argue thatpolitical theory can have practical force by showing how in-justice can be bearable and resisting it can be meaningful,rather than by commanding any particular action. To dothis, I revisit the practical purpose for which John Rawls orig-inally developed the concept of ideal theory: to help reconcilea democratic public to living in a broken world that may seemmore of a home for catastrophe than justice. Rawls was notalone in ﬁnding this task essential in the aftermath of WorldBenjamin L. McKean (mckean.41@osu.edu) is an assistant professor of political151247.proof.3d 1 Achorn InternThe Journal of Politics, volume 79, number 4. Published online Month XX, 201q 2017 by the Southern Political Science Association. All rights reserved. 0022-War II and the Holocaust. Strikingly, both Rawls and Theo-dor Adorno recast the concept of reconciliation, employedby Immanuel Kant and G. W. F. Hegel to demonstrate theunderlying rationality of human existence, to respond to thepalpable irrationality of the twentieth century. As I will show,their accounts of reconciliation, which are in some respectsmirror images of each other’s, are ﬂawed but neverthelessoffer important lessons for how political theorists can re-spond to contemporary injustice.Convinced that theodicy was impossible after Auschwitz,Rawls saw overcoming injustice not only as an organiza-tional challenge but also as an affective one, since the prev-alence of injustice can induce despair and lead us to doubtthe possibility of ever achieving justice. If such doubts be-come pervasive within a democratic public, the consequencescan be dire, as citizens abandon the values that sustain theircoexistence. By describing a realistic utopia, ideal theory canreconcile the public and give its members the hope needed tosustain the long struggle against injustice. Crucially, ratherthan imagining ideal theory as the province of a special fewwith access to an obscure truth, Rawls conceives of reconcili-ation as properly having an essentially democratic character,addressing its audience as equally capable of reﬂecting onpolitics as professional philosophers. However, Rawls’s ac-count is notably ﬂawed. While Rawls explicitly conceives ofideal theory as a political practice within a democratic societyscience at Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210.06/14/17 13:10ational7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/6925893816/2017/7904-00XX$10.00 000q21. A notable exception is Weithman (2009). Other practical tasksidentiﬁed by Rawls include resolving political conﬂict by uncovering“some underlying basis of philosophical and moral agreement” (2001a, 2)and providing an orientation to political and social institutions. See Rawls(2001a, 1–5, 2007, 10–11).000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeanthat is not already well ordered, he also tries to construct hisideal theory from material he believes his audience alreadyaccepts. Yet, in a democracy characterized by unjust institu-tions, there are no facts or theories we should presume ev-eryone accepts, and so, contrary to Rawls’s avowed intentions,his methodology actually makes it much more likely that idealtheory will become ideological by turning certain facts aboutour unjust world into features of a purported utopia.To rectify these problems, I turn to Adorno’s contrastingdefense of the practical affective import of philosophy afterthe Holocaust. Like Rawls, Adorno seeks to take the conceptof reconciliation from its Kantian and Hegelian origins andmake it adequate to a damaged world in which theodicyappears implausible. If Rawls can be said to offer a dem-ocratic conception of the audience for political theory butan undemocratic mode of addressing them, Adorno offerssomething like the reverse. On his view, wemust go on livingour own lives even amid catastrophic suffering, though do-ing so requires us to make ourselves somewhat cold and in-different. Where Rawls seeks to banish this cynical indiffer-ence despite the persistence of the injustice that provokes it,Adorno suggests that the best way to preserve the hope ofcomplete reconciliation under such circumstances is insteadto take responsibility for making ourselves cold and so refuseto be entirely reconciled. This assumption of responsibilityacknowledges the way theorists are themselves affected byinjustice and productively highlights the way their thinkingremains provisional and vulnerable to failure. Adorno’s viewthus chastens Rawls’s, guarding against the temptation ofdeclaring unjust arrangements ideal and keeping the space ofpolitical possibility open for more radical proposals. Yet,while Adorno’s mode of addressing the public is egalitarianin foregrounding his own imperfection and fallibility, hisconception of audience is not. An account that divides theworld into cold theorists and suffering others lacks theconceptual resources to conceive of its audience as potentialequal partners in organizing against injustice, making it un-duly difﬁcult to imagine undertaking cooperative politicalaction. Consequently, I conclude by suggesting that we shouldpursue a more fully democratic theory of reconciliation thatwould ﬁnd reasons for hope in our imperfect relations witheach other.SEEKING RECONCILIATION AFTER KANT AND HEGELRawls’s concern to reconcile a democratic public is not ob-vious from his ofﬁcial deﬁnitions of ideal and nonideal theory.Rawls describes ideal theory as concerning “what a perfectlyjust, or nearly just, constitutional regime might be like” as-suming favorable conditions and strict compliance by (nearly)everyone with the principles of justice (2001a, 13). Nonideal151247.proof.3d 2 Achorn Interntheory, by contrast, relaxes those conditions to consider howto deal with individuals or peoples who do not comply or howto deal with unfavorable conditions in which “historical, so-cial, and economic circumstances”make it difﬁcult to achievea well-ordered regime (Rawls 2001b, 5). Yet Rawls is clearthat the practical role of ideal theory is so important that itscontent is conceived with that in mind, asserting that “Thevery content of the ﬁrst principles of justice, in contrast withthe content of derivative standards and precepts, is deter-mined in part by the practical task of political philosophy”(1999a, 330). Despite this, Rawls’s account of the practicaltask of reconciliation and how it shapes the content of hisideal theory has been overlooked.1 The task of reconciling usto our social world—a function, he notes, “stressed by Hegelin his Philosophy of Right (1821)”—leads philosophy to en-courage its audience “to accept and afﬁrm our social worldpositively, not merely to be resigned to it” (2001a, 3). Whyis this a worthwhile aim? Strikingly, Rawls turns to Kant toexplain the urgency of this task, suggesting, “If a reasonablyjust Society of Peoples whose members subordinate theirpower to reasonable aims is not possible, and human beingsare largely amoral, if not incurably cynical and self-centered,one might ask, with Kant, whether it is worthwhile for hu-man beings to live on the earth” (2001b, 127). Consequently,a brief account of these earlier thinkers—and what madetheir accounts seem impossible to accept after the Holocaust—is essential.Kant famously asks, “What may I hope?” because we of-ten seem to need information beyond the ability of reasonto know (1989, 677). In the ﬁrst instance, this concernsreconciliation between nature and freedom; we cannot knowtheoretically that we are free, but we must make our freedoma “practically necessary presupposition” if we are to act at all(Kant 1996, 52). However, Kant can see that the freedom ofmany people is constrained by war and oppressive politicalinstitutions.What are reasonable hopes for enjoying freedomin the future given these grim circumstances? Kant arguesthat we should believe that humanity is inexorably pro-gressing toward a world of republican states living in perpet-ual peace. Just as it is practically necessary for an individual toassume his own freedom in order to act, so too does Kantargue that we ought to adopt this view of progress for itspractical necessity. If we see history as “the human race fromperiod to period taking steps upward toward virtue and soonafter falling back just as deeply into vice and misery,” then we06/14/17 13:10ationalVolume 79 Number 4 October 2017 / 000will look away in disgust (Kant 1997, 309). Such a lack ofprogress would mean that existing suffering and oppressionis pointless, which would be “contrary to the morality of awise creator and ruler of the world” (Kant 1996, 306). Con-sequently, we adopt this representation of history not on thegrounds that it most accurately reﬂects our discernment ofits objective features—they may seem to us an incomprehen-sible heap of happenings—but because it is more advanta-geous for overcoming nihilistic alienation. As Kant says, “Sucha justiﬁcation of nature—or rather perhaps of providence—isno mean motive for adopting a particular point of view inconsidering the world” (1997, 52). Thus, for Kant, to reconcileourselves to the world as it is requires believing that we areprogressing toward freedom and justice; to think otherwisewould be to see life and action as a farce and to reject thepossibility of an authentic theodicy.With such an explanation in hand, we can make even theevils of wars tolerable, not only because we can be conﬁdentthey will fade away but also because we can see them ascontributing to progress. Kant tells us that “what affordsthis guarantee (surety) [of approaching perpetual peace] isnothing less than the great artist nature (natura daedalarerum) from whose mechanical course purposiveness shinesforth visibly, letting concord arise by means of the discordbetween human beings even against their will” (1996, 331).In other words, we should see nature as guaranteeing thatthe exercise of human freedom contributes to progress evenwhen individuals have no such intentions. This enables himto explain great evils because of the way that they can ad-vance the cause of progress, writing, for example, “So long ashuman culture remains at its present stage, war is thereforean indispensable means of advancing it further” (1997, 232).One can see here the risk of such a progressive narrativeserving ideological ends, as an unjust war could be defendedin the name of perpetual peace.2 But Kant thinks this must berisked since the alternative—to refuse to believe in nature’sguarantee that human freedom will progressively lead toperpetual peace—comes at too high a cost.By contrast, Hegel does not see reconciliation as justiﬁedwith reference to practical necessity or the future, but bythe rationality of existing institutions.3 Key to Hegel’s viewis the famous dictum, “What is rational is actual; and what is2. For a recent defense of Kant’s view of hope, see Goldman (2012).For more on the role of reconciliation in structuring Kant’s approach topolitics, see Flikschuh (2000, 74–79).3. Hegel does place his account of reconciliation within a narrative ofhistorical progress, but it is an account of progress already achieved and sodoes not direct attention to the future. I put this to one side since Rawlsattempts to offer an account of reconciliation in Hegel independent ofthese considerations. See Rawls (2000, 330).151247.proof.3d 3 Achorn Internactual is rational,” which he glosses with the phrase, “Whatmatters is to recognize in the semblance of the temporal andtransient the substance which is immanent and the eternalwhich is present” (Hegel 1991, 20). Hegel views the socialworld as having an underlying rational structure, which it isphilosophy’s task to comprehend. Reconciliation is the stateof fullest rationality when institutions are arranged to re-spect the freedom of individuals and individuals recognize therationality of existing institutions for doing so. Because theindividual feels at home in the world and understands whyhe feels that way—indeed, understands why this very un-derstanding is itself essential to feeling truly at home—he ismost able to act within that world, conﬁdent of the meaningand appropriateness of his actions. Since Hegel believes thatthe world’s rational structure is manifest in modern society,philosophy has the task of shepherding individuals to thisawareness by alleviating their alienation.4Near the close of the Philosophy of Right, Hegel observes,“The present has cast off its barbarism and unjust arbitrar-iness, and truth has cast off its otherworldliness and con-tingent force, so that the true reconciliation, which revealsthe state as the image and actuality of reason, has becomeobjective” (1991, 380). However, after Auschwitz, Rawls andAdorno understandably ﬁnd it impossible to accept this.The world returned to barbarism with a vengeance—andwith the state leading the way. Nor is Kant’s faith in progressany easier to accept. That faith is deeply connected to hisdefense of the possibility of theodicy, which both Rawls andAdorno reject. Absent such faith, the ability to believe thatthe horrors of war can be understood to contribute to prog-ress falters in the face of Auschwitz. Yet, while the Holo-caust may block any straightforward adoption of Kant’sview, it can also be understood to deepen the need that heresponded to. If atrocities of such scale are possible, then weseem to have good reason to wonder if there is any point tocontemplating political ideals when we cannot even stopbarbarity. As the next section establishes, Rawls felt thisworry acutely and consequently repurposed elements fromKant’s and Hegel’s accounts of reconciliation to defend theimportance of ideal theory after Auschwitz.IDEAL THEORY AND THE HOLOCAUSTAS PARADIGM INJUSTICERawls’s own biography tellingly illustrates this affective chal-lenge posed by gross injustice. By his own account, Rawls4. For a useful discussion of Hegelian alienation, see Hardimon (1994).Notably, Rawls advised the dissertation from which Hardimon’s book grew,and Rawls singles out this work as valuable secondary literature in Rawls(2000, 329).06/14/17 13:10ational000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeanidentiﬁed as “a believing orthodox Episcopalian Christian”early in his life and considered attending divinity school tobecome a minister. His undergraduate thesis at Princeton wasa work of Protestant theology that analyzed the concepts offaith and sin and included a rebuke of social contract theory.5The experience of World War II changed his views, however;Rawls reports that he “abandoned [his faith] entirely by June of1945,” transforming his interest in politics and justice. In anundated essay from the 1990s, Rawls reﬂected on his experi-ence:How could I pray and ask God to help me, or myfamily, or my country, or any other cherished thing Icared about, when God would not save millions of Jewsfrom Hitler. When Lincoln interprets the Civil War asGod’s punishment for the sin of slavery, deservedequally by North and South, God is seen as actingjustly. But the Holocaust can’t be interpreted in thatway, and all attempts to do so that I have read arehideous and evil. To interpret history as expressingGod’s will, God’s will must accord with the most basicideas of justice as we know them. For what else can themost basic justice be? Thus, I soon came to reject theidea of the supremacy of the divine will as also hideousand evil (Rawls 2009, 263).Rawls’s rejection of theodicy is clear and direct. The Holo-caust is so monstrous that God must be rejected if He wouldpermit such atrocities. Note how Rawls contrasts the Holo-caust with the enormous evil of slavery, which in turnspawned the slaughter of the Civil War. While Rawls ﬁnds itpossible to imagine a theodicy that would reconcile him to aworld in which sin begat sin and injustice was met with in-justice, the Holocaust shatters that ability to rationalize.6So how is one to motivate moral action in a world that seemsto be equally at home with genocide? One need not share5. See Rawls (2009); for additional context, see Gregory (2007). Bio-graphical information is drawn from Freeman (2007) and Pogge (2007).Biographical quotes in this paragraph from Rawls himself are from Rawls(2009, 261–63). Rawls’s repudiation of his earlier faith there is so completethat he writes: “To the extent that Christianity is taken seriously, I came tothink it could have deleterious effects on one’s character” (265). Notably,as a graduate student, Rawls spent the summer of 1949 producing theindex for Walter Kaufmann’s book on Nietzsche.6. One might also reject the theodicy Lincoln offered in his SecondInaugural and ﬁnd in slavery itself sufﬁcient grounds for questioning thejustice of history. Even if the Civil War can be understood as a ﬁttingpunishment for the actions of whites in the North and South, what evilcan African Americans have committed that could make their enslave-ment seem ﬁtting to them?151247.proof.3d 4 Achorn InternRawls’s background theology to be moved to despair by thepotential meaninglessness of our attempts to achieve justicewhen we cannot prevent horriﬁc evils. Rawls’s concern pre-sents a deep problem for any theory that purports to guideaction or invoke a better future.How does Rawls address this problem of motivating ac-tion against injustice, after acknowledging that our world isone in which the scale of injustice can overwhelm us? Ex-plicitly drawing on Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, Rawls arguesthat the reconciliation ideal theory can provide is an essentialprecondition to effective political engagement with our so-cial world. For Hegel, Rawls writes, “Political philosophymay try to calm our frustration and rage against our societyand its history by showing us the way in which its institu-tions, when properly understood from a philosophical pointof view, are rational, and developed over time as they did toattain their present, rational form” (Rawls 2001a, 3; see alsoRawls 2007, 10–11). For Rawls, political philosophy shouldhelp conﬁrm for us the meaningfulness of our political ac-tion and protect us from anxieties about futility and nihilism;good political theory should be able to make us feel more athome in the world. However, if it is the awfulness of theworld that prompted our worry, how can we feel that theinstitutions of such a world are fundamentally connectedto rationality?In Joshua Cohen’s interpretation, Rawls persists in astraightforward endorsement of the Hegelian slogan thatwhat is rational is actual and what is actual is rational. AsCohen has it, Rawls endorses “a Hegelian Doppelsatz: weneed to accommodate the ideal to the real because the realmanifests the ideal” (2009, 59–60). This helps us to under-stand why some features of our world, such as the existenceof reasonable pluralism, should not frustrate us. On the Rawl-sian picture, while we might wish that everyone agreed withus completely, the free exercise of our moral powers is ofgreat value to our freedom, even if it leads people to differentconclusions that we must tolerate and our institutions mustaccommodate. But while this addresses some frustrationswith society, the Doppelsatz cannot be the whole story forRawls. Reconciliation cannot occur by seeing the reality ofgenocide as a manifestation of the ideal in any sense, yet nei-ther can it be ignored. So how can ideal theory contribute toreconciliation after Auschwitz?Rather than trying to reconcile us by identifying some-thing ideal in such horror, Rawls suggests that ideal theorycan sustain us by training our eyes on a distant but realisticutopia—a task that he identiﬁes as “a variation of ” Hegelianreconciliation (2001a, 4). Indeed, Rawls echoes Kant’s ori-entation to a better future when he argues that “by showinghow the social world may realize the features of a realistic06/14/17 13:10ationalq3Volume 79 Number 4 October 2017 / 000utopia, political philosophy provides a long-term goal of po-litical endeavor, and in working toward it gives meaning towhat we can do today” (2001b, 128). Having seen that justinstitutions are achievable on earth, our world can seem moreof a home to us. While critics have emphasized the practicaland conceptual problems with identifying a long-term goalwithout considering the means for achieving it, they havelargely overlooked the worry about political affect that mo-tivates Rawls to envision such an ideal (cf. Geuss 2005; Wiens2015). Rawls imagines a desirable future, because with it po-litical philosophy can provide a warrant for political practiceagainst the fear of meaninglessness and hopelessness throughwhat Peter Brooks calls “the anticipation of retrospection” (1992,23). Our political actions today appear meaningful by lookingback on them from the perspective of an achieved realisticutopia; this perspective enables us to feel that our actions willhave contributed to justice in a way obscured by our uncer-tain present. For example, envisioning a society in which Rawls’stwo principles of justice are fully realized can help corrob-orate the meaningfulness of working for more modest re-distributive policies in the present. Reconciliation after Ausch-witz thus becomes possible because we draw hope and comfortnot from accepting institutions as they are, but from per-ceiving the possibility of their transformation.Rawls is careful to note that the idea of a realistic utopia“establishes that such a world can exist somewhere and atsome time, but not that it must be, or will be” (2001b, 127).This diverges from the philosophies of history that Kantand Hegel offer and raises the question: Why should thispossibility matter to us? Rawls suggests two reasons. First,Rawls writes, “I believe that the very possibility of such asocial order can itself reconcile us to the social world. Thepossibility is not a mere logical possibility, but one thatconnects with the deep tendencies and inclinations of thesocial world” (2001b, 128; emphasis added). This suggeststhat we care about a realistic utopia, because, with a properunderstanding of our own society, we can hypothesize a re-lationship of historical continuity to a better future. Wherethe Doppelsatz suggests that some apparent misfortune al-ready exhibits features of the better future, this approachsuggests that we can identify progressive trends in societythat give us reason to think that contemporary injusticeswill be overcome without suggesting that there is anythingideal or redemptive in those injustices themselves. Second,Rawls writes: “Political philosophy is realistically utopianwhenit extends what are ordinarily thought to be the limits of prac-ticable political possibility and, in so doing, reconciles us to ourpolitical and social condition” (2001b, 11; emphasis added).This suggests a potentially different connection, since the fu-ture is represented as an extension of ordinary thought about151247.proof.3d 5 Achorn Internthe limits of possibility rather than of deep and perhaps un-acknowledged social tendencies. Such a utopia can providehope and solace not only because I individually believe it ispossible but because its practicability is generally accepted, atleast implicitly; I can more readily feel at a home in an im-perfect society when I know that my hopes for the future arecompatible with its conventional wisdom. However, while or-dinary thought about political possibility may be an expres-sion of the same deep social tendencies that justify hope, itmay also express something different; in societies marked byinjustice, ordinary thought can be habituated to regard deeplyﬂawed institutions as the best that can be hoped for. In thenext two sections, I explore these possibilities by turning toRawls’s method for constructing a realistic utopia—amethodthat relies on Rawls’s conception of the audience that idealtheory is meant to reconcile.RAWLS ON THE CONSTRUCTIONOF A REALISTIC UTOPIATo perform the work of reconciliation, a realistic utopia mustoffer a vision that is distant enough from our unjust presentthat it can plausibly be called ideal while also appearingsufﬁciently familiar that we can recognize it as connected tothe world we inhabit. What would be a principled method forconstructing a realistic utopia to perform this task? Rawlsexplicitly draws his method from what he identiﬁes as theRousseauvian strain in Kant, speciﬁcally from his interpre-tation of Rousseau’s famous dictum that political philosophyshould take “men as they are and laws as they might be”(2001b, 7 and 13). Following this slogan, Rawls rejects theidea that the indifference to suffering that made the Holo-caust possible should lead us to believe that people are nat-urally evil or “incurably cynical and self-centered” (2001b,127). Instead, Rawls gives an account of human nature asfundamentally reasonable—that is, capable of being moti-vated by moral reasons. In the Discourse on Inequality, Rous-seau defended his view of human nature through a kindof imaginary natural history and introduced the methodologyof this argument by writing, “Let us therefore begin by settingaside all the facts, for they do not affect the question” (1997,132). It is not obvious that Rawls can do the same. Rousseauand Kant shared a belief in the possibility of theodicy thatis unavailable to Rawls and unpersuasive for addressing ademocratic public with a diversity of beliefs about religionand nature. Within the world, there is plenty of evidence thatpeople act very badly indeed, so what licenses Rawls to as-sume that they will act justly in other circumstances?Here, Rawls adopts Kant’s strategy of making a practicallynecessary presupposition—now given a political twist andrefracted through an injunction that the Holocaust must not06/14/17 13:10ationalq4000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeantake our hope, even when it has undermined faith. He writes:“We must not allow these great evils of the past and presentto undermine our hope for the future of our society as be-longing to a Society of liberal and decent Peoples around theworld. Otherwise, the wrongful, evil, and demonic conductof others destroys us too and seals their victory” (2001b, 22).That is, Rawls justiﬁes his belief in the human capacity tobe reasonable by highlighting the practical importance ofadopting this viewpoint. The failure to adopt an appropriateviewpoint on human action could mean resignation anddespair for the individual, but Rawls’s worry is ultimatelymore political than existential; Rawls refers to “our hope”because he identiﬁes the most important audience for rec-onciliation as the public. In particular, Rawls argues that thefailure to believe that people naturally respond to moralreasons contributes to bringing about the cynicism and self-centeredness it already proclaims as fact. Rawls asserts thatthe amorality of an unreconciled public can turn a cooper-ative, democratic society into an unstable power struggle—asituation he repeatedly identiﬁes with the Weimar Republicthat preceded Hitler’s regime (Rawls 2007, 8–9; see alsoRawls 1996, lix–lx). Such dramatic political stakes are notmere hyperbole, but methodologically essential if the pre-sumption of human reasonableness is to be justiﬁed by ap-peal to practical necessity. Rawls makes this relation clearwhen he writes: “Our hope for the future of our society restson the belief that the social world allows a reasonably justconstitutional democracy existing as a member of a rea-sonably just Society of Peoples” (2001a, 11). Without be-lieving in the realism of such a utopia, our hopes have noground and the future simply will not look worth pursuing—and so not only must political philosophy provide a realisticutopia to prevent that, it may invoke these practical effectsas a justiﬁcation for belief in utopian possibility.The need to address this justiﬁcation for reconciliationto the public shapes both the self-understanding of the po-litical philosopher and the content of the realistic utopias sheconceives. Rawls writes, “What is the audience of politicalphilosophy? . . . Surely, in a democracy the answer to thisquestion is: all citizens generally” (2007, 1). This audiencemust be addressed in a particular way; Rawls argues that thepractice of political philosophy should be democratic in thefurther sense that “writers in political philosophy have nomore authority than any other citizen, and should claim nomore” (2007, 2). An account of reconciliation for democraticpublics should in principle be acceptable to all; identifyingan account of reconciliation with a partisan claim would beespecially problematic, as it could serve to discredit realisticutopianism for partisans of other positions and reinforcecynicism. Moreover, because they are not authorities, po-151247.proof.3d 6 Achorn Internlitical theorists cannot appeal to superior expertise in theirargument and ought to rely on claims that are already broadlyaccepted by a democratic public. In this fashion, the urgentpractical task of reconciling a democratic public should guidea theorist in deciding what material from the existing worldto use when constructing a realistic utopia that properly ful-ﬁlls its practical aim.This justiﬁcation for Rawls’s view of men as they are thusshapes his understanding of laws as they might be. Whichfacts about our unjust world can help us to see what insti-tutions people would have in a more just one? How can weknow what human conduct we need to accommodate in ourrealistic utopias and what can be dismissed as merely theproduct of our own benighted institutions? These are difﬁ-cult questions, but the need to ensure the public’s acceptanceof the answers puts pressure on Rawls to risk as little un-certainty as possible in constructing his realistic utopia.Consider Rawls’s ideal picture of international politics inTheLaw of Peoples. Rawls writes: “The speciﬁc conditions of ourworld at any time—the status quo—do not determine theideal conception of the Society of Peoples” (2001b, 89–90;emphasis added), but it is a curious and much-remarked-upon feature of this realistic utopia that it closely resemblesprevailing understandings of the world, including a WorldTrade Organization, a World Bank, and a United Nations(2001b, 42–43; see also Buchanan 2000). This should seemless curious in light of the methodology described above. Noone can doubt the “realism” of institutions that already exist.Rawls means for a utopia that is an idealized version ofour world to seem acceptable and achievable to the public,but its very familiarity raises a question: If people in the fu-ture who share our nature act reasonably within institutionsnot unlike ours, why do we not already live in that world?For Rawls, it is not human nature, but the contingent ﬂawsof existing political and social institutions that explain ourfailure to have realized our ideals. He writes: “The social sys-tem shapes the wants and aspirations that its citizens cometo have. It determines in part the sort of persons they wantto be as well as the sort of persons they are. Thus an economicsystem is not only an institutional device for satisfying ex-isting wants and needs but a way of creating and fashioningwants in the future” (1999b, 229). Rawls means for this tosupport his claim that a just society will be stable, but itsimplications for own nonideal society are also important. Anunjust social system profoundly shapes the character of thepeople who grow up under it and can explain their failure torespond reasonably. The existence of unjust institutions doesnot justify unreasonable or self-centered behavior, of course,but simply explains it, resolving the apparent contradictionbetween Rawls’s presumption of our reasonable nature and06/14/17 13:10ational7. Rawls himself modeled this distance in his own life. Freeman re-ports (2007, 5): “He regularly declined requests for interviews, and chosenot to take an active role in public life. He conscientiously avoided ce-lebrity status. Rawls believed that philosophers are normally misunder-stood when they address the public, and that though philosophy has amajor inﬂuence on political life, its inﬂuence is indirect, taking many yearsbefore it becomes a part of a community’s moral consciousness.” Thereare two notable exceptions to this avoidance. The ﬁrst was his oppositionto the war in Vietnam and his support for an effort to have the Harvardfaculty endorse a reform of the military draft that would have made se-lection entirely by lot (see Pogge 2007, 19–22). The second came after his1995 stroke, when he signed an amicus curiae brief to the Supreme Courtin favor of the right to die, published as Dworkin et al. (1997).Volume 79 Number 4 October 2017 / 000the occurrence of the political catastrophes that make rec-onciliation so important in the ﬁrst place.However, this resolution points to a deep problem inRawls’s account. Rawls argued that a realistic utopia couldbe connected to the present and consequently meaningfulfor us in two ways: through the deep tendencies of the socialworld and through extending what are ordinarily thoughtto be the limits of practicable political possibility. Rawlsseems to assume that these amount to the same thing, be-cause of humanity’s capacity to be moved by moral reasons.But Rawls’s explanation of why we have failed to realize ourideals points to how these two can come apart when existinginstitutions are unjust, since those institutions shape the char-acter and thereby the ordinary thoughts of those who growup under them. Is a vision that extends the ordinary thoughtsof an audience habituated to injustice likely to be whollyutopian? Or will it be so marked by injustice that calling itutopian inadvertently serves ideological ends?LEARNING “THE LESSON OF THE HOLOCAUST”?In seeking an ideal theory that can reconcile a democraticpublic divided by injustice, Rawls faces a dilemma. Rawlsknows that our own society is riven by political disputesabout the basis of public justiﬁcation. He writes: “Our so-ciety is not well-ordered: the public conception of justiceand its understanding of freedom and equality are in dispute.Therefore, for us—you and me—a basis of public justiﬁcationis still to be achieved” (1999a, 355). Yet Rawls neverthelessaddresses the audience for reconciliation as if it already lives ina realistic utopia, offering a view that purports to draw from ashared justiﬁcatory basis when it instead relies on premisesthat are deeply disputed within actual politics. By treatingcertain contentious claims as outside politics, such attemptsat reconciliation may needlessly enshrine certain facts aboutthe status quo as ideal when they are not. Rawls is aware ofthis danger. In a footnote, he notes: “The idea of political phi-losophy as reconciliation must be invoked with care. For po-litical philosophy is always in danger of being used corruptlyas a defense of an unjust and unworthy status quo, and thusof being ideological in Marx’s sense. From time to time wemust ask whether justice as fairness, or any other view, is ideo-logical in this way; and if not, why not?” (Rawls 2001a, 4, n4;see also Rawls 1999a, 326, n4, and 2007, 10, 359–62). Recon-ciliation seeks to make us feel at the home in the world andthereby risks encouraging complacency; there is thus a stand-ing danger that it may be used to defend a status quo that isnot actually just. In this section, I will argue that Rawls’s at-tempt to address a divided audience as though it were alreadywell ordered leads him into precisely the trap that he soughtto avoid.151247.proof.3d 7 Achorn InternSo why does Rawls address the public in this fashion?Recall that Rawls’s worry is that actual democratic politicscan devolve into a tenuous and ultimately unstable balanceof power between cynical competing interest groups unlessindividuals come to politics already reconciled, which pre-pares them to see others as reasonable and to give due con-sideration to their interests. Consequently, despite assertingthat political theorists should be understood as citizens in ademocracy like any others, Rawls also asserts that theory is apractice that happens outside politics, not within it. He statesplainly: “Our answer to the question of whether a reasonablyjust Society of Peoples is possible affects our attitudes towardthe world as a whole. Our answer affects us before we come toactual politics, and limits or inspires how we take part in it”(Rawls 2001b, 128, emphasis added; see also Rawls 2007, 7).There is a perfectly common sense element to this separa-tion of theory and “actual politics”; to put theory at theheart of political life would be misguided aggrandizement.7But the combination of Rawls’s aspiration to provide anaccount that all can accept along with the necessity of recon-ciling them before they engage in politics leads to a strongerclaim: what I will call the “priority thesis” that ideal theorycan and should promote reconciliation by relying only on ex-periences, facts, and arguments that are themselves outsidepolitics—or at least are not being actively contested withinactual politics. To Rawls, looking for the resources to en-vision a realistic utopia within the experience of conten-tious democratic politics is a terrible risk, since to enterpolitics unreconciled could propagate cynicism and distrustwith disastrous consequences. However, refusing this riskmeans he must construct a realistic utopia using claims thatare already acceptable to a public shaped by existing unjustinstitutions. By setting the stakes of reconciliation so highin order to justify his presupposition of human reasonable-ness on the grounds of practical necessity, Rawls has boxedhimself in. As a result, Rawls tries to guarantee reconcilia-tion by having theorists address their audience employingonly claims that partisans of all stripes accept, despite the06/14/17 13:10ational000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeanevident impossibility of this aspiration in the contemporarycontext.If taken seriously as a methodological guideline, this pri-ority thesis undermines the democratic credentials of Rawls’sview in three ways: ﬁrst, his view implicitly discourages the-orists from acknowledging their own fallibility and reﬂectingon how they are inﬂuenced by the politics of an unjust society;second, the priority thesis limits the potential means for po-litical theorists to address an audience, rendering it unneces-sarily exclusive; third, his realistic utopia relies on contentiouspartisan claims while purporting to stand outside such dis-putes. These features all derive from the perceived need torespond to an unjust world while bracketing the disagreementthat accompanies a disordered society. Taken together, theyhave the ideological effect of directing ideal theory away fromconfronting the scope and persistence of injustice’s effects. Inshort, Rawls is right to conceive of the audience for politicaltheory as a democratic public, but he is wrong in his assump-tions about the way to address that public in its current state.First, suggesting that theorists can work outside of politicsstands in tension with his own account of the pervasive in-ﬂuence of institutions and the inevitable effects when thoseinstitutions are unjust. Consider how individuals are likely tobe inﬂuenced by the context of unjustiﬁable racial and eco-nomic inequality, for example, as the recipients of unde-served beneﬁts understandably struggle to rationalize theirholdings (Mills 2015). Contestation is pervasive under suchconditions, extending to judgments, doctrines, and factualmatters, and there is no reason to think that professionalintellectuals are immune from this. However, since Rawlsseeks for ideal theory to guarantee reconciliation, acknowl-edging the provisional and fallible nature of the theorist’srealistic utopia risks introducing a dangerous uncertainty,and so the theorist’s own location within politics must bedownplayed.Second, the priority thesis leads to a needlessly narrowpicture of how philosophers can address others. Seekingvenues for deliberation that stand outside actual politics,Rawls suggests that other citizens could come across ideasfrom theorists in “editorials and discussions debating theseideas in newspapers and in journals of opinion” (Rawls 2007,6). However, the contemporary media is itself hardly neutralor nonpartisan; the inﬂuence of party politics and the proﬁtmotive on the structure of communications is clear. Given theevident unreliability of informing the public through suchmethods, Rawls often ends up settling for the much morelimited and elite audience that political theory typically ad-dresses, particularly the judiciary. For example, he singlesout “liberal writers in philosophy [inﬂuencing] the judges ona Supreme Court in a constitutional regime like ours” (Rawls151247.proof.3d 8 Achorn Intern2007, 4) as one of the most powerful way for theorists toengage in politics. Such communication among elites maybe effective, but addressing political theory exclusively to sucha limited audience undermines his own more democraticaims.The third major problem concerns the content of a re-alistic utopia constructed with the aim of reconciling a di-vided public. Consider again the strikingly familiar viewof international politics Rawls describes as realistically uto-pian. In defending limits on the amount of global redistri-bution of wealth required in ideal theory, Rawls cruciallyrelies on the disputed economic claim that “the politicalculture of a burdened society is all-important” for its de-velopment (2001b, 108); in other words, rich countries arenot necessarily obliged to share their wealthwith poor countries,since it is the culture of poor countries that is responsiblefor their poverty. Elsewhere he rather startlingly describesan Islamic people in his realistic utopia as resembling thestate Hegel outlines in The Philosophy of Right and, in de-fending this suggestion from the charge of “baseless uto-pianism,” he notes that an ideal theory must consider that“most Muslim rulers . . . [have] sought empire and territory”(2001b, 75–78). These claims about economic developmentand Islamic leadership are about the institutions of ourworld, and they are obviously contentious; candidates forofﬁce today debate precisely these questions about the efﬁ-cacy of foreign aid and the character of Muslim societies,for example. My point is not to take sides in these particulardebates, but simply to point out that there are sides. Despitehis aspiration, the facts on which Rawls relies in construct-ing and defending his realistic utopia are subject to disputewithin actual politics rather than belonging to a set of sharedpremises that precede politics or that can be vindicated byshared justiﬁcatory standards.Rawls’s account faces these problems because, in responseto features of our world that cause despair, it seeks to culti-vate hopeful attitudes without acknowledging the persis-tence of the unjust structures that cause despair and op-pression; the result is an attitude ill ﬁtted to its full socialcontext. A contrast with Hegelian reconciliation makes thisclear. For Hegel, objective institutional arrangements wereprimary; to be subjectively reconciled without the right kindof actual social world was impossible or, as Marxists wouldlater add, to be the victim of false consciousness. By contrast,Rawls’s conception gives priority to achieving the subjectiveattitude of reconciliation as a precondition to the achieve-ment of just institutions, since we must be reconciled inorder to engage in effective political action. This differenceis highlighted by what Rawls takes to be the most likelypermanent threat to reconciliation. While Hegel acknowl-06/14/17 13:10ationalVolume 79 Number 4 October 2017 / 000edged that poverty could form the objective basis of subjec-tive alienation even in an otherwise reconciled world, Rawlssees fundamentalism as the most important form of alien-ation in an otherwise reconciled world—an attitudinal re-jection of reasonability that he understands to be purelysubjective and without any material or institutional basis.8In seeking to protect hope, Rawls reiﬁes attitudes topolitics so that they cease to be appropriately responsiveto their circumstances. Rawls’s conception of reconciliationsprang from a deep experience of the singularity of the Ho-locaust and a proclamation that theodicy must be rejectedbecause it is “hideous and evil” to try to bend atrocity intoreason. When Rawls writes, “Some seem to think that thisidea [of a realistic utopia] is a fantasy, particularly afterAuschwitz” (2001b, 19), one cannot help but suspect that theRawls who was 78 when The Law of Peoples was publishedwas thinking of the 24-year-old Rawls who lost his faith. Butwhile Auschwitz shook Rawls’s faith in God, it apparentlycemented his consequent belief in human goodness, as hewrites: “The fact of the Holocaust and our now knowingthat human society admits this demonic possibility, however,should not affect our hopes as expressed by the idea of a re-alistic utopia and Kant’s foedus paciﬁcum. Dreadful evils havelong persisted” (2001b, 21). Rawls’s practically necessary faithin human reasonability means that the Holocaust cannottell us anything consequential about what attitudes to takeup to humanity or human possibility; it can only tell usabout our institutions. Thus, Rawls, who found efforts torationalize and explain the Holocaust to be despicable, alsoasserts that “The lesson of the Holocaust is, rather, that acharismatic leader of a powerful totalitarian and militaristicstate can, with incessant and rabid propaganda, incite asufﬁcient number of the population to carry out even enor-mously and hideously evil plans. The Holocaust might havehappened anywhere such a state came to be” (2001a, 100).Rawls’s claim is surely true, as far as it goes, but when it comesto taking the full measure of what the Holocaust can teach us,it is too limited. In the shift from theodicy to sociology,Rawls seems to have lost sight of the depth of the problemthat he is addressing.ADORNO ON RECONCILIATION, COLDNESS,AND SUFFERINGLet us return to the nature of that problem to consider an-other way of responding. Like Rawls, Adorno regarded theHolocaust as threatening to the meaningfulness of political8. For Hegel on poverty, see Hegel (1991, 265–67); for Rawls on fun-damentalism, see Rawls (2001b, 126–27).151247.proof.3d 9 Achorn Internaction and responded by appropriating the concept of rec-onciliation fromKant andHegel to ﬁnd sources of hope in itsaftermath. However, where Rawls seeks to guarantee thatdespair at the Holocaust can be overcome in the name ofpreventing further barbarity, Adorno believes that a soundermethod for employing reconciliation against barbarity cancome from attending to our own implication in on-goingsuffering. In Rawls’s methodology, the aim of ideal theoryis palliative, but where Rawls soothes, Adorno aggravates.He reminds us that, in an unjust world, while it is practicallynecessary to feel somewhat at home, this should not directour attention away from the unnecessary suffering thatsurrounds us. This suffering can force us to acknowledgeour relation to existing injustice and the failure to make theworld a home for all. But Adorno argues that this acknowl-edgement can itself help to fuel our hopes, revealing imagesof utopia even amid catastrophe.Adorno’s biographical and philosophical engagementwith the Holocaust is better known than Rawls’s. The sonof a Jewish father who converted to Protestantism, Adornoﬂed Germany in 1934 and eventually moved to the UnitedStates in 1938 before returning to what was then WestGermany in 1949. Unsurprisingly, the experience of exilefrom fascism marked Adorno deeply, and some of his best-known writing concerns the challenge of living after suchcatastrophe, from war-time works like Dialectic of Enlight-enment and Minima Moralia to his later magnum opusNegative Dialectics, written when he was a prominent publicintellectual seeking to prevent the return of fascism in acountry whose transition to democracy was, he believed, in-complete at best (Müller-Doohm 2005, 325–48). Like Rawls,Adorno rejects an entirely Hegelian reconciliation that revealsa world that is already rational, arguing that “the smallest traceof senseless suffering in the empirical world belies all theidentitarian philosophy that would talk us out of that suffer-ing” (1973, 203). For Adorno, the persistence of sufferingis itself irrational, clear evidence that Hegel was wrong tosuggest that the world had an underlying order that couldmake sense from both subjective and objective points of view.Instead, the Holocaust shows catastrophic suffering to be oneof the deﬁning characteristics of our time. The belief thatcomplete reconciliation is now possible not only disrespectsthose who died and those who continue to suffer but alsohelps to perpetuate suffering by directing us away from at-tending to it. Adorno argues: “He who registers the death-camps as a technical mishap in civilization’s triumphal pro-cession, the martyrdom of the Jews as world-historicallyirrelevant, not only falls short of the dialectical vision but re-verses the meaning of his own politics: to hold ultimatecalamity in check” (Adorno 1978, 234). Adorno thus shares06/14/17 13:10ational000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeanwith Rawls a belief that political thought must concern itselfwith preventing society from returning to barbarity, but heoffers a different account of how thinking can do so.Rawls proposes addressing an audience of democraticagents as though they are presently capable of universalagreement about matters central to reconciliation and, indoing so, places the theorist outside politics and bracketshow existing unjust institutions shape the public. Adornoinsists on the particularity of the theorist and places herﬁrmly within political life, in part by attending to how herown life is marked by unjust institutions. Adorno therebyillustrates how political theory can help its audience endureinjustice in a way that incorporates what Rawls leaves out.Adorno sketches this possibility when he asks: “Whetherafter Auschwitz you can go on living—especially whetherone who escaped by accident, one who by rights shouldhave been killed, may go on living. His mere survival callsfor the coldness, the basic principle of bourgeois subjectiv-ity, without which there could have been no Auschwitz;this is the drastic guilt of him who was spared” (1973, 362–63). Living after the Holocaust requires that one inureoneself to atrocity just in order to go on, yet it is this veryindifference to the suffering of others that made Auschwitzpossible in the ﬁrst place. Such coldness continues to facil-itate injustice. In 1968, Adorno wrote: “In the security ofAmerica . . . it would be difﬁcult to believe that Vietnam isrobbing anyone of sleep. . . . Whoever imagines that as aproduct of this society he is free of the bourgeois coldnessharbors illusions about himself as much as about the world;without such coldness one could not live” (Adorno 2005,274). Adorno frames the dilemma of reconciliation in anunjust world by asking, how can we be reconciled to a worldof suffering when it seems that such reconciliation wouldbe complicit with injustice?To answer this question, we need to understand whyAdorno believes the mere act of survival can make us guilty.One key is the claim that we collectively have the capacity torelieve much existing suffering and oppression. He writes:“Thanks to the present state of the technical forces of pro-duction no one on the planet need suffer deprivation any-more. Whether there will be further want and oppression—which are the same thing—will be decided solely by theavoidance of catastrophe through the rational establishmentof the whole society as humanity” (2005, 144). Considerthat the world’s richest 92 people have as much wealth asthe poorest 3.5 billion, making it easy to imagine that afeasible amount of redistribution could end global poverty(Hardoon 2015). Yet I cannot change these circumstancessingle-handedly, and cooperative group efforts to do so seemuncertain at best and may even appear futile. In the mean-151247.proof.3d 10 Achorn Interntime, to be at home in a world where suffering could be re-lieved but is instead tolerated or even intensiﬁed would be afalse reconciliation, since it requires overlooking how thefeatures of the world that ensure one’s comfort also make itinhospitable to others. Despite this, we must ﬁnd some wayto live, even though to do so means accepting some ac-commodation with existing unjust institutions and inuringourselves to on-going horror simply in order to take care ofourselves.Where Rawls’s account of utopian thinking directs usaway from thinking about contemporary injustice lest itprovoke cynicism about human nature, Adorno actuallydirects us to attend to the experience of distorting ourselvesto live amid catastrophe. We can certainly hope that peopleare capable of acting reasonably, but doing so should not bepremised on suppressing our cynical coldness entirely, sincethat is impossible to do in good faith while injustice andsuffering persist.Instead, though indifference is necessary if we wish to liveour own lives, we should take responsibility for makingourselves cold and see this as a possible source of hope. Thatis a surprising suggestion since the labor of producing ourindifference seems more like a source of despair, a sign thatthe world is so broken that we all must become similarly self-interested in order to survive. Through the work of makingourselves cold, we are indeed “turning into something thatmakes us shudder,” but Adorno says that the experience ofcoming to terms with this is “what compels us to philoso-phize” (1973, 364). Adorno argues that philosophy can serveas an expression of our discomfort with living in a worldwhere our own survival depends on insulating ourselvesfrom it. If it is honest, thinking that is rooted in this dis-comfort and seeks to envision a world without it must alsoacknowledge and take responsibility for one’s own contri-bution to producing one’s indifference. While pervasivecoldness makes us similar, thinking about the possibility ofreconciliation can thus individuate us when it compels us totake responsibility; I am the one who made myself cold inorder to go on. Adorno’s wager is that taking responsibility,even for such a damaging act, exhibits a form of freedom andindividuality that is compelled and constrained by existinginjustice, but which can also facilitate imagining a world offuller freedom and individuality for all. Identifying this ac-tion as mine makes me guilty of a kind of complicity, but italso provides a trace of the freedom that would come wheninjustice has ended and complicity is no longer necessary.For Adorno, when philosophy serves the very practicalpurpose of expressing disquiet with what an unjust worldrequires of its inhabitants, it thus also serves as a source ofhope for reconciliation—a way out of the “catastrophic vi-06/14/17 13:10ational9. Adorno engages in a rare bit of understatement when he writes ofthis condescending proposal: “I am not ignoring the fact that such peoplewould make themselves liked only with great difﬁculty” (2005, 196–97).For a defense of Adorno on popular education, see Mariotti (2014).Volume 79 Number 4 October 2017 / 000cious circle in which human beings have an objective interestin changing the world” but in which the very institutions thatmust be changed have damaged us so much that we seemincapable of being the agents of that change (2006, 76).Adorno consequently placed such a great emphasis on pop-ular education after the Holocaust that biographers describehim as “a ubiquitous presence in the media” in the 1950sand 1960s (Müller-Doohm 2005, 374). Convinced that peo-ple could develop their individuality by understanding thesources of their own coldness, Adorno suggested that hisaudience could taste freedom and ﬁnd joy in “the power ofthe mind to retain its self-control in the face of the sorrow”caused by injustice (2006, 137). Thus, the spread of criticalthinking could give hope for further social transformationand underwrite Adorno’s belief that “Freedom can be achievedin reality. And in contrast to the entire dialectical traditionof Hegel and Marx, I would almost go so far as to say thatactually this has always been possible, that it has been pos-sible at every moment” (2006, 181). In order to realize thatutopian possibility, though, we ﬁrst need to realize our guilt;then, Adorno argues, “Given the way the world is organized,even the simplest demand for integrity and decency mustnecessarily lead almost everyone to protest” (2006, 167).Suggesting that we can draw an image of freedom fromour own discomfort with injustice gives Adorno’s accountof reconciliation a more inward and self-reﬂective characterthan Rawls’s. This helps it avoid the latter’s methodologicalneed to construct a utopia from the beliefs of a public ha-bituated by injustice, but it also generates its own problems.For example, it famously never led Adorno himself to publicprotest, which suggests that his account of reconciliationmay not readily facilitate political action. Indeed, Adornohimself became the target of protests after he asked thepolice to remove students who were brieﬂy occupying theofﬁces of the Institute for Social Research in January 1969(Müller-Doohm 2005, 464–65). Adorno’s relationship topolitical action is thus ambivalent, as suggested by how hecan only “almost go so far as to say” that freedom is possible.On the one hand, he praised the student activists for having“interrupted the smooth transition to the totally adminis-tered world” by, among other measures, opposing the emer-gency laws supported by the Grand Coalition of major Ger-man parties (Adorno and Marcuse 1999, 136); on the otherhand, he found even signing petitions objectionable, “be-cause in their inevitable desire to have a political impact,they always contain an element of untruth or presuppose aknowledge of speciﬁc circumstances” (Müller-Doohm 2005,414). This ambivalence has many sources, but for my pur-poses, the most important is the way that Adorno’s theoryof reconciliation lacks any grounds for ﬁnding sources of151247.proof.3d 11 Achorn Internhope in other people or our relationship to them. In par-ticular, Adorno’s account of suffering and self-imposed in-difference provides no tools for imagining equal cooperativerelations. Instead, it lends itself to an inegalitarian concep-tion of the audience for reconciliation as suffering victimsaddressed by guilty theorists. This is doubly anti-democratic:on the one hand, it implies a philosophizing elite that doesnot experience oppression directly, though their indifferencefacilitates it in others; on the other hand, it also implicitlyremoves the agency of others by presenting them primarily assuffering victims. Adorno even goes so far as to say that be-cause he sees the executioners of Auschwitz “under the spellof unfreedom,” he thus “conceives of them as victims and notjust as murderers” (2006, 203). But seeing others as eithervictims of, or complicit with, oppression (or both) does notfacilitate treating them as equal partners in political action.One can see this at work in Adorno’s practical suggestionsfor popular education, like his proposal for “mobile educa-tion groups” that would travel from cities to promote the“debarbarization” of the countryside (2005, 196–97).9 The pre-sumption that urban educators have nothing to learn aboutsuffering and utopia from rural residents is symptomaticof the danger with this conception of reconciliation’s au-dience. Like Rawls’s, Adorno’s effort to offer sources ofhopes for a future of justice and freedom falls short. Nev-ertheless, as I discuss in the next section, Adorno’s accountoffers important lessons for developing a more democraticmode of addressing political theory to a public sufferinginjustice—one that can better avoid the ideological trapRawls fell into.THINKING UTOPIA MORE DEMOCRATICALLYRawls’s aspiration to guarantee that reconciliation occursbefore political engagement undermines the democratic na-ture of his view by obscuring the effects of existing injusticeon the theorist herself and on the democratic public, whichwas addressed as though it was already well ordered. Adorno’saccount argues that we can ﬁnd hope in taking responsi-bility for our damaging accommodations to such injustice,but it has difﬁculty moving from this individualizing mo-ment to collective action—despite insisting on the possi-bility and desirability of this passage. What is needed is atheory that avoids these traps by conceiving of both a dem-ocratic audience for reconciliation and a democratic mode06/14/17 13:10ational000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeanof addressing that audience. In closing, I discuss three fea-tures of such a fully democratic theory of reconciliation amidinjustice: ﬁrst, acknowledgement of the inevitability of dis-agreement; second, acceptance that philosophy is itself apolitical practice that may fail; third, seeing our relations withothers as sources of hope, which in turn requires ensuringthat our utopias include them. Such democratic reconcilia-tion is necessarily plural and provisional; while our sourcesof hope can differ, we should all be prepared to revise ourutopias when we ﬁnd that they preserve the causes of others’suffering.First, theorists who seek to reconcile democratic publicsneed not avoid disagreement, even on fundamental matters.In this chastened form, utopian thinking is not offered as aguaranteed solution to despair, and, since it no longer needsto ensure success for all, it can drop Rawls’s requirementthat it employ only facts beyond dispute in favor of ac-knowledging that some of its premises are provisional, non-ideal, or disputed within actual politics. This does not meanthat utopian thinking should become self-consciously sec-tarian or renounce its ambitions to address a public. Rawlsrightly observes that, when political theory serves a demo-cratic purpose by identifying reasons to believe in the pos-sibility of achieving justice, its character should be shapedby the audience it addresses. However, because he fails toaccount for the disordered nature of a public structured byinjustice, Rawls offers an overly narrow view of what kindsof address are democratically appropriate today. For exam-ple, in the context of a market economy characterized bydistributive injustice, it can be effective to speak from one’sown perspective without trying to tailor one’s presentationto what one imagines would comfort an audience. Reﬂect-ing on the success of books like Dialectic of Enlightenment,Adorno wrote that his works “were written without prac-tical intentions and nonetheless exercised some practicalinﬂuence. That inﬂuence came from the fact that in a worldwhere even thoughts have become commodities and pro-voke sales resistance, no one could suppose when readingthese volumes that he was being sold or talked into some-thing” (2005, 277; “sales resistance” is originally in English).Given a social world in which texts circulate as commoditiesand news is transmitted for proﬁt, Adorno attributes the en-during appeal of his thought to a lack of apparent intentionto be practically effective. Of course, such an approach hasits own costs; just as Rawls’s view risked charges of beingideological by envisioning utopias that resembled the pres-ent too closely, theorizing that makes no concessions to thepublic risks charges of navel-gazing and undemocratic in-accessibility. Because we do not live in a well-ordered societyin which there is general endorsement of shared standards151247.proof.3d 12 Achorn Internof public justiﬁcation, any utopian conception must be of-fered to the public with the hope that it may inspire hope.But there is no guarantee that it will be received that way;in that sense, it is a political action like any other, a risk.Rawls assumes that we will not take such a risk withoutsome reason to believe that things could turn out all rightand consequently believes that presupposing human rea-sonableness is practically necessary. However, one can shareRawls’s worry about the potential meaninglessness of re-sisting injustice without believing that it must be assuagedbefore political action begins. Instead, members of a demo-cratic public can recognize that political action is always on-going and they are already taking a risk by living in society.Our position is not that of a person on a diving board whoneeds encouragement in order to take the plunge; we aremore like a group on a life raft that needs a reason to believedry land can be reached if most of the people on the raft canﬁgure out how to row in the same direction. In this spirit,Adorno reminds us that “in the ﬁnal analysis thinking isitself a form of behavior” (2001, 4), shaped by its environ-ment like other behavior; as a consequence, he suggests, “Weneed to hold fast to moral norms, to self-criticism, to thequestion of right and wrong, and at the same time to a senseof the fallibility of the authority that has the conﬁdence toundertake such self-criticism” (Adorno 2001, 169).This enables a more democratic form of address thanattempting to guarantee reconciliation; political theorizingthat acknowledges its own fallibility can make it easier forthe theorist to address her audience as equals. On this view,since reasons for hope need not be provided before politicsbegins, their effectiveness can be enhanced rather than un-dermined by acknowledging that we are all in the same boat,as it were, and that our theorization of reconciliation maybe affected by the unjust institutions we live in.Finally, a more democratic view of reconciliation wouldﬁnd hope for a just world in our relations with others.Adorno’s viewmakes theory into a practice, but at the cost ofmaking all other practice seem impossible because of how itorients his audience to regard others as suffering victims tobe pitied. Not only does this attitude imply a hierarchicalrelation, but, as Adorno himself notes, such compassion“tacitly maintains and gives its sanction to the negativecondition of powerlessness in which the object of our pityﬁnds himself” (Adorno 2001, 173). The focus on sufferingthus depoliticizes and naturalizes unjust relations that oughtto be contested and shown to be contingent. By contrast,Rawls’s account asserts the political equality of theorist andaudience, but it sees this relation expressed by an impossibleagreement among them; disagreement about ideals becomesevidence of the futility of politics. A better approach would06/14/17 13:10ationalq5q6Volume 79 Number 4 October 2017 / 000see existing relations as imperfectly instantiating our equal-ity and as sources of hope for its fuller realization. By givingus hope for achieving justice in the future, reconciliation ismeant to help us live together in an imperfect democraticsociety, so we must be especially alert when we are told thatthe utopia that comforts us also preserves within it featuresthat would make that society inhospitable to others. For ex-ample, in discussing the list of contingencies that his prin-ciples of justice correct for, Rawls says that race and genderare not included because “we are mainly concerned withideal theory” (2001a, 65). This suggests that ideal theory isnot informed by race and gender, but only by their absenceand purported irrelevance. But Rawls’s assurance here is con-testable; many ﬁnd sources of hope and even images of utopiain the solidarities formed around these identities. Even ifsuch solidarities are partly a product of existing inequalityand would be unnecessary in a fully just society, experiencesborn of injustice can nevertheless inform our ideals, as Adornoshowed. Since people are differently situated with respectto unjust institutions, it should not surprise us when otherspropose sources of hope we were not otherwise able to per-ceive. Indeed, we might ﬁnd hope for justice precisely in theability of others to show us forms of meaningful politicalaction we would otherwise overlook.Rawls does not consistently exhibit this blindspot towardthe potential for political experiences to shape our utopias.He argues that the religious wars in the wake of the Refor-mation eventually led to a new way of living organizedaround toleration. Rawls describes this as “the discovery ofa new social possibility” (2001a, 197), and he gives no reasonto think that further new possibilities could not be discov-ered. I want to close by suggesting that Rawls’s failure totreat the Holocaust as a new and terrible social possibilityhampers his effort to offer a persuasive practical defense ofpolitical theory in its wake. His determination to guaranteereconciliation before we enter politics leads him to claimthat, for practical purposes, we already know all we need toknow about human possibility. But to close ourselves offfrom discovering new possibilities, good and bad, needlesslycurtails the potential for radical critique and blocks us fromconfronting some urgent sources of despair. To be moreconsistent and democratic defenders of political theory amidinjustice, we should embrace a conception of reconciliationthat acknowledges that our realistic utopias are not fullyideal but rely upon the kind of nonideal and disputed un-derstandings that are available to us within our existing,unjust social world. Since we cannot guarantee getting itright in advance, we should be ready to alter the utopias thatgive us hope when others tell us that our ideals preserve thecauses of their suffering or exclude the sources of their joy.151247.proof.3d 13 Achorn InternACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe author thanks Dana Howard, Charles Beitz, Derek Bow-man, Julie Cooper, Stephen Macedo, Jan-Werner Müller, Jen-nifer Pitts, Ethan Porter, and James Lindley Wilson, as well asaudiences at Georgetown University, University of Chicago,York University, the American Political Science Association,and the Western Political Science Association.REFERENCESAdorno, Theodor. 1973. Negative Dialectics. Translated by E. B. Ashton.New York: Continuum.Adorno, Theodor. 1978. Minima Moralia: Reﬂections from Damaged Life.Translated by E. F. N. Jephcott. New York: Verso Books.Adorno, Theodor. 2000. Introduction to Sociology. Edited by CristophGödde and translated by Edmund Jephcott. Stanford, CA: StanfordUniversity Press.Adorno, Theodor. 2001. Problems of Moral Philosophy. Edited by ThomasSchröder and translated by Rodney Livingstone. Stanford, CA: Stan-ford University Press.Adorno, Theodor. 2005. Critical Models: Interventions and Catchwords.Translated by Henry W. Pickford. New York: Columbia UniversityPress.Adorno, Theodor. 2006. History and Freedom: Lectures, 1964–1965. Editedby Rolf Tiedemann and translated by Rodney Livingstone. Malden,MA: Polity.Adorno, Theodor, and Herbert Marcuse. 1999. “Correspondence on theGerman Student Movement.” Translated by Esther Leslie. New LeftReview 233:123–316.Brooks, Peter. 1992. Reading for the Plot: Design and Intention in Nar-rative. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Buchanan, Allen. 2000. “Rawls’s Law of Peoples: Rules for a VanishedWestphalian World.” Ethics 110 (4): 697–721.Cohen, Gerald Allan. 2008. Rescuing Justice and Equality. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Cohen, Joshua. 2009. “Moral Pluralism and Political Consensus.” In JoshuaCohen, Philosophy, Politics, Democracy: Selected Essays. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press, 38–60.Dworkin, Ronald, Thomas Nagel, Robert Nozick, John Rawls, T.M. Scanlon,and Judith Jarvis Thomson. 1997. “Assisted Suicide: The Philosophers’Brief.” New York Review of Books 44 (5): 41–47.Flikschuh, Katrin. 2000. Kant and Modern Political Philosophy. New York:Cambridge University Press.Freeman, Samuel. 2007. Rawls. New York: Routledge.Geuss, Raymond. 2005. Outside Ethics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UniversityPress.Goldman, Loren. 2012. “In Defense of Blinders: On Kant, Political Hopeand the Need for Practical Belief ” Political Theory 40 (4): 497–523.Gregory, Eric. 2007. “Before the Original Position: The Neo-orthodoxTheology of the Young John Rawls.” Journal of Religious Ethics 35 (2):179–206.Hardimon, Michael. 1994. Hegel’s Social Philosophy: The Project of Rec-onciliation. New York: Cambridge University Press.Hardoon, Deborah. 2015.Wealth: Having It All and Wanting More. OxfamIssue Brieﬁng. Oxford: Oxfam International.Hegel, G. W. F. 1991. Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Edited by AllenW.Wood and translated by H. B. Nisbet. New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Kant, Immanuel. 1996. Practical Philosophy. Edited by Mary J. Gregor.New York: Cambridge University Press.06/14/17 13:10ationalq7q8q9000 / Practical Uses and Ideological Abuses of Political Theory as Reconciliation Benjamin L. McKeanKant, Immanuel. 1997.Kant: PoliticalWritings. 2nd ed. Edited byHans Reissand translated by H. B. Nisbet. New York: Cambridge University Press.Kant, Immanuel. 1998. Critique of Pure Reason. Edited and translated by PaulGuyer and Allen W. Wood. New York: Cambridge University Press.Kant, Immanuel. 2005. Notes and Fragments. Edited by Paul Guyer andtranslated by Curtis Bowman, Paul Guyer, and Frederick Rauscher.New York: Cambridge University Press.Mariotti, Shannon L. 2014. “Adorno on the Radio: Democratic Leadershipas Democratic Pedagogy.” Political Theory 42 (4): 415–42.Mills, Charles W. 2015. “Global White Ignorance.” In Matthias Gross andLinsey McGoey, eds., Routledge International Handbook of IgnoranceStudies. New York: Routledge, 217–27.Müller-Doohm, Stefan. 2005. Adorno: A Biography. Translated by RodneyLivingstone. Malden, MA: Polity.Pogge, Thomas. 2007. John Rawls: His Life and Theory of Justice. Trans-lated by Michelle Kosch. New York: Oxford University Press.Rawls, John. 1996. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.Rawls, John. 1999a. “Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory” In SamuelFreeman, ed., Collected Papers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress, 303–58.Rawls, John. 1999b. A Theory of Justice. Revised ed. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.151247.proof.3d 14 Achorn InternRawls, John. 2000. Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy. Edited byBarbara Herman. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Rawls, John. 2001a. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. Edited by ErinKelly. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Rawls, John. 2001b. The Law of Peoples; with “The Idea of Public ReasonRevisited. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Rawls, John. 2007. Lectures on the History of Political Philosophy. Editedby Samuel Freeman. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Rawls, John. 2009. A Brief Inquiry into the Meaning of Sin and Faith: with“On My Religion”. Edited by Thomas Nagel. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.Rousseau, Jean Jacques. 1997. The Discourses and Other Early Political Writ-ings. Edited and translated by Victor Gourevitch. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Sen, Amartya. 2009. The Idea of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-versity Press.Simmons, A. John. 2010. “Ideal and Nonideal Theory.” Philosophy andPublic Affairs 38 (1): 5–36.Weithman, Paul. 2009. “John Rawls and the Task of Political Philosophy.”Review of Politics 71 (1): 113–25.Wiens, David. 2015. “Against Ideal Guidance.” Journal of Politics 77 (2):433–46.06/14/17 13:10ational