ABSTRACT: 
This article reevaluates the origins of Yugoslavia's instrumental role in the formation of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and elucidates the roots and conceptualization of Tito's strategic reorientation toward nonalignment. Yugoslav foreign policy became truly independent only after Yugoslavia was expelled from the Soviet fold. The article shows that Belgrade began searching for a “third way” earlier than is acknowledged in the relevant historiography. The search began when, faced with the distinct threat of a Soviet invasion in the early 1950s, Yugoslavia became all but formally incorporated into the Western alliance. Based on previously unknown or inadequately researched documents from the Yugoslav archives, the article demonstrates that Josip Broz Tito's trip to India and Burma in December 1954, particularly his first encounter with India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, played a key role in shaping Tito's principles of active peaceful coexistence and noncommitment and in transforming them into a global initiative. The article highlights the well-defined political and philosophical rationale behind the principles that became embedded in the concept of non-engagement and, later, nonalignment. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article aims to give the NAM greater expectations of the 'non-engaged’ movement in the Cold War by demonstrating that the Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito and Yugoslav diplomats played an important, perhaps crucial, role in the conceptualization of the idea of non-engagement and in the establishment of the NAM. An explanation of the origins of non-alignment is impossible without a comprehensive analysis of the global process of decolonization that was taking place in the 1950s and 1960s and theverse political, historical, and cultural heritage that inouenced actions of the leaders of Yugoslavia, India, Egypt, Indonesia, and other Asian and Afri 1.. A notable exception is Alvin Z. Rubinstein’s seminal book Yugoslavia and the Non-aligned World (Princeton, NJ) which remains an invaluable contribution to the scholarsship of the NAM in the Cold War. Yugoslav archival sources that were unavailable to Rubinstein conarm some of his arguments but contravene others. My analysis here goes be-yond Rubinstein’s and offers new insights into several key issues such as the strategic choices and di-lemmas the Yugoslav leadership faced after 1948, the true beginnings of Yugoslavia’s non-commitment to blocs, the signiacance of Tito’s arst trip to India and Burma for the development of the global “non-engagement” initiative, and the conceptualization of the guiding principles behind the new initiative. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Svetozar Rajak No bargaining chips, no spheres of interest: the Yugoslav origins of Cold War non-alignment Article (Published version) (Refereed) Original citation: Rajak, Svetozar (2014) No bargaining chips, no spheres of interest: the Yugoslav origins of Cold War non-alignment. Journal of Cold War Studies, 16 (1). pp. 146-179. ISSN 1520-3972 DOI: 10.1162/JCWS_a_00434 © 2014 The President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/81652/ Available in LSE Research Online: June 2017 LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE Research Online website. 146RajakNo Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of InterestNo Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of InterestThe Yugoslav Origins of Cold WarNon-Alignment✣ Svetozar RajakThe First Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM),held in Belgrade in September 1961, launched a movement that has now ex-isted for more than 50 years. The movement became the voice of many ThirdWorld governments and, for a time at least, posed a challenge to Cold War bi-polarity.Despite the NAM’s historical uniqueness and signiªcance, remarkablylittle has been written about its origins.1 How, for example, did a quest for ac-tive peaceful coexistence and non-commitment to blocs evolve into an insti-tutionalized movement? This article aims to give the NAM greater promi-nence in the historiography of the Cold War by demonstrating that theYugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito and Yugoslav diplomats played an important,perhaps crucial, role in the conceptualization of the idea of non-engagementand in the establishment of the NAM. An explanation of the origins of non-alignment is impossible without a comprehensive analysis of the global pro-cess of decolonization that was taking place in the 1950s and 1960s and thediverse political, historical, and cultural heritage that inºuenced actions ofthe leaders of Yugoslavia, India, Egypt, Indonesia, and other Asian and Afri-1. A notable exception is Alvin Z. Rubinstein’s seminal book Yugoslavia and the Non-aligned World(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1970), which remains an invaluable contribution to thescholarship of the NAM in the Cold War. Yugoslav archival sources that were unavailable toRubinstein conªrm some of his arguments but contravene others. My analysis here goes be-yond Rubinstein’s and offers new insights into several key issues such as the strategic choices and di-lemmas the Yugoslav leadership faced after 1948, the true beginnings of Yugoslavia’s non-commitmentto blocs, the signiªcance of Tito’s ªrst trip to India and Burma for the development of the global “non-engagement” initiative, and the conceptualization of the guiding principles behind the new initiative.This in no way diminishes the importance and relevance of Rubinstein’s work. On the contrary,I deem the book essential reading on the topic of non-alignment in the master’s course I teach at theLondon School of Economics.Journal of Cold War StudiesVol. 16, No. 1, Winter 2014, pp. 146–179, doi:10.1162/JCWS_a_00434© 2014 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Instituteof Technologycan countries that sought non-engagement. These wider developments lie be-yond the scope of this article. Nonetheless, by shedding light on the rationale,motives, and considerations that drove Tito and his aides to pursue the riskyroad of non-commitment to blocs, the article can contribute to an under-standing of the origins of non-alignment. The intellectual and political delib-erations that steered Yugoslavia toward non-commitment are representative ofthe considerations that made this option appealing to Third World countries.The main aim here is to offer a reinterpretation of the origins of Yugosla-via’s road to non-alignment and elucidate the roots and conceptualizationof Tito’s strategic reorientation. Contrary to the views of some analysts thatTito’s intransigence was the casus belli of the Yugoslav-Soviet split in 1948, theevidence cited below indicates that Belgrade’s foreign policy became truly in-dependent only after Yugoslavia’s excommunication from the Soviet fold. Fur-thermore, the article shows that Belgrade began searching for a “third way”earlier than is acknowledged in the relevant historiography. The search beganwhen, faced with the distinct threat of a Soviet invasion in the early 1950s,Yugoslavia became all but formally incorporated into the Western alliance.Based on previously unknown or inadequately researched documents fromthe Yugoslav archives, the article also demonstrates that Tito’s trip to Indiaand Burma in December 1954, particularly his ªrst encounter with India’sPrime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, played an exceptionally signiªcant role inthe conceptualization of the principles of active peaceful coexistence and non-commitment and in transforming them into a global initiative. Lastly, the ar-ticle highlights the political and philosophical rationale behind the principlesthat became embedded in the concept of non-engagement and, later, non-alignment.A preliminary note of clariªcation is worthwhile. Although “non-alignment” was ªrst mentioned in Tito’s and Nehru’s joint statement issuedon 22 December 1954, the terms used at the time to depict the new foreignpolicy initiative were “active peaceful coexistence,” “non-commitment,” and“non-engagement.” “Non-alignment” became universally accepted towardthe end of the 1950s, especially after the Belgrade conference in 1961. Asmuch as possible, the discussion here adheres to this etymology.The Roots of Yugoslavia’s Independent RoadTito became leader of Yugoslavia through the struggle against Nazi occupa-tion during World War II and in the coterminous civil war, achieving a domi-nant position in Belgrade by 1945. Like thousands of Communist revolution-147No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interestaries around the world, he and his closest aides ªrmly believed in Iosif Stalin’sinfallibility and tried to replicate Stalinist institutions and practices as closelyas possible. At an extraordinary plenum of the Yugoslav Communist party’sCentral Committee in mid-1948, Tito discussed the accusatory letter he hadjust received from Stalin and Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov andsaid: “This letter is the result of horrid defamations. False reporting. . . . If thecomrades from the Central Committee of the [USSR’s All-Union Commu-nist Party] would ask for the transcript [of this meeting], we will send it tothem.”2 In July 1948, several weeks after being expelled from the CommunistInformation Bureau (Cominform) on the basis of Stalin’s allegations, Tito de-clared at the Fifth Congress of the Yugoslav Communist party: “The Com-munist Party of Yugoslavia has to date honorably fulªlled its historical mis-sion and . . . will prove through its unshakeable loyalty to the science of Marx-Engels-Lenin-Stalin that it has not strayed from the road of this science.”3Some historians, however, argue that Tito’s “deviations” from Soviet foreignpolicy line were a major factor in the Yugoslav-Soviet rupture in 1948.4 Thefocus of this article does not allow for a more detailed analysis of such inter-pretations.5 However, evidence in the Yugoslav archives indicates that prior toYugoslavia’s expulsion from the Soviet bloc Tito was ideologically and politi-cally committed to Stalinism and Stalin’s policies. As the most doctrinaire ofthe East European “peoples’ democracies,” Yugoslavia was ªrmly embeddedin the Soviet bloc and was considered the most loyal among the Soviet satel-lites. Stalin awarded the Yugoslav Communists a prominent role at the forma-tive meeting of the Cominform in 1947. Moreover, Belgrade was chosen asthe site of the new organization’s headquarters.Manifestations of Tito’s autonomous actions prior to the rift in 1948must not be mistaken for an independent foreign policy. The Yugoslav leaderpossessed an uncanny ability to adapt his actions to circumstances, which148Rajak2. Excerpts from the record of the plenary session of the Central Committee of the Communist Partyof Yugoslavia (CPY), Belgrade, 12–13 April 1948, are quoted in Vladimir Dedijer, Dokumenti 1948:Knjiga prva [Documents of 1948: Book One] (Belgrade: Rad, 1979), pp. 225–238.3. Peti kongres KPJ: Stenografske beleske [Fifth Congress of the CPY: Transcripts] (Belgrade: Kultura,1949).4. See, for example, A. B. Edemskii, Ot konºikta k normalizatsii: Sovtsko-yugoslavskie otnosheniya v1953–1956 godakh (Moscow: Nauk, 2008).5. The limitations of this article do not allow for a more elaborate discussion of the causes of the 1948Tito-Stalin split. For my views on the issue, please refer to Svetozar Rajak, Yugoslavia and the SovietUnion in the Early Cold War: Reconciliation, Comradeship, Confrontation, 1953–1957 (New York:Routledge, 2011); and Svetozar Rajak, “The Cold War in the Balkans, 1945–1956: From the GreekCivil War to Soviet-Yugoslav-Normalization,” in Melvyn P. Lefºer and Odd Arne Westad, eds., TheCambridge History of the Cold War, Vol. 1: Origins (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,2010), pp. 145–162.served him well in overcoming the insurmountable odds he frequently facedin his life and long political career. Tito was also blessed with a peasant’s sur-vival instinct that often helped him miraculously wriggle his way out of diresituations during his interwar covert activities as a Communist Internationaloperative and head of the Yugoslav Communists and his wartime role as theleader of the anti-Nazi partisans. Reminiscing about his personal trepidationson the eve of the fateful meeting of the Yugoslav party’s Central Committeeon 12 April 1948, which was to decide whether to accept or rebut Stalin’s ac-cusations, Tito told his ofªcial biographer: “Life had taught me that in suchcritical moments, it is most dangerous to be without a position, to hesitate. Insuch a situation, one must always react with boldness, resolutely.”6 These per-sonal traits and acquired skills distinguished Tito from other Comintern-groomed “international cadres.” As a trained operative working throughoutEurope prior to the Second World War and particularly as the Yugoslav resis-tance leader during the war, Tito was often forced to make on-the-spot deci-sions in response to the circumstances surrounding him.The archival evidence and accounts of Tito’s companions suggest that un-til the 1948 confrontation with Stalin the Yugoslav leader’s willingness to ac-commodate the general principles of “socialist construction” to the domesticcircumstances and idiosyncrasies in his country was based on the convictionthat such actions were in the spirit of the existing Moscow “line,” in accor-dance with the principles of Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism, and necessary toexpedite the realization of the goals of the international proletarian move-ment. Whenever Tito’s actions met with Stalin’s disapproval, the Yugoslavleader adhered to his “internationalist duty,” fell into line, and followed direc-tives from Moscow. Often quoted examples of Tito’s intransigence prior to1948, such as the Trieste crisis in 1945 or Tito’s territorial demands overCarinthia and Trieste at the Paris Peace Conference in 1946, conªrm thatTito in the end always dutifully accepted Stalin’s diktat.In June 1948, having been excommunicated from the socialist fold, Titofound himself left out in “the cold.” Based on his Communist outlook andthe developments on his border with Italy at the time, he sensed that the Westwas intent on “swallowing” his regime. Faced with a gargantuan struggle forsurvival, Tito was forced to contemplate distancing Yugoslavia from bothblocs, which he now saw as equally threatening. Stalin’s banishment pushedTito into the void between the two Cold War alliances, where he was con-fronted by simultaneous threats from both East and West. On 18 and149No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest6. Vladimir Dedijer, Novi prilozi za biograªju Josipa Broza Tita [New Supplements to the Biography ofJosip Broz Tito], Vol. 1 (Zagreb: Mladost, 1980), p. 479.19 March 1948, the Yugoslav leader received two consecutive démarches fromMoscow announcing the withdrawal of Soviet military and civilian advisersfrom Yugoslavia. As a pretext, Moscow accused the Yugoslav authorities ofpreventing Soviet advisers from carrying out their duties. A second letter fromStalin and Molotov, sent on 27 March, contained an even longer list of accu-sations, signaling a deªnite rift with the Yugoslavs. On 12 and 13 April, Titoconvened the Yugoslav Communist party’s Central Committee to gain sup-port for his dramatic decision to refute Stalin’s accusations.7 After emotionallycharged and, at times, hostile exchanges with Sreten Zujovib-Crni, the promi-nent revolutionary and member of the Yugoslav Politburo who was advising aconciliatory response to Stalin, Tito eventually secured the backing of hisCentral Committee. At one point, Tito shouted at Zujovib-Crni, “Crni, youhave given yourself the right to love the USSR more than I do. . . . You wantto shatter [the Yugoslav party’s] unity; you want to divide [the party’s] leader-ship. . . . Comrades, our revolution does not devour its own children. Thechildren of this revolution are honest.”8 The Yugoslav party’s decision to rejectStalin’s accusations was a turning point in the history of the internationalCommunist movement. For the ªrst time, a small European Communistparty dared to confront Stalin, the “undisputed Leader of the socialist camp.”On nearly the same day that the initial accusations arrived from Moscow,the Yugoslav regime received a threat from the West. On 20 March 1948, theU.S. and British governments jointly announced their decision to allow Italyto take over the administration of their zone of the Free Territory of Trieste.This transfer was a clear breach of the peace treaty with Italy, signed by thevictorious powers—the United States, the United Kingdom, France, theSoviet Union, and Yugoslavia—at the Paris Peace Conference in February1947, which stipulated that changes to the status of the territory could bemade only if agreed to by all signatories.9 Yugoslavia’s opposition to the resto-ration of Italian sovereignty nearly provoked an armed confrontation withboth Italy and, eventually, other Western powers. Tito’s room for maneuverwas severely limited. Much of his domestic political capital was invested in thepromise that Trieste would become part of Yugoslavia. The loss of Trieste150Rajak7. Corresponding documents, in Archive of Josip Broz Tito (AJBT), Cabinet of the President of theRepublic (KPR), I-2 / 4-2. See also Vladimir Dedijer, Novi prilozi za biograªju Josipa Broza Tita [TheNew Supplements to the Biography of Josip Broz Tito], Vol. 3 (Belgrade: Izdavacka radna organizacija“Rad,” 1984), pp. 220–228.8. Dedijer, Dokumenti 1948, pp. 225–238.9. The text of the peace treaty with Italy, signed in Paris on 10 February 1947 is in Dokumenti ospoljnoj politici Socijalisticke Federativne Republike Jugoslavije: 1947 [Documents on the Foreign Policyof the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia: 1947] (Belgrade: Savezni sekretarijat za inostraneposlova / Institut za medjunarodnu politiku i privredu / Jugoslavenski pregled, 1984), Vol. I, pp. 125–185.threatened to erode his domestic popular support at the very time he neededit for the impending confrontation with Stalin. Given the extraordinarySoviet intelligence penetration of the British government, Stalin may havetimed his attack on Tito to coincide with the anticipated Anglo-Americandeclaration on Trieste. Thus, when Tito and his aides decided in April 1948to resist Stalin, they had little alternative.Stalin’s banishment and Yugoslavia’s struggle for survival in a bipolarworld order that was intolerant of dissent left Tito’s regime in internationalisolation. At ªrst, Western governments were not ready to accept that theTito-Stalin public spat was anything but a ruse. On the other hand, the lackof precedents and, more importantly, the ideological myopia of Tito and hisassociates induced them to believe they would be restored to Stalin’s goodgraces once he understood that the accusations against them had been fabri-cated. Moreover, the Yugoslav leaders’ genuine dedication to Communist ide-ology and hope of once again being under the safety of the Soviet securityumbrella made them determined not to do anything that could jeopardize theinterests of the international proletarian movement, even if this meant endan-gering their own existence.10 Their stance on the matter was not simply the re-sult of Comintern-induced indoctrination. It derived from an unconditionalcommitment to the “cause,” the very same belief that prompted the victims ofStalin’s purges in the USSR to admit responsibility for completely fabricatedcrimes while being led to their deaths.In the autumn of 1949, however, the prospect of imminent Soviet attackbecame real. The anti-Yugoslav propaganda intensiªed, and armed provoca-tions along Yugoslavia’s borders with the Soviet-bloc countries became a dailyoccurrence. Furthermore, high proªle trials against prominent leadersthroughout Eastern Europe gave the anti-Titoist campaign an alarming mo-mentum. These ominous developments disabused the Yugoslav leaders oftheir last remaining hope that the conºict was the result of mere “misinforma-tion” and a “family quarrel” that would soon be resolved, prompting them tocontemplate a new strategic option.11Tito ªnally crossed his Rubicon in December 1950. Following China’sentry into the Korean War, he turned to the West for arms and economic aid.The Yugoslavs saw the escalation in Korea as Stalin’s decoy and testing of wa-ters for a Soviet intervention against Yugoslavia.12 Belgrade’s foreboding wasfurther augmented in subsequent months by an unprecedented Soviet-bloc151No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest10. Record of the CPY CC Politburo meeting, 30 August 1949, in Archive of Yugoslavia (AJ), Archiveof the Central Committee of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (ACK SKJ), 507/III/42.11. Transcript of the Third Plenum of the CPY Central Committee (CC), 29–30 December 1949, inAJ, ACK SKJ, 507/IX, 119/II/7.12. Record of the CPY CC Politburo meeting, 4 December 1950, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/III/53.military build-up and multiplication of “military exercises” on Yugoslavia’sborders following Stalin’s rearmament initiative in January 1951.13 From thenon until the full normalization with the Soviet Union in 1956, Yugoslaviagradually incorporated itself into the Western defense system. Its strategic use-fulness was rewarded by generous U.S. military and economic aid. Western,namely U.S., military assistance on an unprecedented scale enabled Yugosla-via to build capabilities against the Soviet and East European threat. At thesame time, economic aid, in particular the U.S. food relief program, helpedTito’s regime escape large-scale famine and economic and social collapsein the early 1950s.14 From 1950 to 1955, Yugoslavia received more than$700 million in economic aid and close to $1 billion in military aid.15Despite this dependence on U.S. arms and food deliveries, Tito resistedpressure to bring Yugoslavia formally into the North Atlantic Treaty Organi-zation (NATO).16 He perceived association with the West as only a temporarymarriage of convenience.17 Tito was convinced that irrespective of his cooper-ation and a de facto military alliance against the USSR, the West would nevercease to entertain hopes of changing the character of his regime. He warnedhis Yugoslav comrades: “They see in us a Communist country. They want tomake a Satellite out of us.”18 When Soviet pressure intensiªed in Decem-ber 1949, Tito insisted at the meeting of the Yugoslav party’s Central Com-mittee that “it is particularly important now, in light of the [changed Yugo-slav] position toward the imperialist world that we, especially youngermembers of the party do not forget that we are a socialist country.”19 To Tito,152Rajak13. Mark Kramer, “Stalin, the Soviet-Yugoslav Split, and Soviet Efforts to Reassess Control: A Reas-sessment,” in Svetozar Rajak, ed., The Balkans and the Cold War (New York: Palgrave Macmillan,2014).14. Tito’s report to the Sixth Congress of the CPY/League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY),Zagreb, 3 November 1952, published in Borba, 4 November 1952, p. 1; and transcript of Yugoslav-Soviet talks in Belgrade, 27–28 May and 2 June 1955, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/IX, 119/I-56.15. National Intelligence Estimate 31–55, “Yugoslavia and Its Future Orientation,” 23 February1955, in U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), Electronic Reading Room (www.foia.cia.gov, hence-forth cited as CIA-ERR). See also the collection of documents in “From National Communism to Na-tional Disintegration: US Intelligence Estimative Products on Yugoslavia, 1948–1990,” conferenceorganized by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and the National IntelligenceCouncil, 7 December 2006, Washington, DC). Documents from this collection are now available on-line at CIA-ERR.16. Record of the meeting of the Executive Committee of the Central Committee of the LCY, 27 No-vember 1952, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/III/61.17. Transcript of the Meeting of the LCY Executive Committee, 19 July 1954, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/III/62a.18. Record of the meeting of the LCY Executive Committee, 27 November 1952, in AJ, ACK SKJ,507/III/61. See also the record of the Second Plenum of the Central Committee of the LCY, 16 May1953, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/II/10.19. Transcript of the Third Plenum of the CPY Central Committee, 29–30 December 1949, in AJ,ACK SKJ, 507/IX, 119/II/7.international isolation was perhaps the most threatening consequence of the1948 expulsion from the Cominform.20 Ostracized, under economic block-ade, and subjected to ªerce propaganda attacks from Yugoslavia’s former pa-trons in Moscow, and with the West initially reluctant to offer full support,the Yugoslav leaders found themselves alone and exposed. Such complete iso-lation from both blocs was unique during the Cold War. A U.S. intelligencereport from the mid-1950s concluded: “Since June 1948 . . . [Yugoslavia’s] in-ternational position has been anomalous.”21 Tito was forced to learn a lessonhe would never forget, namely, that he must avoid relying exclusively on onebloc. Although excommunicated from the Marxist-Leninist camp, the Yugo-slav leaders never entertained illusions that they would be safe in the oppositebloc. When justifying the establishment of relations with the West at theThird Plenum of the Central Committee in December 1949, Edvard Kardeljemphasized that leaders in Belgrade were determined not to allow the[the West] to bargain with the Soviet government at [Yugoslavia’s] expense . . .[Yugoslavia] must not come into the situation when, for example a sudden deci-sion by the American government to cancel our purchases would completelyhalt the economic development of our country. We must shield ourselves fromany such surprises. 1948 and 1949 must never happen again.At this point, Tito interjected: “The experience in the East must be an abjectlesson.”22 Having suffered for taking a stand against Soviet hegemony in theirown bloc, the Yugoslavs were determined not to fall prey to the same pressureon the other side. The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) concluded atthe time: “The dominant concerns of [Tito’s] regime will almost certainly re-main those of insuring its own survival and avoiding foreign domination.”23Indeed, this became the driving force and principal rationale behind Yugosla-via’s effort to remain outside both blocs. Expulsion from the ideological foldand perception of a threat from both the East and the West induced Tito to153No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest20. Ibid; and Tito’s report to the Sixth Congress, published in Borba, pp. 1–2. See also the record ofthe meeting of the LCY Executive Committee (renamed Politburo), 27 November 1952, in AJ, ACKSKJ, 507/II/61.21. National Intelligence Estimate 31–55 (see note 16 supra).22. Transcript of the Third Plenum of the CPY Central Committee, 29–30 December 1949, in AJ,ACK SKJ, 507/IX, 119/II/7. Kardelj, Tito’s second-in-command, the regime’s ideologue, and, until1953, Yugoslavia’s foreign minister, frequently served as the promulgator of new ideas at meetings ofthe Politburo and Central Committee. However, he was not the originator of these ideas; rather, hewas just ofªcially transmitting proposals that had already been discussed by Tito and three or four ofhis most trusted aides. Besides Kardelj, the core group included Aleksandar Rankovib, Tito’s ofªcialdeputy and head of the security apparatus. Tito often used Kardelj to test out new concepts with thewider party and state leadership.23. National Intelligence Estimate 31–55 (see note 16 supra).maintain a distance from both blocs. The ensuing international isolationprompted him to search for allies.The Yugoslav regime did not abruptly stumble into non-alignment, nordid the concept occur to Tito as an epiphany. It was the result of a gradualprocess of rationalization that, on the one hand, required an analysis of thechanges under way in the international system, and, on the other hand, tookaccount of the reality that Belgrade’s foreign policy options were conditionedby circumstances outside its control. Dependent on the West for protectionfrom the Soviet threat and for economic survival, Tito had to play his cardscarefully. Thus, the initial deliberations about the road between the two blocswere conªned to Tito and his innermost circle.24 While contemplating a newforeign policy strategy, Tito occasionally found it necessary to reassure Wash-ington. In January 1953 he “solemnly declared” to the U.S. ambassador inBelgrade that “[isolationism and neutralism] were abhorrent both to him andto his people.”25 Several years had to pass before Belgrade was able to con-ceptualize the new approach and identify possible allies. Most importantly,a favorable shift in the “correlation of forces” surrounding Yugoslavia hadto occur before Tito and his aides could pursue a new foreign policy orienta-tion. The conceptualization of Yugoslav non-engagement underwent threephases. The ªrst involved secretive high-level discussions which concludedthat independence from both Cold War alliances was possible by playing oneagainst the other. Traumatized by the isolation that followed the split withStalin, Tito and his associates also understood that the new strategy was im-possible without the fulªllment of two conditions. On the one hand, Yugosla-via would need to secure international support for its new foreign policy posi-tion. On the other hand, the new strategic option was possible only after theSoviet threat had been eliminated or sufªciently defused. During the secondphase, Yugoslav leaders identiªed possible allies in the quest for non-commit-ment to either bloc. The third phase began with Belgrade’s shift away fromthe West in the autumn of 1954. Taking advantage of the opening createdby the incipient normalization of relations with the Soviet Union in the wakeof Stalin’s death, Yugoslav leaders felt emboldened to begin establishing con-tacts with possible allies in Asia. During a visit to India in December 1954,Tito publicly declared Yugoslavia’s new foreign policy orientation for the ªrst154Rajak24. Third Plenum of the CPY CC, Transcript, 29–30 December 1949, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/IX, II-7;Record of the CPY Politburo meeting, 28 June 1950, in AJ, 507/II/49; and “Discussion on our rela-tions with the USSR and the Cominform countries, 20. X. 1953, at comrade Kardelj’s,” Record of Yu-goslav leadership’s policy discussions (without Tito but per his instructions) at Kardelj’s home in Bel-grade, 20 October 1953, in AJBT, KPR, I-5-v/297.25. The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Allen) to the Department of State, 8 January 1953, in U.S. De-partment of State, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1952–1954, Vol. VIII, pp. 1333–1335.time. He set out to elaborate a rationale for a policy of non-commitment toblocs and to win backers for it.Conceptualization: Yugoslavia in Search of Policyand AlliesThe Yugoslav strategy of playing one bloc against the other was contrivedfrom discussions within Tito’s innermost circle. In the nascent Cold War sys-tem, there were no precedents or models for the Yugoslavs to emulate. Thenotion of “[taking] advantage of the existing rivalry in the World, in order tosecure [Yugoslavia’s] survival and further consolidation” was ªrst broached toa wider circle of the Yugoslav leadership by Kardelj at the party’s CentralCommittee plenum in December 1949.26 Symptomatic of the deliberationsthat were taking place at the time was Tito’s indiscretion in front of the U.S.ambassador in Belgrade, George V. Allen, six months later. Provoked by Al-len’s criticism of Yugoslavia’s “passivity” in the United Nations (UN) follow-ing the outbreak of the Korean War, Tito responded that “[Yugoslavia] wouldrather be ostracized for being an independent country than end up in the pitof one of the blocs.”27 The concept of a “third way” was taking shape gradu-ally. Speaking on Korea at the Fifth UN General Assembly, in the autumn of1950, Kardelj proclaimed thatthe people of Yugoslavia cannot accept the postulate that humanity today hasonly one choice–a choice between a domination of one or the other bloc. We be-lieve that there exists another road. True, it may be a difªcult one but, at thesame time, it is an unavoidable one. It is the road of democratic struggle for aworld in which people are free and equal, for democratic relations between na-tions that would eliminate outside interference in internal affairs of nations, andfor a full peaceful cooperation between nations based on equality.28Kardelj’s statement revealed an embryonic notion that a position between thetwo blocs was possible. At a Politburo meeting held on 5 December 1950, aday after the Yugoslav leadership made a monumental ideological U-turn anddecided to seek U.S. military aid, he proposed that the time had come for Yu-goslav foreign policy to free itself from the single-minded focus on “us [Yugo-slavs] and the Russians.” Echoing this, the Politburo decided to set up a top155No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest26. Third Plenum of the CPY CC, Transcript, 29–30 December 1949, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/IX, II-7.27. Record of the CPY Politburo meeting, 28 June 1950, in AJ, 507/II/49.28. Kardelj’s speech at the Fifth Annual Session of the UN General Assembly, 20–28 September 1950,is quoted in Leo Mates, Nesvrstanost: Teorija i savremena praksa [Non-Alignment: The Theory andCurrent Practice] (Belgrade: Institut za medjunarodnu politiku i privredu, 1970), p. 216.quality research institute that would provide, free of any ideological tunnel vi-sion, expert insights into the politics and economics of the outside world andthe opportunities offered to Yugoslavia.29 In the autumn of 1953, at the apexof the Trieste crisis, Tito’s top aides reasserted the position that Yugoslaviamust “make better use of current [international] relations and existing globalantagonisms.”30 This balancing act was a risky venture, however. On the onehand, the new strategy was designed to avoid jeopardizing the continuationof Western support against possible Soviet aggression. On the other hand,the goal was to create the necessary leeway from either bloc and preventEast-West accommodation over Yugoslavia. Tito’s almost panicky reaction tothe Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 conªrms a fear that neverleft him, namely, that an East-West accommodation would provide theSoviet Union with a blank check to settle scores with Yugoslavia once andfor all.Yugoslav leaders were determined never to repeat the lesson of 1948—the country’s complete international isolation and nearly fatal vulnerability.Tito and his aides understood that they would need international supportand allies if they were to use the rivalry between the two ideological campsto forge an independent position from both. Looking for support, the Yugo-slavs ªrst turned to those most proximate to their still prevailing ideologicalWeltanschauung—to the non-Communist European Left. This in itself was amajor departure from the existing Stalinist paradigm, which stipulated thatWest European Socialists and Social Democrats were the “lackeys” of thebourgeoisie and a more dangerous enemy than the capitalists themselves. At aJune 1950 Politburo meeting, Kardelj optimistically identiªed “new tenden-cies” akin to a “new movement” within the traditional European Socialist andSocial Democratic parties that could provide backing for Yugoslavia’s new po-sition.31 The Yugoslav party leaders set out to establish or strengthen their re-lations with several of these parties, ªrst and foremost with the West GermanSocial Democratic Party (SPD), which was the most prestigious and the onewith the longest tradition. The ªrst contact occurred on 12 March 1952,when Vladimir Dedijer, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee of theYugoslav parliament met Erich Ollenhauer, the successor to the ailing SPDpresident, Kurt Schumacher. From then on, the Yugoslav ambassador inBonn, Mladen Ivekovib, maintained regular contacts with Ollenhauer and156Rajak29. Record of the CPY CC Politburo meeting, 5 December 1950, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/III/54.30. “Discussion on our relations with the USSR and the Cominform countries, 20. X. 1953, at com-rade Kardelj’s,” Record of Yugoslav leadership’s policy discussions (without Tito but per his instruc-tions) at Kardelj’s home in Belgrade, 20 October 1953, in AJBT, KPR, SSSR, I-5-v/297.31. Record of the CPY Politburo meeting, 28 June 1950, in AJ, 507/III/49.other prominent SPD ofªcials, especially Willy Eicher and Fritz Heine.32 InFebruary 1953, representatives from a European and Asian Socialist and So-cial-Democratic parties were ofªcially invited to the Fourth Congress of theYugoslav Popular Front. Speaking at the congress, Kardelj appealed to the So-cialists to back Yugoslavia’s “road,” and Dedijer urged them to stop support-ing either superpower because both were locked in a struggle for global su-premacy.33 Before long, however, the Yugoslavs realized it was one thing forthe West European Socialist and Social Democrats to support Belgradeagainst Moscow and quite another for them to renounce their allegiance tothe Western alliance.After the disappointment with the West European Left, Yugoslav leaderssaw Third World countries and the ex-colonial domains that had recentlygained independence as the only remaining alternative. But with the processof decolonization still in its infancy in the late 1940s and early 1950s, it wasdifªcult to distinguish who among the new nationalist political movementsand personalities in these countries was truly independent of their ex-colonialmasters. More importantly, Belgrade at the time knew very little about theThird World. Upon returning from his ªrst trip to India and Burma, Tito ad-mitted to having had “very limited knowledge about these countries.”34 Worsestill, the ideologically minded Yugoslav leaders all too easily fell victim to Eu-rocentric and Marxist sectarian stereotyping of the Third World. Many ofTito’s aides considered it untoward and unwise to link Yugoslavia with whathis then Chief of Army Staff, Koca Popovib, and Deputy Foreign MinisterVeljko Mibunovib dubbed “the world of miserables.” Kardelj also initially op-posed collaboration with the “feudal lords” who, in his opinion, ruled thenewly liberated colonies. It was certainly very difªcult to identify allies inthe Third World who were willing to stand apart from both blocs andagainst the nascent Cold War order at its most contested juncture. In a mo-ment of doubt, Kardelj admitted in 1951: “A third force is not possible. Theonly possibility for a socialist country like ours is to exploit the contradictions,which emerge in one or in the other camp.”35 Nonetheless, despite the skepti-cism and frustration, the search for allies continued. By the end of 1951, Yu-goslav leaders shifted their focus toward the Asian ex-colonies. In the autumn157No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest32. Records of meetings between SPD leaders and Yugoslav ofªcials, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/IX/87/II.33. Darko Bekib, Jugoslavija u hladnom ratu: Odnosi sa velikim silama 1949–1955 [Yugoslavia in theCold War: Relations with the Big Powers 1949–1955] (Zagreb: Globus, 1988), p. 463.34. Speech by the President of the Republic in the Federal People’s Assembly, 7 March 1955, in AJ,837, II-5-b-1.35. “Archives of Slovenia (AS), Dedijer, t. e., 7, Spomini tov. Kardelja, 25.12.1951, pp. 42–43,”quoted in Joze Pirjevec, “The First Steps of Yugoslav Non-Aligned Foreign Policy: AmbassadorsDjerdja and Vilfan in New Delhi,” paper presented at the International Conference on the Non-aligned Movement, Zurich, Switzerland, 2–4 June 2011.of that year, at a meeting of the heads of departments of the Yugoslav ForeignMinistry, Josip Djerdja, who had just returned from his posting as the ªrstYugoslav ambassador in New Delhi, suggested that Yugoslavia could relymore on the newly liberated colonies, particularly India, as a way out of inter-national isolation. Kardelj, presiding as the foreign minister, immediately in-terrupted the meeting and informed Tito via a secure phone line that Djerdjahad come up with some interesting ideas about a foreign policy strategy“along the lines we have been discussing.” Tito promptly ordered both to hisnearby residence for further deliberations.36Several considerations ensured that Asia and particularly India becamethe focus of Belgrade’s attention. The Korean War and debates at the UN pro-vided Third World countries with an opportunity to voice opposition to theexisting Cold War divisions. Most prominent and proactive among these werethe newly liberated countries of Asia; especially, India, Burma, and Indonesia.They took the lead in drafting and tabling resolutions aimed at preventing thespread of the Korean War and at reducing tensions in Asia. During 1950 and1951, Yugoslavia and India often found themselves taking similar positionson a number of UN initiatives and resolutions. In September 1950, Yugosla-via supported India’s proposal regarding the People’s Republic of China’s UNmembership. A month later, both countries abstained from voting on theEight Nation resolution calling for UN troops to cross the 38th parallel. Thisrecord suggested to the Yugoslavs that India harbored a similar outlook on theinternational situation. Another factor that made some Asian countries attrac-tive to Yugoslavs—a factor that largely escaped historians’ attention—was thetwo countries’ ideological proximity.37 In the early 1950s, Socialist partiesplayed a prominent role in the political life of several Asian countries, includ-ing Burma, India, and Indonesia. The establishment of the Asian SocialistConference in January 1953 in Rangoon reinforced the impression of theascendency of Socialism in Southeast Asia. Belgrade dispatched a high-proªledelegation, headed by Milovan Djilas, the regime’s ideologue and a memberof Tito’s innermost circle, to attend the conference. The delegation broughtback valuable insights and information about Asia. This, in addition to morequaliªed reporting from higher-caliber diplomats now being posted to severalAsian countries, such as Josip Djerdja and Joze Vilfan in India, helped to dis-pel the Yugoslav leadership’s initial ideologically tainted reservations regardingthe “feudal” leadership in these countries.38 As Tito admitted in an interview158Rajak36. Vladimir Dedijer, Novi prilozi za biograªju Josipa Broza Tita [New Supplements to the Biographyof Josip Broz Tito], Vol. 3 (Zagreb-Rijeka: Mladost-Liburnija, 1980), p. 554.37. The exception being Rubinstein, Yugoslavia and the Non-aligned World, pp. 40–43.38. Although Djilas headed this fact-ªnding mission and participated in deliberations regarding thenew Yugoslav strategy, the documentation does not indicate that he played a pivotal role in its concep-for the Belgian magazine Le Peuple upon his return from India and Burma,“when we embarked upon ªnding a ‘modus-vivendi’ [between the two Blocs]who could we turn to in the ªrst place if not to Asian countries?”39Although the two countries formally established diplomatic relations on5 December 1948, relations between Yugoslavia and India remained embry-onic until 1954. Indian suspicions about Yugoslavia’s true non-engagementcredentials were probably to blame for this. Before 1948, India regarded Yu-goslavia as a Soviet satellite and in the early 1950s, after Belgrade started re-ceiving military aid from the United States, India viewed Yugoslavia as amember of the Western bloc.40 Leaders in New Delhi could not contemplatethat a small European country receiving extensive Western economic and mil-itary aid could remain outside the Western bloc. Until the autumn of 1954,India was represented in Belgrade by its ambassador in Rome, further proof ofhow little it valued its relations with Yugoslavia. Belgrade, on the other hand,was keen to improve links with New Delhi and appointed high-caliber diplo-mats as ambassadors to India. Djerdja, the deputy foreign minister, served asYugoslavia’s ªrst ambassador to India from April 1950 until the autumn of1951. Vilfan, Djerdja’s successor, became a highly inºuential chief of Tito’scabinet upon his return from India in March 1953.41 In November and De-cember 1952, Belgrade dispatched a fact-ªnding “mission of good will” to In-dia. In January 1953, after returning from the First Asian Socialist Conferencein Rangoon, Djilas and Aleš Bebler, the Yugoslav deputy foreign minister, vis-ited New Delhi. Yugoslavia’s pronounced interest and the rationale behind itwere clearly elaborated in an assessment report on India’s foreign policy andinternational position, a report compiled by Yugoslav Foreign Ministry ex-perts ahead of Tito’s visit in 1954. The report concluded that with a hugepopulation, crucial geostrategic position, and rich cultural and historic heri-tage India was poised to play a major role in the world, particularly in Asia.Yugoslav experts pointed out that India’s foreign policy engagement and inter-national prestige “far exceeded its current economic and military strength.”42This seemed to corroborate the notion that a country could play a role inglobal politics beyond the limitations imposed by its economic and militaryresources and capabilities—something that clearly appealed to Tito and his159No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interesttualization. Most likely, his impact on Yugoslavia’s non-engaged foreign policy was limited even beforehe was expelled from the ruling party organs in January 1954. Hence, the article focuses on the role ofthe key strategist of Yugoslavia’s new foreign policy, Tito, and, to a smaller extent, Kardelj.39. Tito’s interview and conversation with Albert Hosiaux, the editor-in-chief of Le Peuple magazine,14 April 1955, in AJ, 837, IV-1-b.40. Analytical monograph “India,” prepared by the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry for Tito’s trip to India,November 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-1.41. Ibid.42. Ibid.aides, who believed that a prominent role in international affairs would helpYugoslavia withstand subjugation by either superpower. The report also listednumerous principles of India’s foreign policy that further strengthened itsability to pursue an independent course: mutual cooperation between coun-tries, non-interference in the affairs of others, opposition to the existing blocs,and anti-colonialism.43However, the Yugoslavs had to tread with extreme caution when contem-plating a foreign policy detour. Yugoslavia could ill afford to be seen as neu-tralist by the United States, its security guarantor and the provider of an eco-nomic lifeline. As long as there existed a “clear and present danger” of Sovietaggression, Yugoslavia’s struggle to remain outside the two blocs had to beplayed out as a subtle balancing act. Yugoslavia struggled to avoid formal link-age to NATO without endangering its security imperative to remain withinthe Western defense system and under the U.S. security umbrella.The pivotal change in the “correlation of forces” that ªnally allowed Yu-goslavia to embrace a new strategic orientation occurred in the summer of1954. After six years of an increasingly ominous Soviet threat, including dailyborder clashes, an economic blockade, propaganda warfare, and internationalisolation, the summer of 1954 brought the unexpected prospect of a normal-ization of relations with the USSR. Out of the blue, Belgrade received a letter,dated 22 June and signed by Nikita Khrushchev, the First Secretary of theCommunist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), on behalf of the CPSU Cen-tral Committee. This was the ªrst direct communication between the Sovietand Yugoslav leaders since the 1948 rupture. The letter proposed the normal-ization of relations and initiated a secret correspondence between the twoleaders.44By early November 1954, several of Moscow’s public goodwill gestures,coordinated through the secret correspondence, convinced Tito and his asso-ciates that the Soviet initiative was genuine and that the prospect of the re-moval of the Soviet threat was real.45 The normalization of relations with theUSSR offered Tito the much-hoped-for maneuvering space to curtail depend-ence on the West and to carve out for himself an equidistant position fromboth blocs. Tito admitted this causality in his 7 March 1955 report to the160Rajak43. Ibid.44. For more on the Yugoslav-Soviet secret correspondence in 1954 and 1955, which led to Khrush-chev’s historic trip to Belgrade in May 1955, see Rajak, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union in the EarlyCold War; and Svetozar Rajak, “The Tito-Khrushchev Correspondence, 1954,” CWIHP Bulletin,No. 12–13 (Fall–Winter 2001), pp. 315–324.45. Record of the meeting of the Executive Committee of the Central Committee (ex-Politburo) ofthe LCY, 3 November 1954, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/III/63. For more on the Yugoslav-Soviet normal-ization, see Rajak, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union In the Early Cold War.Yugoslav parliament on Yugoslav foreign policy and on his ªrst trip to Asia:“The principles of active co-existence became particularly clearly manifestedin our foreign policy only with the creation of objective conditions that madesuch a policy possible.”46 The truly unanticipated and astounding normaliza-tion with Moscow coincided with the apex in Belgrade’s relations with theWest. During the summer and early autumn of 1954, Yugoslavia fulªlledits primary strategic goals that were conditional upon Western support. On9 August 1954, after eighteen months of negotiations, the Balkan Pact be-tween Greece, Turkey, and Yugoslavia was signed. The pact provided Yugosla-via with Western security guarantees against a Soviet attack without formalNATO membership. At the same time, the long-standing dispute with Italyover Trieste was resolved to Yugoslavia’s satisfaction. On 5 October, Italy andYugoslavia signed in London a ªnal agreement on Trieste with three Westernpowers as co-guarantors. Thus, Tito’s trip to Asia in December 1954 came af-ter the long-standing Soviet threat had ªnally been defused and at a timewhen Yugoslavia had achieved a highly favorable strategic position vis-à-visboth superpowers.Conceptualization: Active Peaceful Coexistence andthe Like-MindedIn the early summer of 1954, Tito was still pondering a trip to Burma, hisªrst intended journey to the Third World. Burma was chosen because Yugo-slav leaders saw it as a fulcrum of the nascent socialist movement in Asia. Assuch, it appealed to the Yugoslavs’ still limited and ideologically tainted un-derstanding of the Third World. The Burmese Socialist party of Ba Swe wasthe most prominent political force in the country and played a leading role inthe creation of the Asian Socialist Conference in Rangoon in January 1953.Moreover, during the Rangoon Conference Djilas received a formal invitationfor Tito to visit Burma. In September 1953, Burmese Prime Minister U Nurenewed the invitation in a conversation with the Yugoslav ambassador inBurma. Belgrade accepted the invitation but replied in a rather ambiguous,noncommittal manner that the visit “could not be scheduled earlier than theend of 1955.”47 By mid-1954, with no plans for a visit to India, the political161No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest46. Speech by the President of the Republic in the Federal People’s Assembly, 7 March 1955, in AJ,837, II-5-b-1.47. Memorandum on the visit by President Tito to India and other countries in Asia, 16 August 1954,in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2; Telegrams to the Yugoslav Embassies in New Delhi and Rangoon, 19 Augustvalue of a trip to Asia that would have Burma as the only destination was stillapparently under debate within the Yugoslav leadership.The reduction of tensions with Moscow and the signing of the BalkanPact and the Trieste Agreement allowed Tito to go to Asia. However, the exactitinerary and the agenda were inºuenced by two additional developments inthe summer of 1954. The ªrst was a dramatic change in India’s attitude to-ward Yugoslavia, which opened the door for a visit to India. The Indian shiftwas probably spurred by recent developments on the subcontinent. In Febru-ary 1954, India’s archrival Pakistan had strengthened its military ties with theWest by signing the Pact of Mutual Cooperation with Turkey, a precursor tothe Baghdad Pact. This, and the fact that Nehru was aware of Tito’s possiblevisit to Rangoon, could explain the timing of the ªrst Indian fact-ªnding mis-sion to Yugoslavia, which took place in the summer of 1954 and was headedby Nehru’s sister, Virjaya Lakshmi Pandit. During her visit, Pandit traveledextensively through Yugoslavia and engaged in comprehensive exchanges withTito and other Yugoslav ofªcials. Her reports provided Nehru with perhapshis ªrst detailed insight into Yugoslavia’s domestic political system and, moreimportantly, its foreign policy aspirations. The report apparently allayed hisremaining suspicions about Yugoslavia’s independence from both blocs. Atthe end of her visit, Pandit ofªcially invited Tito to visit India “before or afterhis visit to Burma.”48 A few weeks later, in a conversation with Gojko Nikoliš,the Yugoslav ambassador in New Delhi, Nehru reiterated the invitation, em-phasizing that India “is a huge country” and that the length and itinerary ofthe visit would be at Tito’s convenience.49 In October, a month before Titodeparted for Asia and as a follow-up to Pandit’s visit, the ªrst Indian ambassa-dor to Yugoslavia arrived in Belgrade.The second event that inºuenced Belgrade’s preparations for the Asiantrip were the talks held with Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia, who visitedYugoslavia at the end of July 1954. This was Tito’s ªrst encounter with theleader of a prominent Third World country. This visit by an absolutist mon-arch of a feudal state was in itself a sign of changes in Belgrade’s approach ininternational relations, conªrming that the Yugoslavs had largely discardedtheir ideological blinkers about the Third World. After speaking with Selassie,Tito had a much better grasp of the expectations and emerging ambitions ofthe growing community of independent ex-colonies in Africa and Asia. Moreimportant, the surprising scope and character of assistance requested by the162Rajak1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2; and Memorandum on the Visit by President Tito to India, Burma, andother Asian countries, 24 August 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.48. Memorandum on the Visit by President Tito (see previous footnote).49. Memorandum of a conversation between Ambassador Nikoliš and the Indian prime minister, J.Nehru, 24 August 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.Ethiopians made Tito aware of the magnitude of inherited problems in theThird World and the enormous possibilities for cooperation. Selassie pro-posed comprehensive collaboration and asked for large-scale Yugoslav techni-cal assistance in mining, forestry, agriculture, education, and military produc-tion.50 The encounter with Selassie enabled the Yugoslavs to identify twoimportant aspects that profoundly shaped their future approach to the ThirdWorld. First, it convinced them that economic development was a prerequi-site for a Third World country to achieve true sovereignty. Second, it demon-strated that Yugoslavia’s economy could greatly beneªt from the provision oftechnical assistance and industrial exports to Third World countries. Thetalks with Selassie helped Tito to prepare concrete proposals for economic andmilitary cooperation when he met the Burmese leaders in Rangoon sixmonths later.Tito departed on a two-and-a-half-month-long voyage to Asia on hisyacht Galeb on 30 November 1954. He emphasized in a report to the Yugo-slav parliament after his return that the main goal of the trip had been to “ac-quaint ourselves and to strengthen ties with the countries who, like us, strivefor peace, with the aim to act jointly.”51 Between his arrival in New Delhi on17 December and his departure for Burma from Calcutta on 3 January, Titovisited fourteen Indian cities by train or car, acquainted himself with the cul-ture and customs of India, and called on numerous factories, hospitals, mili-tary barracks, and universities. His days were ªlled with meetings and conver-sations with ofªcials, academics, and public ªgures, as well as with ordinaryworkers and poor peasants. Tito, a passionate hunter, even went on a tigerhunt.52 More importantly, Tito and Nehru got to know each other personally.Besides four ofªcial rounds of talks, the two leaders spent much time in pri-vate conversation between ofªcial meetings and engagements or over privatedinners. The ªrst round of talks between the Indian and Yugoslav leaders washeld on 18 December, in Nehru’s New Delhi residence.53 Tito and Nehruwere alone, with Tito’s chief of cabinet acting as the translator. At Tito’s re-quest, all further ofªcial talks were held with members of the Yugoslav delega-tion and Indian ofªcials in attendance.163No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest50. Record of talks held in Brioni, on 25 July 1954, between the President of the Republic [Tito] andthe Emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie I, in AJ, 837, I-3-1/24-3.51. Speech of the President of the Republic at the Federal People’s Assembly, 7 March 1955, in AJ,837, II-5-b-1.52. The program and itinerary of the President’s visit to India, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.53. Memorandum of the conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India,J. Nehru, in New Delhi, 18 December 1954, at 12:00 p.m., at the residence of the Indian Prime Min-ister, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.During this ªrst meeting, Tito presented his views on an array of foreignpolicy issues, whereas Nehru limited himself to occasional remarks, mainlywhen China was mentioned. Tito ªrst addressed Yugoslav-Soviet relations,conªding that he was in secret correspondence with Soviet leaders to followup on their initiative for an improvement in bilateral relations. He claimedthat Nehru was the ªrst foreign leader to be informed of this correspondence.Tito then emphasized that Yugoslavia had gone along with Moscow’s initia-tive only because the Soviet Union had indirectly accepted responsibility forthe 1948 conºict and agreed to normalization based on non-interferencein Yugoslavia’s affairs. He defended his non-aligned credentials by insistingthat Yugoslavia had not joined NATO when it signed the Balkan Pact; its aimwas only to fend off the very real threat of Soviet aggression. Tito said that theimprovement of relations with the USSR would allow Yugoslavia to give pri-ority to economic and political rather than military, aspects of the pact. Titothen reproached his Balkan Pact ally, Turkey, for its aspirations to play the roleof a regional hegemon. He added that during his recent visit to Ankara he hadmade a point of inquiring with his hosts whether the new Turkish-Pakistanitreaty of cooperation was directed against India. The Turks, Tito reported,had assured him that the treaty was not directed against India.54 He then pro-vided an overview of the situation in Europe, singling out the question ofGermany as the most important foreign policy issue of the moment. Nehrurefrained from commenting, but toward the end of the meeting he inquiredabout Yugoslavia’s relations with China. The Indian leader informed Tito thatduring Zhou Enlai’s recent visit to New Delhi the Chinese premier had ex-pressed support for the establishment of relations with Yugoslavia. Tito re-sponded that Yugoslavia was not opposed to this.55 He evidently wished toimpress and woo Nehru. By disclosing the existence of secret contacts withMoscow, the Yugoslav leader wished to convey to his Indian host a feeling ofrespect and trust. Tito also tried to present himself as a friend of India and wasparticularly keen to reiterate his non-aligned credentials by minimizing therelevance of the Balkan Pact and its links to NATO.Several hours after the ªrst meeting, a second ofªcial session was heldduring which Nehru outlined India’s foreign policy views. From the outset, hestressed that India was not a member of any military alliance, insisting thatthe Commonwealth could not be regarded as an alliance insofar as member-ship carried no legal obligations. At the same time, he stressed, Common-wealth membership helped India to acquire better international recognition164Rajak54. Ibid.55. Ibid. Zhou visited New Delhi from 25 to 28 June 1954 on his return trip from the Geneva Con-ference on Indochina.and to retain inºuence in global politics. According to Nehru, on more than afew occasions India’s views had prompted Great Britain to change its positionin the UN.56 Nehru barely mentioned Pakistan apart from making a passingcomment that Karachi’s policies were not helping to diminish the existingfrictions between the two countries. He admitted that Kashmir remained thebiggest and perhaps the only problem between them. Nehru mentioned Eu-rope only in passing, justifying India’s passivity toward European issues bystating that India had “no wish to impose itself on European problems.”57Most of the prime minister’s presentation during the second meeting, how-ever, was reserved for China. He informed Tito that during Zhou’s recent visitto New Delhi the two countries had pledged to cooperate despite differencesin their political systems. Tito interrupted Nehru, asking whether the Chinesecould be trusted and whether Moscow was not behind Zhou’s visit. Nehrudisagreed and reiterated his belief that Beijing had its “own feeling for Asia.”Furthermore, he was convinced that Moscow was not “too happy” with theChinese foreign policy initiatives and revealed that Soviet ofªcials had ap-proached him with a proposal for a joint declaration supporting the ‘‘‘Fiveprinciples,’ as if they wished to diminish the importance of Zhou and[Nehru’s] joint statement in which [they] pledged their adherence to theseprinciples.”58 Nehru then focused on India’s relations with China, emphasiz-ing that the two countries shared a border stretching more than 2,000 miles,including Tibet. He was conªdent there was no danger of Chinese aggression,pointing to the geography of their shared border, which stretched across theworld’s highest mountains. Nehru was also conªdent that China did not wantwar, and he emphasized that Chinese sovereignty over Tibet was never inquestion. He accused the British of creating “certain privileged positions inTibet that were then inherited by India but which India, from the very begin-ning, was aware it was not in a position to maintain.” However, Nehru saidthat when he recently spoke with Zhou Enlai and others in Beijing, he had“encouraged the Chinese to recognize Tibetan individuality by allowing a cer-tain kind of autonomy for Tibet.” Returning to Tito’s earlier question aboutthe sincerity of Chinese foreign policy, Nehru disclosed that both he and165No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest56. Memorandum of a conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India, J. Nehru,in New Delhi, 18 December 1954, at 18:00, in AJBT, KPR, I-2 / 4-2.57. Ibid.58. Ibid. In a joint statement issued at the end of Zhou’s June visit to New Delhi, the Indian and Chi-nese prime ministers reafªrmed the “Five Principles” that should guide relations between their twocountries, as well as their relations with other countries. The principles, ªrst laid down in the Agree-ment on Tibet signed by both countries on 29 April 1954, were (1) mutual respect for each other’s ter-ritorial integrity and sovereignty; (2) non-aggression; (3) non-interference in each other’s internal af-fairs; (4) equality and mutual beneªt; and (5) peaceful coexistence. See Keesing’s ContemporaryArchives, 1952–1954, Vol. 9, 3–10 July 1954 (Bristol, UK: Keesing’s Publications), p. 13,661.U Nu had expressed strong anxieties to Zhou about Beijing’s support of Com-munist parties throughout Asia.59 Nehru’s accentuated conciliatory attitudetoward China suggested his satisfaction with the results of his meeting withZhou. His insistence on talking only about Asian affairs indicates his predom-inantly regional focus.Most of the third ofªcial meeting between Tito and Nehru, held on20 December, was again dedicated to China.60 Nehru blamed the UN for itsstance on recent trials in China and the sentencing of U.S. prisoners of war(POWs) on charges of espionage. He said it was wrong to condemn Chinawithout hearing its side of the story. He disclosed that he had recently medi-ated between the UN Secretary General, Dag Hammarskjöld, and the Chi-nese and had advised Beijing to accept Hammarskjöld’s offer to visit China.Tito disagreed with Nehru, suggesting that it was inappropriate for theChinese to declare POWs spies. Tito harbored strong suspicions aboutthe “Chinese trials,” reminding Nehru that “[the Yugoslavs] have had experi-ence with these sorts of show trials, for example the trial against Laszlo Rajk[in Hungary].” Tito also feared that the Chinese action might be used by“aggressive elements in the West” to provoke tensions in the region. In thiscontext, he stressed India’s crucial role in preventing and easing such adversedevelopments. Referring to possible cracks in the Sino-Soviet relations, Titoobserved thatit looks sometimes as if the Soviets are against the Chinese entry into the UN.There is certainly some kind of change in the Soviet policy [toward China]. Oneshould look back into previous experiences. The [Yugoslav] conºict withCominform had its roots in, among other things, East European [socialist]countries’ tendencies for closer relations with Yugoslavia that were becoming in-creasingly apparent at the time. It was precisely [Tito’s visit to Romania inDecember 1947] and the outpourings of overwhelming public sympathies forthe Yugoslavs that signaled the beginning of the Soviet campaign [againstYugoslavia].61With little ªrst-hand knowledge of China, Tito was still convinced thatBeijing and Moscow did not constitute a united front in Asia and that China’sregional policies were more independent than was actually the case. Nehru’stone when speaking about China revealed the positive impact on China’sneighbors of Beijing’s peace offensive and Zhou’s constructive diplomacy.166Rajak59. Memorandum of a conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India, J. Nehru,in New Delhi, 18 December 1954, at 18:00, in AJBT, KPR, I-2 / 4-2.60. Memorandum of a conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India, J. Nehru,in New Delhi, 20 December 1954, at 17:30, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.61. Ibid.Tito, on the other hand, was probably eager to hear about the ªrst Chineseforeign policy foray outside the Soviet shadow, not so much because he be-lieved that China would welcome non-commitment to blocs, but because itcould help him understand better the motives behind the most recent Sovietinitiative to normalize relations with Yugoslavia.On 21 December, on the eve of a fourth meeting with Nehru, Tito ad-dressed the Indian Parliament. He used the occasion to deliver a programspeech that would deªne and promulgate Yugoslavia’s new foreign policy ori-entation. The speech revealed a surprisingly developed Yugoslav conceptual-ization of non-engagement and active peaceful coexistence. As the four mainthreats to peace, Tito identiªed inequality among states and nations, the in-terference of the big powers in the affairs of other states and peoples, the divi-sion of the world into spheres of interest and blocs, and colonialism. The Yu-goslav leader insisted that non-committed countries needed a global ratherthan regional approach to activism. He stressed that non-engagement meantmaintaining equidistance from the two blocs, arguing against the tendency ofthe newly liberated ex-colonies to regard the USSR as the lesser of two evils.Tito also stressed that trade and economic cooperation between non-engagedcountries was a good way to achieve rapid industrialization and emancipationfrom old colonial masters.62 The Yugoslav leader used the speech to inject ac-tivism into the concept of non-engagement borne out of traditional Asianneutralism. He promoted “active coexistence” based on functional coopera-tion, involvement in the peaceful settlement of international crises, and theremoval of obstacles to cooperation between states. That same evening, after aprivate dinner in the Indian prime minister’s residence, the two discussed thedraft of the joint statement, and Tito suggested that the word “active” beadded in describing India and Yugoslavia’s “positive and constructive policy ofnon-alignment.”63 Although hesitant at ªrst, Nehru accepted the insertion thenext morning.64The joint statement, signed on 22 December, articulated the aspirationsof the new and emerging force in the international system—the non-engagedcountries.65 In the statement, the two leaders declared their intention to “de-167No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest62. The speech by President J. B. Tito to the Indian Parliament, 21 December 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-1, 876–880.63. Memorandum of a conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India, J. Nehru,in New Delhi, 21 December 1954 (following dinner at Nehru’s residence), in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.64. Memorandum of the meeting held at the Indian Foreign Ministry, 22 December 1954, at 10:30,in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.65. The Joint Statement by the President of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia and the PrimeMinister of India, New Delhi, 22 December 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2. In a number of Yugoslavdocuments, as well as in the ªnal communiqué signed at the end of Nehru’s ofªcial visit to Belgradesix months later, 30 June–7 July 1955, this statement is described as a declaration.vote their energies . . . toward the advancement of peace through negotia-tions, and reconciliation as the means for the resolution of internationalconºicts.” Tito and Nehru also clariªed that “the policy of non-alignmentwith blocs, which they pursue, does not represent ‘neutrality’ or ‘neutralism’;neither does it represent passivity as is sometimes alleged. It represents thepositive, active and constructive policy that, as its goal, has collective peace asthe foundation of collective security.” The statement then spelled out theprinciples of interstate relations that India and Yugoslavia were determined topromote—the recognition of individual sovereignty, independence and integ-rity, non-aggression, equality, respect, non-interference in the affairs of otherstates, and peaceful coexistence. The document denounced allegations in theWestern media that countries seeking to be non-committed to the blocswould themselves form a “third bloc.” Finally, in one of the most importantdeclarations of the statement, Tito and Nehru expressed hope that the “prin-ciples of relations between countries that they have proclaimed would acquirea wider, universal implementation.”66 By including this passage, they were sig-naling their intention not only to work actively toward the implementation ofthe principles they had just endorsed but also to encourage a wider following.This aspect and the timing of the joint statement were of particular impor-tance. Published ahead of the April 1955 Bandung conference of the Asianand African countries, the document acquired additional signiªcance andmeaning because it articulated the rationale behind the forthcoming gather-ing and helped to deªne the aspirations of the non-committed countries.The second leg of Tito’s trip to Asia took him to Burma. Tito held fourrounds of ofªcial talks with the Burmese prime minister, U Nu, and otherofªcials. During their second meeting, on 13 January, U Nu informed Titoabout his trip to Hanoi, emphasizing that “the people of North Vietnam areªercely loyal to their Communist leaders and in particular to Ho Chi Minh,”and that “the American intervention in South Vietnam will end in disasterand for a very simple reason: Despite American weapons, despite Americandollars and despite American military assistance, no one in South Vietnam iswilling to die for the Americans.”67U Nu spoke at length about China and the talks he had held with MaoZedong and Zhou Enlai during his recent visit to Beijing. He expressed fasci-168Rajak66. Ibid.67. Transcript of talks held between the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal J. B. Tito, and the PrimeMinister of Burma, U Nu, on board the ship Mindon, 13 January 1955, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2. Allofªcial talks were held on the Mindon. Whether this was for a particular reason is unclear. The U.S.presence in South Vietnam at the time was very limited; only a small number of military advisers werestationed there.nation with the changes that had occurred in China since he was last there,before the Second World War. According to U Nu, “before liberation, theChinese people walked with their backs bent and with fear in their eyes when-ever they would meet a foreigner. Now, they walk upright, like men.”68 Hethen stressed that, contrary to the opinion of many of his own people, he hadbecome convinced that the Chinese Communist Party was strong and en-joyed the support of the Chinese people. The Burmese leader justiªed the vio-lence used by the Communists: “It is true that the Communists killed a lot ofpeople and mistreated others when they took over power. However, the peo-ple they treated this way were not good people but black marketeers, spies,proªteers, and the like. For this reason the Chinese masses did not hate thenew Government. On the contrary, they started supporting it.”69 He con-cluded by noting that Mao and Zhou had assured him that, “because of thehuge program of domestic development, they do not want to go to war withanyone.” U Nu’s explanation of the current state of affairs between China andBurma caused Tito to express reservations and provoked an interesting ex-change:U Nu: Until recently, the Burmese Government was of the opinion that the Chi-nese were aiding and assisting the rebels here. . . . When Zhou Enlai visitedRangoon last year, I told him that we do not like what they were doingand if they wish to have good relations with us it had to stop. Zhou re-sponded that he had no idea about any of this and that the Chinese Gov-ernment is not interested in internal affairs of Burma. I have decided to ac-cept his explanation.Tito (interrupting): As if the left hand doesn’t know what the right one is doing.U Nu: When I visited China, I addressed this question again with Mao Zedongand Zhou Enlai. I explained to the Chinese that Burma is not an Americantool and is following a foreign policy which is completely independentfrom America. The Chinese had to admit this was true. I have also toldthem that Burma does not allow the Americans to build bases on its terri-tory, and the Chinese admitted it was true. I have also told them that . . .Burma had given active support to China, namely with regard to the ad-mission of China to the UN. The Chinese have admitted this as well andhave said that having all that in mind, it would not be correct for them tokeep supporting the insurgents in Burma. After this, I returned to Burmawith the belief that the Chinese will not interfere any more in our affairs.Tito: How could [the Chinese leaders] say that they will not give further support[to insurgents] and yet Zhou Enlai had said that he knew nothing about it?169No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest68. Ibid.69. Ibid.U Nu: Well, they did not say it explicitly, but I had acquired such an impression.They continued to say they did not give assistance to rebels, and I havecome to believe that they would not give it in future.Tito: I am not convinced they will not meddle in your affairs in the future. It isin the logic of a big power.70During their fourth meeting, on 14 January, Tito discarded as an illusionU Nu’s earlier suggestion that the Soviet Union and China were better ormore moral than the West. According to Tito, both blocs were driven by self-interest and pure greed. He shared, however, U Nu’s opinion that the UnitedStates intended to establish itself ªrmly in Asia. Tito warned that U.S. mo-tives were not only ideological but imperialist and noted that[U.S.] imperialism is not classic imperialism manifesting itself in the armiesmarching in, conquest without particular reason, etc. but through a completelydifferent method of penetration and conquest. American imperialism is not asdangerous to Europe as it is for Asia because the Asian countries are much moreunderdeveloped than Europe. [The Americans] achieve their goals through eco-nomic measures, through aid.71U Nu’s later observations about the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization(SEATO) provoked a sarcastic response from Tito:U Nu: SEATO is a strange organization. All hitherto military alliances, includ-ing NATO, had pledged to defend themselves only. However, SEATO isdetermined to defend other states, as well, including those that have notjoined it. Burma is also in the sphere of their guarantees.Tito: Indeed, the wolf is keen to embrace the lamb to “protect” it.72Struck by what he saw as U Nu’s naïveté, Tito insisted that the division of theworld into blocs was, by its very nature, a danger for smaller countries andthat the competition between the two blocs threatened their very existence:Between themselves, [the Soviet Union and the United States] have undertakento divide the world. From the American side, this is done under the pretext andslogans of the ªght against the spread of communism; from the other side, it isdone in the name of the struggle for the Revolution, for social change in which,of course, the Soviet Union has to play the leading role. Both are equally danger-ous. I do not know which is in fact more dangerous for the small nations.73170Rajak70. Ibid.71. Transcript of talks held between the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal J. B. Tito, and the PrimeMinister of Burma, U Nu, on board the ship Mindon, 14 January 1955, at 15:30, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.72. Ibid.73. Ibid.The Yugoslav also warned of China’s emerging role. He argued that, as a bigcountry, China inevitably had its own interests that it wished to pursue andattain.I have already voiced some reservations while Mr. Nu was speaking aboutChina, namely whether China has its own aspirations here, in Burma. I believethat it may not have them today—although I do not trust a single big countrybecause every one of them harbors imperialistic appetites, Western countries aswell as the Soviet Union. However, it is very possible that in the future, when itbecomes industrialized and more developed, China will appear in the same light[as the other two global superpowers]. History is full of such examples.74Two further meetings between the Burmese and the Yugoslav leadersfocused on military and economic cooperation and demonstrated Tito’s in-tent to promote activism over traditional concepts of neutralism. Earlier, on11 January, after a military parade held in his honor, Tito asked to spendsome time in conversation with the present Burmese army ofªcers.75 He of-fered advice on aspects of military organization, from the size of infantry divi-sions to the type of weapons best suited to the Burmese army and Burmeseterrain. Tito argued that small, non-engaged countries like Burma and Yugo-slavia should build up their military capabilities in order to discourage the su-perpowers’ attempts to dominate them. The Yugoslav leader further claimedthat non-engaged countries should buy weapons from both blocs while devel-oping their own production of light weaponry. In this context, he suggestedcloser cooperation and, in response to a direct question from one of the Bur-mese ofªcers, conªrmed Yugoslavia’s willingness to supply light weapons,train Burmese ofªcers, and send advisers to Burma.76 During the follow-upmeeting on the morning of 14 January, Tito again maintained that “Burma,like any other small country, has better chances to secure its independence if ithas resources to defend it.” He reminded his hosts that Yugoslavia was able toresist the Soviet threat only because it possessed a strong army, adding that“no improvement of international relations or various initiatives for disarma-ment could lull me; I believe that it is still better to be armed and have astrong army than wait for others to disarm.”77 A so-called special statement,issued together with a joint statement at the end of Tito’s visit, announcedthat the Yugoslav president had offered, “as a gift,” to arm a brigade of the171No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest74. Ibid.75. Memorandum of a conversation between President Tito and the representatives of the BurmeseArmy, 11 January 1955, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.76. Ibid.77. Transcript of the talks held between the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal J. B. Tito, and the PrimeMinister of Burma, U Nu, on board the ship “Mindon,” 14 January 1955, at 15:30, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.Burmese army and that in “accepting this generous offer with gratitude” theBurmese government had decided “to offer in return, as a gift, rice for thepeople of Yugoslavia.”78 This arrangement also inaugurated barter as a mecha-nism to facilitate Yugoslav-Burmese trade and served as a template for futureSouth-South cooperation, helping the non-aligned countries overcome theperennial obstacle to economic cooperation between them: their inability toªnance mutual trade. The talks with the Burmese on economic and militarycooperation reºected Tito’s conviction that mutual reliance and cooperationamong Third World countries was the only way for them to defend their sov-ereignty and independence.ConclusionYugoslavia’s non-commitment to the Cold War alliances was borne out of itsinternational isolation and life-and-death struggle for survival following itsexpulsion from the Cominform. Tito’s independent foreign policies and ideo-logical heresy did not predate 1948. On the contrary, they were a result of theYugoslav-Soviet rupture. To survive, Yugoslavia had to master the art of play-ing one bloc off against the other. Within a year of being exiled “into thecold,” Yugoslav leaders began contemplating a position between the two blocsas a permanent strategic option. The conceptualization of this new orien-tation, which occurred much earlier than the prevailing historical interpreta-tions suggest, was at ªrst conªned to Tito’s most trusted circle. The very realdanger of Soviet aggression did not allow Yugoslavia to risk losing the only de-terrent it possessed—U.S. military and economic support. However, the ma-neuvering space that was suddenly created following an astonishing and un-foreseen Soviet initiative in the summer of 1954 for the normalization ofrelations with Yugoslavia enabled Tito and his aides to embark on the imple-mentation of their strategy of maintaining an equidistance from the twoblocs. Yugoslavia did not rush to the West in the face of Soviet aggressiononly to perform an ungrateful volte-face once the threat had subsided. Therefusal to submit to foreign domination was as much behind Tito’s non-commitment to both blocs after the normalization with Moscow as it was be-hind his decision to oppose subjugation by his ideological mentor, Stalin, andto ªght for survival following expulsion from the Cominform. As a U.S. intel-ligence assessment at the time predicted, “[Tito] will continue to regard his172Rajak78. Special Statement (Annex to the Joint Statement) by the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal, J. B.Tito, and the Prime Minister of Burma, U Nu, 17 January 1955, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.interests to be best served from a ºexible position in which Yugoslavia canachieve beneªts from both power blocs with a minimum of commitments toeither.”79The removal of the Soviet threat was the sine qua non of Yugoslavia’s newforeign policy strategy. But Tito realized that the only way to ensure that thestrategy could be preserved indeªnitely was by enlisting international sup-port. Accordingly, he set sail for India and Burma in December 1954 insearch of allies. His goal was to identify and establish cooperation with like-minded leaders with whom he could work to promote peaceful coexistenceand reduce tensions in the international system. The Yugoslavs understoodwell that both were essential for their survival. Moreover, as they had learnedthe hard way, a voice in debates on global issues and increased presence in in-ternational politics that would lead to increased prestige were crucial if thecountry was to resist outside pressure and overcome the isolation in which itfound itself after 1948. Tito was particularly eager to recruit Nehru as an ally.Collaboration with a country as big and inºuential as India made it easier forYugoslavia to pursue the new foreign policy. During an informal conversationwith his aides and Yugoslav journalists on a train from Calcutta, he admitted:“What would small Yugoslavia be able to do alone in this [struggle to securean independent position outside the Blocs] unless some big country wouldjoin in? That is why we are looking for allies. That was the goal of this trip.Why else would we go on such a long trip? Certainly not for me to seetigers.”80The amity toward India was reinforced by perceived ideological proxim-ity. At the end of their ªnal round of talks, Tito asked Nehru to elaborate onhis vision of India’s social and political strategy. The Indian leader respondedthat “[India’s] philosophy is the development toward Socialism in accordancewith India’s speciªc conditions; this development has to be carried out peace-fully.”81 Tito was convinced that the creation of a common front with othernon-committed countries would best serve Yugoslavia’s new strategy. He be-lieved in the strength of such a gathering to resist superpower dominationonce the movement acquired the ability to inºuence global issues. This con-viction subsequently became the driving force behind Tito’s lengthy tours of173No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest79. National Intelligence Estimate 31/2-55, “Yugoslavia’s International Position,” 17 September 1955,in CIA-ERR.80. Memorandum of a conversation between the President and the Yugoslav journalists who were ac-companying him on a train journey from Calcutta to [unclear, handwritten name of town], 2 January1955, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.81. Memorandum of a conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India, J. Nehru,in New Delhi, 21 December 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.Africa and Asia, during which he tirelessly lobbied for the creation of theNAM. During his ªrst trip to India and Burma, he discerned the power ofthe Third World. As he admitted to U Nu,We salute and praise the tendency of those countries, namely India, Burma, andIndonesia, to remain outside the blocs and to be interconnected as much as pos-sible. . . . [They] feel the need to associate with each other in order to be strongerin their resistance to domination by others. For this reason, [Yugoslavia] is doingits best to cooperate with those countries in Asia.82The ªrst visit to India and Burma helped Tito to identify in the newly decolo-nized countries of Asia an emerging force in the international system that wasable and determined to pursue policies independent of either bloc. The ªrstventure into the Third World had a profound imprint on Tito’s perceptionsand shaped his future political engagement.This article has introduced terms and phrases such as “non-commit-ment,” “active peaceful coexistence,” “non-interference in the affairs of oth-ers,” and “struggle for global peace” as the main concepts that became thebuilding blocks of “non-alignment.” Tito’s speech before the Indian Parlia-ment on 21 December 1954 suggests that he had arrived in New Delhiwith surprisingly developed ideas about “peaceful co-existence” and “non-engagement.” His ªrst trip to Asia and the discussions he had with Nehru fa-cilitated a further, comprehensive conceptualization of these ideals. As Titoand Nehru conªrmed seven months later in a communiqué signed at the endof Nehru’s reciprocating visit to Belgrade, in early July 1955, the New Delhijoint statement provided the ªrst platform for the mobilization of non-en-gaged countries around the policy of “active peaceful coexistence” and “non-commitment” to the two main Cold War alignments.83 The platform offereda common identity and purpose to Third World countries. Of particular sig-niªcance, the document appeared on the eve of Nehru’s trip to the Bandungconference preparatory meeting in Djakarta. The joint statement invited Afri-can and Asian countries to join Tito and Nehru in the implementation of theprinciples they had promulgated as the norms in international relations.Nehru and Tito were often accused of moralizing and of grandiloquencefor tirelessly promoting non-commitment, activism, and peaceful coexistence.However, these concepts were a product of a judicious rationalization of theexisting international system and the adverse environment within which174Rajak82. Transcript of talks held between the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal J. B. Tito and the PrimeMinister of Burma, U Nu, on board the ship Mindon, 14 January 1955, at 15:30, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.83. Joint Statement by the Prime Minister of India and the President of FPRY [Federal People’s Re-public of Yugoslavia], Brioni, Yugoslavia, 6 July 1955, in AJ, 837, I-3-a/38-9.Third World countries were striving to safeguard their independence. Nehruand Tito used these terms to articulate real political aims and goals. Fromtheir ªrst meeting, the two leaders promoted activism and the need for non-engaged countries to have a say on all international issues. The only way toensure that the voice of Third World countries would be loud enough was byjoining together in a common position on global issues. The two leaders be-lieved that only then would their countries, as well as the Third World asa whole, be able to maintain independence from superpower pressure—pressure that would otherwise result in the loss of sovereignty.84 In a similarfashion, Tito placed enormous emphasis on economic and military coopera-tion, giving these issues a prominent place in all his talks and in the docu-ments and statements signed during his Asian and subsequent trips. As heceaselessly pointed out, underdevelopment meant perpetuation of depend-ence on colonial masters and superpowers. Mutual economic cooperation andtrade was for Third World non-engaged countries the only tool they had attheir disposal to overcome this dependency. To fend off superpower pressureand meddling in their internal affairs, the Third World countries also had toboost their defense capabilities. Military collaboration and self-reliance mini-mized dependence on arms procurement from the superpowers, further limit-ing their inºuence. Ultimately, development, modernization, and mutual co-operation were conduits to independence.The struggle for peace was another concept that Tito and Nehru repeat-edly and prominently championed, and it became a central part of their ini-tiative. Contrary to cynical interpretations, it was not used as a merely as arhetorical justiªcation for their policies. Rather, it was of practical sig-niªcance, with profound political implications. Peace was also one of the pre-cepts of their initiative that most clearly demanded “active” engagement.They were convinced that weak Third World countries would become theªrst victims of a superpower confrontation, whether directly or throughproxy, as the Korean War had just demonstrated. Tito warned U Nu: “We be-lieve that the division of the World into Blocs will, in not too distant future,lead to a conºict. Although in the end it would be a catastrophe for the wholeWorld, this conºict would, ªrst and foremost, swallow and destroy smallcountries.”85 A crucial justiªcation for placing the pursuit of peace at thecenter of the new political philosophy was the simple fact that a nuclear warwould result in catastrophic destruction for everyone. The Third World175No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest84. Speech by the President of the Republic in the Federal People’s Assembly, 7 March 1955, in AJ,837, II-5-b-1.85. Transcript of talks held between the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal J. B. Tito, and the PrimeMinister of Burma, U Nu, on board the ship Mindon, 14 January 1955, at 15:30, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.countries, representing half the world’s population, had thus declared that thefuture of the world, its destiny, and the right to life were not a privilege ofthe superpowers alone but a fundamental right of all.By overcoming his own ideological prejudices, Tito gave true meaning tothe concept of coexistence between countries with different ideologicalafªliations and political systems. His trip to India and Burma and particularlyhis conversations with Nehru helped Tito to form a new outlook on theThird World countries and to overcome the ideologically colored preconcep-tions he previously held. This was also the reason he was so eager to counterallegations in the Western media that he would use the trip to India andBurma to promote Soviet penetration in the region. As evidenced by the Yu-goslav records of the conversations with Nehru and U Nu, Tito did preciselythe opposite. On more than one occasion, he warned his hosts that the SovietUnion, and China in the future, aimed to dominate other countries as muchas the traditional colonial powers and the United States did. Tito understoodthat his hosts, recently liberated from the colonial yoke, regarded the SovietUnion and China as benign powers. Departing further from his own ideologi-cal constraints, Tito did not hesitate to condemn the obstructive role playedby the domestic Communist parties, particularly the Communist-led insur-gency in Burma. The Yugoslav became convinced that both India and Burmawere on the road to create better societies in accordance with their traditionsand speciªc conditions. He also recognized rudimentary socialist elementswithin the economic and political systems these countries were trying tobuild.86 Consequently, Tito urged Khrushchev during the latter’s visit to Yu-goslavia in May and June 1955 to reconsider existing Soviet policies towardcountries such as India and Burma. He insisted that these countries repre-sented a “reservoir of socialism,” explaining that there were clear elements ofsocialism with individual characteristics in both India and Burma. Tito askedKhrushchev to stop aiding the Communist parties there. He contended thatthese parties were small and obscure and, as was the case in Burma, wereªghting a guerrilla war against the existing government with little or no popu-lar support.87 When U Nu visited Belgrade barely a week after Khrushchevleft, Tito could inform him of the advice he had given to Soviet leaders. Hereiterated his belief that the local Communist parties in India and Burmawere not only “distanced from their own people and are engaged in destruc-tive activities” but have “practically joined forces with the most reactionary176Rajak86. Speech by the President of the Republic in the Federal People’s Assembly, 7 March 1955, in AJ,837, II-5-b-1.87. Transcript of Yugoslav-Soviet talks in Belgrade, 27–28 May, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 507/IX; and Tran-script of Yugoslav-Soviet talks in Belgrade, 2 June 1955, in AJ, ACK SKJ, 119/I-56.circles” in their countries.88 Tito’s ability to transcend his own ideologicalafªliation made him a trusted interlocutor of the Third World leaders and amediator in their disputes.The maturing of the Yugoslav approach to non-commitment that hap-pened during the trip to India and Burma enabled Tito to enrich and ºeshout the concept of “active peaceful coexistence.” Of particular signiªcancewas the fact that he introduced globalism and universalism to the hithertoAsia-focused concept of neutralism. He believed that, in the era when theCold War order and superpower rivalry had become global, issues such aspeace, the threat of nuclear war, colonialism, development, and independencewere also global. They were of concern to all—big or small, poor or rich, de-veloped or underdeveloped. They were also a responsibility and, more impor-tant, a universal right belonging to all. As he stressed to U Nu, “Asia is not adistant world to us, although we are geographically separated.”89 Tito intro-duced universality and activism to Nehru’s regionalism and proclivity todigniªed but passive neutralism. The rapport established between the twoleaders helped to merge neutralism and paciªsm, already inherent in tradi-tional Indian religious and cultural identity, with European activism, nation-alism, and individualism. This helped transform non-commitment from avague concept into a global phenomenon that over time attracted a growingnumber of decolonized and underdeveloped countries. This was to becomeTito’s and Nehru’s lasting legacy.The visit to India enabled Tito and Nehru to create a unique rapport thatproved beneªcial for both sides. They developed a congruence of views basedon trust and respect, admiration for each other’s political wisdom, and con-ªdence in each other’s intellectual competence and ability to analyze and un-derstand international issues and developments. From the outset, the twoleaders felt free to talk openly and in full conªdence. At their ªrst meeting,Tito revealed to Nehru the existence of the secret correspondence with theSoviet Union.90 Three days later, Tito disclosed something he had hithertokept only to himself and his closest aides—the fact that Moscow had just pro-posed a meeting between the Yugoslav and Soviet leaders and that he intended177No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest88. Record of talks between the President of FRPY, Marshal Josip Broz Tito, and the President of theGovernment of the Burmese Union, U Nu, held at the White Palace in Belgrade, 19 June 1955, in AJ,837, I-3-a/15-5.89. Transcript of talks held between the President of Yugoslavia, Marshal J. B. Tito, and the PrimeMinister of Burma, U Nu, on board the ship Mindon, 14 January 1955, at 15:30, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.90. Memorandum of the conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India,J. Nehru, in New Delhi, 18 December 1954, at 12:00 p.m., at the residence of the Indian Prime Min-ister, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.to accept this offer, regardless of the Western reaction.91 Tito’s attentiveness,respect, and willingness to seek Nehru’s advice, as manifested during theirmeetings, were unique. Tito’s relationships with other Third World leaders inlater years, even the bond he enjoyed with Gamal Abdel Nasser, could notmatch the partnership Tito forged with Nehru. During their meeting on21 December, Tito conªded to Nehru that the Chinese had secretly ap-proached the Yugoslav embassy in Moscow to propose the establishment ofdiplomatic relations. Tito was initially determined to delay responding to theChinese approaches, but when Nehru advised against it, Tito promised to re-consider his decision. On 2 January, while Tito was still in India, YugoslavForeign Minister Popovib sent a response to Zhou’s telegram of 14 Decemberconªrming Yugoslavia’s agreement to the establishment of diplomatic rela-tions. Yugoslav documents also conªrm that Tito and Nehru held extensivediscussions outside their formal meetings, before or after public functions, of-ten on the terraces of their residences. The joint statement, unusually for sucha document, stressed the informal character of their exchanges. It is truly re-markable that two statesmen of such divergent upbringing and such differentcultural and ideological backgrounds could have shared so much in common.What had brought together an Indian patrician, educated at the elitist Har-row and Cambridge University and committed to parliamentarian democ-racy, and a peasant-turned-metal-worker from remote Zagorje who was acommitted Communist-internationalist? How could two such different indi-viduals ªnd a cause they would jointly and so determinedly endeavor to ful-ªll? The only possible response is also the one that best explains the appeal oftheir initiative to so many across the Third World: the true universality andtimelessness of the goals and principles the two leaders committed themselvesto defend and implement. The unique rapport between Tito and Nehru,forged during the Yugoslav leader’s ªrst visit to India, became a driving forcein the creation and existence of the NAM until Nehru’s death in 1964.Finally, what can explain Tito’s charisma, and why was he so well receivedin the Third World from the very beginning? This question is often posedwith regard to Yugoslavia and its president’s role in the creation of the NAM,and several explanations may be offered. First, Tito’s carried with him the dis-tinctive aura of the leader of a successful resistance and national liberationmovement, something that appealed to Third World people and politiciansalike. Many of them had only recently emerged from an anti-colonial struggleor war of liberation. Tito also had the ability to listen and to award his inter-locutors with the attention and respect they craved as the leaders of newly lib-178Rajak91. Memorandum of the conversation between the President and the Prime Minister of India,J. Nehru, in New Delhi, 21 December 1954, in AJBT, KPR, I-2/4-2.erated countries. He could articulate their desire for independence anddignity because he shared it. He was sincere, and they recognized it. Further-more, he came from a small country that had dared to stand up to a super-power and had emerged unscathed. The myth of David and Goliath neverceases to inspire the weak and the deprived.92 Being independent of both su-perpowers, Tito could freely voice his views on any international issue. Moreimportantly, he was seen as someone who was successfully promoting and de-fending his country’s own interests. Within a short period of time Tito hadsuccessfully led a devastated and economically underdeveloped country to-ward modernization and commendable economic development and militarystrength. Last but not least, Tito championed the new political, cultural, andracial awareness toward the Asian and African countries. This was even moreaccentuated because he came from Europe, home to the traditional colonialpowers. In a way, he was the ªrst white European who did not come to subju-gate and arrived instead as an equal, professing independence and mutualrespect.179No Bargaining Chips, No Spheres of Interest92. Association with this parable did not escape Alvin Z. Rubinstein when describing Tito’s receptionin Burma. See Rubinstein, Yugoslavia and the Non-aligned World, p. 58.