ABSTRACT: 
Panpsychism harbors an unresolved tension, the seriousness of which has yet to be fully appreciated. I capture this tension as a dilemma, and offer panpsychists advice on how to resolve it. The dilemma, briefly, is as follows. Panpsychists are committed to the perspicuous explanation of macro-mentality in terms of micro-mentality. But panpsychists take the micro-material realm to feature not just mental properties, but also micro-subjects to whom these properties belong. Yet it is impossible to explain the constitution of a macro-subject (like one of us) in terms of the assembly of micro-subjects, for, I show, subjects cannot combine. Therefore the panpsychist explanatory project is derailed by the insistence that the world’s ultimate material constituents (ultimates) are subjects of experience. The panpsychist faces a choice of abandoning her explanatory project, or recanting the claim that the ultimates are subjects. This is the dilemma. I argue that the latter option is to be preferred. This needn’t constitute a wholesale abandonment of panpsychism, however, since panpsychists can maintain that the ultimates possess phenomenal qualities, despite not being subjects of those qualities. This proposal requires us to make sense of phenomenal qualities existing independently of experiencing subjects, a challenge I tackle in the penultimate section. The position eventually reached is a form of neutral monism, so another way to express the overall argument is to say that, keeping true to their philosophical motivations, panpsychists should really be neutral monists.Peer reviewedFinal Accepted Versio. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper examines panpsychists’ reductive physicalism, and the argument that panpsychists are in the right ballpark for a here-and-now solution to the mind/body problem. The argument is a dilemma, and offer panpsychists advice on how to resolve this. The dilemma is a dilemma, and offer panpsychists advice on how to resolve this. The dilemma is a dilemma, and offer panpsychists advice on how to resolve it. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
    1  The  Real  Combination  Problem:  Panpsychism,  Micro-­‐Subjects,  and  Emergence1    0.  Introduction  Panpsychists  hold  that  all  matter  possesses  mental  properties  of  some  form.  The  main   motivation   for   panpsychism   is   the   perceived   failure   of   reductive  physicalism—the  project  of  explaining,   inter  alia,   the   instantiation  of   conscious  experience   solely   in   terms   of   conventionally   understood   physical   matter   and  properties.   Such   physical   matter   and   properties   are   presumed   not   to   include  mental   properties   at   the   basic   level.2  According   to   panpsychists,   the   moral   of  anti-­‐physicalist   arguments   like   the   knowledge   argument   and   the   zombie  argument   is   that   from   ingredients   entirely   lacking   in   consciousness,  consciousness   cannot   derive.3  To   adequately   account   for   the   instantiation   of  consciousness   in   beings   like   us,   panpsychists   aver,   we   must   take   mental  properties  as  part  of  the  fundamental  furniture  of  the  material  world.4      I  consider  overall  that  the  panpsychist  explanatory  project  is  well-­‐motivated,  and  that   panpsychists   are   in   the   right   ballpark   for   a   here-­‐and-­‐now   solution   to   the  mind/body  problem.5  I  won’t  attempt   to  motivate  panpsychism  with  respect   to  physicalism,  but  take  it  that  if  a  viable  panpsychist  theory  could  be  described,  it  would  represent  at  least  an  attractive  option  on  the  field  of  metaphysics  of  mind.  My   concern   is   with   difficulties   internal   to   panpsychism,   and   with   where   the  intuitions  driving  panpsychism  should  propel  one  if  those  difficulties  turn  out  to  be   insuperable.   The   discussion   should   be   of   interest   to   any   theorists  who   still  hope  for  an  explanation  of  consciousness  in  terms  of  its  material  underpinnings:                                                                                                                  1  Thanks   to   Gregg   Rosenberg   in   particular   for   helpful   comments   on   this   paper,   as  well   as   the  attendees  of  the  ‘Panpsychism  on  the  Reef’  conference  of  July  2012  organised  by  David  Chalmers,  and  an  anonymous  referee  for  this  journal.  2  Cf.  Stoljar  2006.  3  For  a  recent  example  of   this  sort  of  argument  see  Strawson  2006.  See  also  Nagel  1979,   James  1890.    4  As  Nagel   and  Strawson   in  particular  make   clear,   if   the  phenomenal   can  only  derive   from   the  phenomenal,   then   ultimate   entities   (e.g.   basic   particles)   must   be   phenomenal:   since   were  phenomenality  to  first  arise  at  any  non-­‐basic  level,  it  would  derive  from  the  non-­‐phenomenal.  5  As  compared  with  a  wait-­‐and-­‐see  solution  like  Stoljar’s  (2006).  Stoljar  believes  we  should  await  the  discovery  of  a  non-­‐mental   intrinsic  nature  to  matter  which  would  make  the  instantiation  of  macro-­‐consciousness  intelligible.       2  the  question  at  the  center  of  that  enterprise,  and  of  this  paper,  is  quite  how  rich  the   properties   of   micro-­‐matter   must   be   in   order   to   account   for   macro-­‐consciousness.      Panpsychism  harbors  an  unresolved  tension,  the  seriousness  of  which  has  yet  to  be  fully  appreciated.  I  capture  this  tension  as  a  dilemma,  and  offer  panpsychists  advice  on  how  to  resolve  it.  The  dilemma,  briefly,  is  as  follows.  Panpsychists  are  committed  to  the  perspicuous  explanation  of  macro-­‐mentality  in  terms  of  micro-­‐mentality   (in   a   sense   of   ‘perspicuous   explanation’   to   be   elucidated).   But  panpsychists  take  the  micro-­‐material  realm  to  feature  not  just  mental  properties,  but  also  micro-­‐subjects  to  whom  these  properties  belong.  Yet  it  is  impossible  to  explain   the   constitution   of   a   macro-­‐subject   (like   one   of   us)   in   terms   of   the  assembly  of  micro-­‐subjects,  for,  I  will  argue,  subjects  cannot  combine.  Therefore  the  panpsychist  explanatory  project  is  derailed  by  the  insistence  that  the  world’s  ultimate   material   constituents   (ultimates)   are   subjects   of   experience.   The  panpsychist   faces  a   choice  of  abandoning  her  explanatory  project,  or   recanting  the   claim   that   the  ultimates   are   subjects.   This   is   the  dilemma.   I   argue   that   the  latter  option  is  to  be  preferred.  This  needn’t  constitute  a  wholesale  abandonment  of   panpsychism,   however,   since   panpsychists   can   maintain   that   the   ultimates  possess  phenomenal  qualities,  despite  not  being  subjects  of  those  qualities.  This  proposal   requires   us   to   make   sense   of   phenomenal   qualities   existing  independently   of   experiencing   subjects,   a   challenge   I   tackle   in   the  penultimate  section.  The  position  eventually  reached  is  a  form  of  neutral  monism,  so  another  way   to   express   the   overall   argument   is   to   say   that,   keeping   true   to   their  philosophical  motivations,   panpsychists   should   really   be   neutral  monists.   This  shift   carries   a   further  boon:   as  well   as  being  a   coherent  position—something   I  argue   undiluted   panpsychism   is   not—neutral   monism   is   somewhat   closer   to  physicalistic  respectability,  since  it  does  not  assert  that  basic  material  ontology  is  rife  with  subjects  of  experience.6                                                                                                                    6  The   argument   assumes   a   robust   realism   about   human   subjects—that   there   really   are   such  subjects,   and   that   they   are   not   merely   (in   some   sense)   splinters   of   a   greater,   universe-­‐sized  subject.  I  take  this  premise  to  have  empirical  support—we  experience  ourselves  as  such  subjects  (cf.  James  1912/2005:13-­‐14).  But  I  don’t  expect  others  to  find  this  evidence  uncontroversial,  and  am   therefore   prepared   to   accord   this   realism   the   status   of  mere   assumption.   The   assumption     3  The   dialectic   revolves   around   a   comparison   between   panpsychism   and  emergentism,   so   I   begin   by   outlining   this   comparison,   before   moving   to   a  discussion   of   the   combination   problem,   and   then   to   an   examination   of   the  difficulty  positing  micro-­‐subjects  causes  for  panpsychism—a  difficulty  it  cannot  overcome,  and  which  ultimately  motivates  theory-­‐change.    1.  Panpsychism  and  Emergentism    Panpsychism’s   metaphysical   and   explanatory   aspirations   can   be   clarified  through   comparison   with   emergentism.   The   general   idea   of   ‘emergence’  concerns  the  appearance  of  a  property  at  a  higher  level  of  being  or  organisation  which  is  absent  at  lower  levels.  Emergentism  takes  two  forms,  strong  and  weak.  Weak  emergentism  amounts  to  the  idea  that  the  novel  property  is  unpredictable  with  respect  to  the  lower-­‐level  base  from  which  it  arises.  But  this  is  taken  to  be  strictly   an   epistemological   limitation   for   those   studying   the   properties   of   the  lower-­‐level   base.   Perhaps   they   don’t   possess   every   scrap   of   lower-­‐level  information  relevant  to  the  generation  of  the  novel  property.  Or  perhaps  there  is  some   deeper   reason   why   occurrences   of   the   property   remain   unpredictable.7  Weak   emergentism   stops   short   of   claiming   that   emergents   are   ontological  novelties:  in  fact  they  are  taken  to  be  of  a  piece  with  their  bases,  and  in  principle  their   instantiations   are   wholly   deducible   (i.e.   for   an   ideal   reasoner).   Strong  emergentism,   by   contrast,   is   the   claim   that   some   properties   are   genuinely  ontologically  novel  with  respect  to  their  lower-­‐level  bases.  Strong  emergents  are  unpredictable   in   principle.   Such   properties   also   possess   autonomous   causal  powers.8  For   these   reasons   it   is   plausible   that   strong   emergentism   concerning  mental  properties  implies  property  dualism.9    Panpsychists   shun   emergentism,   especially   of   the   strong   variety.   They   might  allow  that  there  exists  a  contingent  gap  in  our  understanding  of  the  generation  of  macro-­‐mentality  from  its  material  underpinnings,  but  it  has  been  panpsychism’s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                prevents   the   panpsychist’s   dilemma   branching   into   a   tetralemma:   we   can   rule   out   subject  monism  or  nihilism  as  options.  Thanks  to  Luke  Roelofs  for  discussion  of  this  point.  7  Humans  might  not  be  intelligent  enough  to  carry  through  the  derivation,  for  example.    8  See  e.g.  Humphreys  1997.  9  See  e.g.  Brüntrup  1998.     4  raison   d’etre   to   preserve   ontological   continuity   between   the   world’s   lower  ontological   levels   and   the   conscious  macro-­‐mentality   arising   from   these   levels.  With   this   commitment   comes   the   doctrine   that   the   generation   of   conscious  mentality   from  material   underpinnings   is   in   principle   perspicuously   explicable.  This  idea  can  be  captured  by  saying  that  given  a  suitably  complete  catalogue  of  the  world’s  micro-­‐material   contents,   it   should  be   inconceivable10  that   ours   is   a  zombie  world—one   lacking  higher-­‐level   phenomenal   consciousness   of   the   sort  we   actually   enjoy.   Given   the   conceivability   of   physical   zombies,   panpsychists  deem  physicalist  ontology   short  on   resources   for   capturing   consciousness.  The  required   ‘extra’   is   to   be   supplied   by   a   distribution   of   micro-­‐phenomenal  properties   across   the   ultimates.   The   panpsychist   seeks   thereby   to   add   just  enough   to   the   world’s   micro-­‐ingredients,   as   conceived   by   physicalism,   to  logically   guarantee   the   instantiation   of   macro-­‐consciousness.   The   presence   of  macro-­‐consciousness   should   flow   from   the   properties   of   the   ultimates   plus  details  of  their  arrangement.        This   commitment   to   ‘smooth   transition’—i.e.   non-­‐emergence—is   on   display   in  the   main   philosophical   vertebrae   comprising   modern-­‐day   panpsychism:   the  writings   of   James,   Nagel   and   Strawson.     James,   the   father   of   modern  panpsychism,  found  that:     The  demand  for  continuity  has,  over  large  tracts  of  science,  proved  itself   to   possess   true   prophetic   power.   We   ought   therefore  ourselves   sincerely   to   try   every   possible   mode   of   conceiving   the  dawn  of  consciousness  so  that  it  may  not  appear  equivalent  to  the  irruption  into  the  universe  of  a  new  nature,  non-­‐existent  until  then.      And  the  explicit  reasoning  leading  James  to  panpsychism  went:  ‘If  evolution  is  to  work   smoothly,   consciousness   in   some   shape  must   have   been   present   at   the   very  origin  of  things.’11                                                                                                                    10  The  usual  restrictions  apply:  ideally  conceivable  for  an  idealised  reasoner.  See  Chalmers  2002  for  explanation  of  these  ideas.    11    1890:148-­‐149.     5  Nagel   is   largely   responsible   for   re-­‐igniting   interest   in   panpsychism   in   recent  decades,   having   been   brave   enough   to   examine   a   theory   of   mind   that,   as   the  twentieth   century   closed,   was   largely   ignored—or   else   considered   laughable.  The   key   premise   of   Nagel’s   argument   for   pansychism   is   his   rejection   of  emergence:     there   are   no   truly   emergent   properties   of   complex   systems.   All  properties  of  complex  systems  that  are  not  relations  between  it  and  something   else   derive   from   the   properties   of   its   constituents   and  their  effects  on  each  other  when  so  combined.12      From  this  principle,  plus  the  claims  that  a  conscious  being  is  constructible  from  mere  matter,  and   that  a  physicalist   construal  of   such  matter   (as   fundamentally  lacking   mentality)   cannot   account   for   consciousness,   Nagel   infers   that  consciousness  must  be  present  in  basic  matter.      Strawson’s  work  brought  panpsychism  to  the  attention,  and  critical  scrutiny,  of  mainstream   philosophers   of  mind,   also  making   a   new   generation   aware   of   its  appeal.  His  argument  for  panpsychism  departs  not  far  from  Nagel’s  formulation,  but  Strawson  contributes  a  clear  and  forceful  presentation,  allied  to  a  sustained  defence   of   the   non-­‐emergence   principle.   This   he   expresses  with   characteristic  pithiness:     You  can  get  liquidity  from  non-­‐liquid  molecules  as  easily  as  you  can  get  a  cricket  team  from  eleven  things  that  are  not  cricket  teams.  In  God’s   physics,   it   would   have   to   be   just   as   plain   how   you   get  experiential  phenomena   from  wholly  non-­‐experiential  phenomena  [i.e.  matter  as  construed  by  physicalism]13    In   understanding   the   production   of   liquidity   from   non-­‐liquid   components   we  move,   says   Strawson,   ‘in   a   small   set   of   conceptually   homogenous   shape-­‐size-­‐mass-­‐charge-­‐number-­‐position-­‐motion-­‐involving   physics   notions’ 14  These  notions   provide   no   conceptual   bridge   to   consciousness—hence   the                                                                                                                  12    1979:182.  13  2006:15.  14  2006:13.     6  conceivability   of   physical   zombies—so,   for   Strawson,   nothing   short   of   positing  phenomenality  as  a  property  of  the  ultimates  will  suffice  as  an  explanatory  basis  for  macro-­‐consciousness.      Panpsychism   thus   stands   opposed   to   emergentism.15  It   has   been   said   that  austere   reductive   physicalism   is   suited   to   those   with   a   taste   for   desert  landscapes.  Still,   from  the  panpsychist  perspective  such  physicalism,  along  with  dualism   and   emergentism,   all   seem   committed   to   discomfitingly   abrupt  ontological  inclines—spots  where  the  material  landscape  of  a  sudden  manifests  mentality,  having  just  previously  shown  not  the  least  sign  of  doing  so.  On  these  views   consciousness   irrupts   onto   the   scenery   unexpectedly,   in   sharply   jutting  outcrops.  Panpsychists  might   then  be  described  as   those   theorists  with  a   taste  for   only   gently   graded   landscapes.   They   decline   to   scale   the   sheer   slopes   of  sudden  mentality.    2.  Constitutive  Panpsychism  The  panpsychist  posits  mentality  as  a  fundamental  feature  of  matter  from  a  deep  commitment   to   the   non-­‐emergence   principle.   But   how   should   one   understand  the   relationship   between   this   basic   mentality   and   high-­‐level   consciousness?  Given  the  desire  for  a  smooth  and  intelligible  transition  from  the  micro-­‐material  to   the   macro-­‐conscious—what   Van   Cleve   dubs   panpsychism’s   ‘mereological  rationalism’ 16—the   natural   way   to   construe   the   relationship   between   the  mentality  of  the  ultimates  and  the  conscious  mentality  of  high-­‐level  individuals  is  to  say  the  former  is  constitutive  of  the  latter.      The   broad   idea   behind   this   constitutive  panpsychism17  is   as   follows.   Consider   a  macro-­‐subject,  one  of  us,  having  an  experience  of  being  cold,  tired  and  smelling  roast  beef.18  This  experience  is  unified  in  the  following  sense:  though  the  subject  can   attend  now   to   the   sensation  of   cold,   now   to  her   tiredness,   and  now   to   the                                                                                                                  15  Cf.   Van   Cleve   (1990),   who   responds   to   Nagel   by   arguing   that   emergentism   is   preferable   to  panpsychism  as  an  outcome  of  his  argument.    16  1990:  218.  17  The  name  is  due  to  Chalmers  (talk  at  Hochschule  of  Philosophy,  Munich,  June  2011).    18  The  example  is  Goff’s  (2009).     7  smell   of   roast   beef,   still,   phenomenologically-­‐speaking,   these   three   sensations  are   given   to   her   all   in   one   go.   Her   phenomenological   point   of   view   appears  suffused  by  all  three  together,  as  opposed  to  experiencing  them  only  discretely,  in  series.  It   is  the  presence  of  such  unified  phenomenal  fields  as  we  each  enjoy,  featuring  at  a  time  many  different  sorts  of  phenomenal  element,  that  any  theory  of   consciousness   must   adequately   explain.   On   constitutive   panpsychism   this  unified   experiential   field   is   literally   constituted   by   parts,   ultimates   in   the  subject’s  brain,  instantiating  just  those  qualities  that  feature  in  consciousness.  So  the  macro-­‐experience  of  feeling  cold,  tired  and  smelling  roast  beef  is  constituted  by   one   set   of   ultimates   instantiating   phenomenal   coldness,   another   set  instantiating   phenomenal   tiredness,   and   a   further   set   instantiating   roast   beef  smell.  These  groups  of  ultimates   together   compose   the   consciousness-­‐realising  portion  of  the  subject’s  brain.    This  is  an  over-­‐simplified  model  of  what  the  constitutive  panpsychist  intends,19  but   the   guiding   idea   is   clear   enough.   Any   phenomenal   qualities   figuring   in   the  macro-­‐experience   are   put   there   through   being   carried   by   the   phenomenally-­‐qualitied   ultimates   jointly   composing   the   relevant   part   of   the   subject’s   brain.  Thus  we   can   trace   the  macro-­‐phenomenology   to   the   phenomenal   states   of   the  ultimates   in   a   smooth   way,   and   panpsychists   can   account   for   the   macro-­‐experiential   state   in   terms   of   the   matter   composing   it.   This   explanatory  operation   is   essentially   no   more   difficult   than   accounting   for   the   overall  composition   of   a   painted   canvas   by   reference   to   the   various   patches   of   paint  filling   it,   along   with   their   qualities.   In   the   case   of   phenomenal   paint,   this   is  achieved  by  taking  phenomenal  qualities  to  belong  to  basic  matter,  and  by  taking  this   matter   not   only   to   materially   constitute   the   subject,   but   to   phenomenally  compose  her  experiential   field  as  well;   that   is  to  say,   the  phenomenal  quality  of  each  experiential  field-­‐composing  ultimate  finds  its  way  into  the  conscious  state  enjoyed  by  the  subject.                                                                                                                      19  For   one   thing,   there  will   have   to   be   some   sort   of  qualitative  blending   or  pooling   among   the  qualities   carried   by   each   ultimate:   if   each   ultimate’s   quality   showed   up   as   such   in   the  macro-­‐experience,  it  would  lack  the  notable  homogeneity  of  (e.g.)  color  experience,  and  plausibly  some  mixing  of  basic  qualities   is   required   to  obtain   the  qualities  of  macro-­‐experience.   I   revisit   these  issues   from   section   4   onwards,   arguing   that   they   are   not   terribly   problematic   for   panpsychist  models  of  combination.     8  The  experiential  field,  composed  in  this  way  by  the  relevant  micro-­‐phenomenal  items,  counts  as  what  O’Connor  and  Wong  term  a  ‘structural  property’,  where:     there  is  nothing  more  to  having  the  structural  property  than  being  composed   by   parts   having   certain   other   properties   and   bearing  certain  relations  to  one  another—it  is  ontologically  reducible.20    In  our  case,   instantiating  the  macro-­‐experience  of  coldness,  tiredness  and  roast  beef   smell   is   nothing   more   than   having   a   certain   brain-­‐state   composed   of  ultimates   some   of   which   instantiate   phenomenal   coldness,   some   phenomenal  tiredness,   and   some   phenomenal   roast   beef   smell.21  Constitutive   panpsychism  thus  successfully  evades  emergentism,  providing  a  satisfactory  realisation  story  for   macro-­‐experientiality   by   its   material   underpinnings.   Put   in   the   terms  employed  earlier  to  capture  the  panpsychist’s  explanatory  ambitions:  it  ought  to  be   that   given   full   specification   of   the   ultimates   composing   the   subject’s  experience,   including   details   of   the   phenomenal   quality   each   carries,   it   is  inconceivable   both   that   this  micro-­‐material   setup   obtains   and   that   the   subject  does  not  instantiate  an  experiential  state  featuring  coldness,  tiredness  and  roast  beef   smell.   Since   the   phenomenally-­‐qualitied   ultimates   in   question   (jointly)  instantiate  these  very  qualities,  and  constitute  the  subject’s  experience,  this  test  appears   to   be   passed.   The   absence   of   the   subject’s   experience   seems   no  more  conceivable  than  the  absence  of  a  certain  painting  once  we  have  stipulated  that  a  set  of  paint  patches  is  arranged  thus-­‐and-­‐so,  in  these-­‐and-­‐those  colors.    Constitutive   panpsychism   is   thus   faithful   to   the   panpsychist’s   core   concern:   to  posit   enough   in   the   material   fundamentals   for   a   smooth   realisation   story   for  macro-­‐consciousness.   Indeed,   it   seems   the   most   natural   way   of   meeting   the  panpsychist’s   explanatory   requirements.   So   I   will   henceforth   equate   (anti-­‐emergentist)  panpsychism  with  constitutive  panpsychism.                                                                                                                    20  2005:10.  See  also  Armstrong  1978.  Note  that  the  anti-­‐emergence  premise  in  Nagel’s  argument  for   panpsychism   expresses   the   same   idea.   The   panpsychist   anti-­‐emergence   principle   is  effectively  the  claim  that  all  non-­‐basic  properties  are  structural.    21  Wong  and  O’Connor’s  characterisation  requires  that  the  components  not  possess  the  higher-­‐level   property.   This   requirement   is   met   in   the   present   case:   the   higher-­‐level   property   is   of  experiencing   coldness   and   tiredness   and   roast   beef   smell,   and   no   ultimate   possesses   this  conjunctive  property.       9  3.  Panpsychism  and  Micro-­‐Subjects  The   panpsychist’s   ultimates   possess   phenomenal   qualities.   For   example,   the  ultimates   constituting   the   experience   just   considered   possessed   phenomenal  qualities   like   phenomenal   coldness,   tiredness   and   roast   beef   smell.   But  phenomenal   qualities   are   properties   that   characterise   conscious   experience   of  the   sort  we   (macro-­‐subjects)   enjoy;   they   are   those   qualities   such   that   there   is  something   it   is   like22  to   have   them,   something   it   is   like,   crucially,   for   the   haver.  But  if  they  are  like  something  for  the  haver,  that  haver  would  seem  a  fortiori  to  be  a   subject  of   experience—since  a   subject   is   just   that   sort  of   entity   for  whom  anything   can   be   like   anything   at   all.   This   ‘for’,   in   other   words,   seems   to   drag  ineluctably  in  its  wake  the  notion  of  subjectivity,  and  its  corollary,  the  notion  of  a  phenomenological  point  of  view.  Something  can  be  like  something  for  you  but  not  like  anything  for  me  precisely  because  we  are  distinct  subjects  occupying  distinct  points   of   view   in   (and   upon)   the   world.   So   it   would   appear   that   phenomenal  qualities  necessarily  exist  as  belonging  to  subjects.  This,   in  turn,  would  convert  the   ultimates   into   subjects,   since   the   panpsychist’s   ultimates   possess  phenomenal  qualities.   It’s   unsurprising,   then,   that  most  historical  panpsychists  agree  that  the  ultimates  are  subjects  of  experience.    As  Goff  says:  ‘If  panpsychism  is   true   then   physical   ultimates   are   subjects   of   experience…there   is   something  that  it’s  like  to  be  a  physical  ultimate.’23  Strawson  is  equally  clear  on  this  point.24    For   constitutive   panpsychists,   then,   human   experiencers   are   at   bottom  constituted  by  materially  fundamental   ‘micro-­‐subjects’—corresponding  to  basic  physical   particles—who   are   the   first   holders   of   the   phenomenal   qualities   we  enjoy  atop  our  macroscopic  perches.      We   must   now   ask:   What   is   the   relationship   between   the   subjectivity   of   these  fundamental   subjects   and   the   unified,   single-­‐perspective   subjectivity   of   the  human   subjects   they   compose?   For   simplicity   we’ll   consider   only   the  relationship   between   ultimate-­‐subjects   and   human   subjects,   without   worrying                                                                                                                  22  This,   and   related   phrases   (e.g.   ‘what-­‐it-­‐is-­‐likeness’)   commonly   used   to   evoke   phenomenal  consciousness  derive  from  Nagel  1974.  23  Goff  2009:301.  24  See  his  2006.     10  whether  the  ultimate-­‐subjects  also  compose  subjects  composing  us,  e.g.  subjects  corresponding  to  brain-­‐hemispheres.    We  grasped  well  enough,  in  outline,  the  constitution  of  a  macro-­‐qualitative  state  of   coldness,   tiredness  and   roast  beef   smell   by   adverting   to   composing   ultimates  which  jointly  instantiated  just  those  qualities.  It  was  something  like  the  way  we  understand  the  composition  of  a  painting  by  thinking  about  the  various  painted  patches  filling  the  canvas:  we  consider  their  qualities   in   isolation,  and  see  how,  by   assembling   the   qualitative   patches,   we   obtain   the   complete   image.   But,   we  will   see,   there   is   no   way   to   understand,   in   parallel   fashion,   the   assembly   of  subjects   into  a   larger  subject.  Subjects  do  not  combine.  This   leaves  constitutive  panpsychism   in   a   pickle.   To   lay   the   ground   for   this   difficulty,   it’s   time   we  introduced  the  notorious  combination  problem  for  panpsychism.    4.  The  Combination  Problem  Seager  coined  the  name,25  describing   the  combination  problem  as   ‘the  problem  of   explaining  how   complex   conscious   states   emerge   from   the  primitive  mental  states  ascribed   [by  panpsychists]   to…fundamental  entities’.26  This   specification,  however,  is  ambiguous  between  two  distinct  difficulties  in  particular.  I  will  argue  that   only   the   second,   the   subject   combination   problem,   need   seriously   worry  panpsychists.  Unfortunately,   this   difficulty   is   also   insuperable,   and   it   is   on   this  rock  that  traditional  panpsychism  runs  aground.    The  combination  problem  is  originally  due  to  James,  who  famously  formulates  it  thus:     Take   a   hundred   [feelings],   shuffle   them   and   pack   them   as   close  together  as  you  can  (whatever  that  might  mean);  still  each  remains  the   same   feeling   it   always   was,   shut   in   its   own   skin,   windowless,  ignorant  of  what  the  other  feelings  are  and  mean.  There  would  be  a  hundred-­‐and-­‐first   feeling   there,   if,   when   a   group   or   series   of   such  feelings  were  set  up,  a  consciousness  belonging  to  the  group  as  such  should   emerge.   And   this   101st   feeling  would   be   a   totally   new   fact;                                                                                                                  25  Seager  1995.  26  MS:6.     11  the  100  original  feelings  might,  by  a  curious  physical  law,  be  a  signal  for   its   creation,  when   they   came   together;   but   they  would   have   no  substantial   identity   with   it,   nor   it   with   them,   and   one   could   never  deduce  the  one  from  the  others,  or  (in  any  intelligible  sense)  say  that  they  evolved  it.27    To   isolate   the   two   versions   of   the   combination   problem,   we   should   examine  what  James  means  by  ‘feeling’.    There  are  two  possibilities,  which  are  not  usually  distinguished.   First,   James   may   simply   mean   by   ‘feeling’   something   like  ‘qualitative  element’,  a  notion  explained  as  follows.  Consider  your  current  overall  phenomenal   field—your   complete   experience,   such   that   this   comprises   other  things  which  could  be  called  experiences  (like  the  feeling  of  your  bottom  on  your  chair,  or  your  visual  experience  of  this  page)  and  such  that  this  experience  is  not  itself   a   component   of   any   further   experience.   It   is   a  maximal   property   of   you.  Now  isolate  a  single  component  of  your  complete  experience:  for  convenience  let  it  be  the  visual  experience  as  of  this  page,  a  largely  white  field  with  black  shapes  across   it.   This   visual   experience   of   the   white   and   black   page   is   a   ‘qualitative  element’   of   the   overall   qualitative   phenomenal   field   you   enjoy,   across   your  various  senses  and  faculties.      What   is   notable   about   this   particular   qualitative   element,   which   goes   for   any  other  we  care  to  describe,  is  that  we  specified  its  intrinsic  character  without  any  essential  reference  to  the  subject  in  fact  enjoying  it:  you.  We  have  no  need,  in  the  normal   course   of   things,   to   mention   the   subject   when   enumerating   the  qualitative   elements   she   enjoys.   You   are,   for   common   sense   anyhow,   the   only  subject  enjoying  this  token  visual  experience  of  this  page.  So  we  can  specify  the  experience,   this   component   of   your   complete   experience,   purely   in   qualitative  terms—in   terms   of   the   qualities   you   experience   in   having   it.   These   are,   as  we  said,   something   like  a   field  of  white  and   smaller  black   shapes   running  across   it.  Thus  considered  in  abstraction  from—without  mentioning—the  fact  of  its  being                                                                                                                  27  1890:160.     12  enjoyed  by  a  subject,  the  experience  is  a  mere  qualitative  element  of  your  overall  experience.  By  ‘feeling’  James  could  have  meant  this  sort  of  thing.28    But  when   James   speaks  of   the  assembly  of   feelings  producing   ‘a   consciousness  belonging   to   the  group  as  such…a  101st   feeling’,   it   suggests  a  different  sense  of  ‘feeling’,  one  more  distant  from  everyday  talk,   though,  one  might  think,  a  sense  congenial   to   panpsychists.   This   is   a   use   of   ‘feeling’   which   James   apparently  considers   synonymous   with   ‘subject’,   since   he   employs   the   terms   ‘a  consciousness’   and   ‘a   feeling’   interchangeably.   As   noted   earlier,   consciousness  entails  its  being  like  something  for  someone,  and  that  someone  is  a  subject.        So,   on  one   reading   James’s   ‘feelings’   are  qualitative   elements   experienced  by   a  subject,  and  on  the  other  they  are  experiencing  subjects  themselves.  The  first  is  the   more   common   understanding,   since   we   typically   talk   about   the   feelings   a  subject   enjoys—those   qualitative   elements   ‘before’   her   in   consciousness—without   bothering   explicitly   to   invoke   the   presence   of   the   subject   herself.    We  simply   specify   these   elements   via   the   different   qualities   they   exemplify.  Nota  bene:  There  is,  as  yet,  no  insinuation  that  qualitative  elements  could  exist  outside  of   being   experienced  by   subjects.   The  point   is   only   that   they   can  be   described  without  including  subjectivity  into  the  description.    Given   these   two  readings  of   ‘feeling’,  we  now  have   two  ways  of  understanding  the  problem   James  wants   to  highlight.   Providing  his  use  of   ‘feeling’   is  univocal  throughout  the  quoted  passage,29  it  seems  James  either  claims  that:    1.  Qualitative   elements   cannot   be   assembled   so   as   to   have   a   substantial   identity  with  their  product.    or:                                                                                                                  28  I  note  that  some  (e.g.  Kriegel  2009)  believe  there  to  be  a  distinctive  ‘me-­‐ness’  quality  present  in   experience.   If   this   is   right   there   is   at   least   one   qualitative   element   that   can’t   be   specified  without  mentioning  the  subject.  I’m  not  acquainted  with  the  ‘me-­‐ness’  quality,  however.  29  Perhaps  it  isn’t.  But  then  I  am  at  a  loss  to  reconstruct  the  difficulty  James  has  in  mind.       13  2.  Subjects  of  experience  cannot  be  assembled  so  as  to  have  a  substantial   identity  with  their  product.    I  understand  James’s  term  ‘substantial  identity’  as  follows.  James  half-­‐unpacks  it,  as  part  of  his  denial   that  the  hundred  feelings  could  form  a  substantial   identity  with   the  one-­‐hundred-­‐and-­‐first,   by   saying   the  product   could  never  be  deduced  from   its   antecedents.   So   James  means  by   ‘substantial   identity’   just   the   idea  we  have   been   operating  with   on   the   anti-­‐emergentist   panpsychist’s   behalf:   it   is   a  product  that  does  not  emerge  from  its  ingredients  (‘emerge’  in  the  bad  sense  of  strongly  emerge),30  but  which  is  perspicuously  and  smoothly  derived  from  their  arrangement:   a   structural   property.   This   reading   is   reinforced   by   James’s   final  phrase,  where  he  parses  a  substantial  identity  as  an  item  that  intelligibly  evolves  from   its   antecedents.   Claim   1,   then,   asserts   that   a   complex   qualitative   field  cannot  intelligibly  (non-­‐emergently,  structurally)  be  assembled  from  qualitative  ingredients.   Claim   2   asserts   that   a   macro-­‐subject   cannot   intelligibly   (non-­‐emergently,  structurally)  be  assembled  from  micro-­‐subjects.    Before  assessing  these  claims,  we  can  now  see  how  Seager’s  talk  of  the  ‘problem  of   explaining  how   complex   conscious   states   emerge   from   the  primitive  mental  states’,   did   not   tell   us   whether   the   challenge   concerned   the   ‘emergence’  (presumably   Seager’s   is   the   innocuous   sense   of   ‘emerge   from’,   equivalent   to  ‘derive  from’)  of  complex  qualitative  fields  from  simpler  qualitative  ingredients,  or   the   emergence   of   a   higher-­‐level   subject   from   subject-­‐components.   The  Jamesian   ambiguity   is   also   present,   to   a   lesser   degree,   in   Goff’s   work   on   the  combination   problem.   Though  Goff   tends   to   avoid   ambiguous   formulations,   he  does   fluctuate   between   describing   the   difficulty   in   quality-­‐based   and   subject-­‐based   terms,   even   within   the   same   article.   Perhaps   he   is   best   understood   as  holding   that   both   aspects   of   the   combination   problem   are   equally   serious   for  panpsychists.31                                                                                                                  30  For,  recall,  weak  emergents  are  in  principle  fully  explicable.  31  Goff’s   2006,   for   instance,   employs   the   example   of   the   combination   of   ten   slight   pains   into   a  single   severe   pain.   At   times   Goff   talks   as   if   the   problem   is   understanding   the   qualitative  combination  (since  ten  slight  pains  are  not  the  same  thing  as  one  severe  pain)  and  elsewhere  he     14  I  do  not  agree  that  this  is  so,  however—that  both  problems  are  equally  serious.  The   reason   is   that   there   is   simply   no   ‘combination   problem’   as   concerns   the  assembly   of   qualitative   instances   into   a   qualitative   whole.   There   is   little  challenging   in   the   notion   of   taking   ingredients,   each  with   a   certain   qualitative  character,  and  putting  them  together  into  a  whole  whose  macroscopic  qualitative  character  is  the  intelligible  product  of  the  qualities  of  the  components  plus  their  arrangement.   There   are   a   few   different   relevant   conceptual   models   we   have  available   from   everyday   life,   and   it   might   be   that   phenomenal   qualitative  combination   conforms   to   any   one   (or   more)   of   these.   Again,   phenomenal  qualitative  combination  may  have  its  own  rules;  but  there  seems  little  reason  to  think  there  is  anything  much  more  conceptually  challenging  in  such  combination  than  there  is  in  the  everyday  models  of  qualitative  combination.32    We   considered   already   a  merely   additive  model,   on  which   the   qualities   of   the  composite  are  simply  the  organized  set  of  those  instantiated  by  its  components.  Our   illustrative   analogy   for   this   kind   of   combination   was   a   painting’s  composition   by   qualitatively   distinct,   determinate   paint   patches.   Perhaps  phenomenal  qualitative  combination  is  like  this.  Of  course,  the  additive  model  is  simplistic,  even  as  regards  building  a  painting.  In  painting  an  important  element,  something   the  artist  spends  considerable   time  on,   is   the  blending  of  qualitative  instances.   A   red   patch  mixed  with   a   dab   of   blue  will   give   purple,  wherein   the  antecedent   qualitative   instances   survive   in   their   contribution   to   the   blend.  Variously  colored  rays  of  light  blend  differently  (as  common  sense  views  things):  here  the  blending  of  the  various  qualities  gives  white—in  painting  it  gives  black.  Some  such  blending  mechanism  will  surely  be  an  important  component  of  micro-­‐quality   combination   into  macro-­‐qualia.   In   any  of   these   cases   just   considered—additive,  or  blending,  or  a  combination  of  both—a  synchronous  snapshot  of  the  composite   can   be   intelligibly   related   to   its   component   qualitative   elements,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                seems   to   suggest   that  what   blocks   combination   is   the   fact   that   each   pain   is   associated  with   a  distinct  subject.    32  This  is  not  to  say  the  rules  will  be  graspable  just  from  consideration  of  uncombined  qualitative  ingredients.  We  had  to  study  chemical  reactions  to  understand  the  generation  of  the  properties  of  NaCl  from  its  antecedents,  for  example  (at  the  time  he  writes,  Broad  1925  considers  chemical  properties   emergent).   But   after   the   fact   we   are   able   to   see   how   the   high-­‐level   properties   are  structurally  produced.  It  may  well  be  the  same  for  macro-­‐qualitative  combination.       15  which  can  be   readily   conceived  as  persisting  via   the  ongoing  contribution   they  make   to   the  new  quality   instantiated   (take   the  blueness   away   from   the  purple  paint-­‐dab  and  you  are  left  with  red,  altering  the  quality  of  the  whole).  There  is,  in  short,   no   serious   difficulty   associated  with   the   idea   of   a   complex  macroscopic  qualitative  state  being  the  combination  of  a  set  of  simpler  quality  instances.  The  first   Jamesian  combination  problem,  then,   is  no  real  problem  at  all.  For  homely  confirmation   of   this,   we   can   think   about   the   way   we   easily   understand   the  combination  of  the  various  flavours  we  taste  in  a  meal  into  a  gustatory  gestalt.      What   of   the   second   putative   problem,   concerning   the   combination   of   subjects  into  a  ‘larger’  subject?  This  is  the  real  combination  problem.    5.  Subjects  do  not  Combine  Goff   argues   that   the   existence   of   a   set   of   subjects,   however   arranged,   never   a  priori   entails   the   existence   of   another   subject,   thus   panpsychism’s   explanatory  project   falters.33  Goff   is   correct,   but   the   situation   for   panpsychists   is   far  worse  than  he  estimates,  both  epistemically  and  metaphysically.  By  Goff’s  argument  we  cannot   see   how   the   combination   of   micro-­‐subjects   could   provide   for   the  existence   of   a  macro-­‐subject.   I   argue   that  we   can   see  how   the   combination   of  micro-­‐subjects   could   not   provide   for   the   existence   of   a   macro-­‐subject.   The  combination  of  subjects  is  a  demonstrably  incoherent  notion,  not  just  one  lacking  in  a  priori  intelligibility  or  evident  necessity.  Goff’s  epistemic  argument  leaves  it  open  that  subjects  might  combine  as  the  panpsychist  envisages;  my  metaphysical  argument   rules   this   out,   thus   ruling   out   constitutive   panpsychism.   Before  proceeding  with   the  argument,  we  need  to  say  a  bit  more  about   the  concept  of  combination,  and  how  we  understand  subjects  of  experience.      Earlier   we   connected   the   notion   of   a   subject   with   that   of   a   point   of   view.34  Neither  notion   is  easy   to  get  a  grip  on,  but  noting  one  or   two  basic   features  of  each  will  help  to  make  their  interrelation  clear  enough  for  present  purposes.  The  idea   of   being   a   subject   goes   with   being   an   experiential   entity,   something                                                                                                                  33  Goff  2009.    34  A  conceptual  connection  salient  in  Nagel’s  work,  for  example  the  second  half  of  his  1979.     16  conscious   of   phenomenal   qualities.   That   a   given   subject   has   a   particular  phenomenological   point   of   view   can   be   taken   as   saying   that   there   exists   a  discrete   ‘sphere’   of   conscious-­‐experiential   goings-­‐on   corresponding   to   this  subject,   with   regard   to   which   other   subjects   are   distinct   in   respect   of   the  phenomenal  qualities  they  experience,  and  they  have  no  direct  (i.e.  experiential)  access  to  the  qualitative  field  enjoyed  by  the  first  subject.  A  subject,  then,  can  be  thought   of   as   a   point   of   view   annexed   to   a   private   qualitative   field   (this   is   a  conceptual   bifurcation   for   now—these   aspects   may   be   metaphysically  inextricable).   A   thought   experiment   will   exhibit   the   interrelation   between   a  subject’s  point  of  view  and  those  qualities  within  her  experiential  ambit.  Imagine  a  hundred  qualitatively  identical  subjects  at  the  ‘starting  line’  of  existence—their  only   difference   is   that   they   occupy   distinct   positions   in   space-­‐time.   They   are  about   to   set   out   on   their   lives.   As   time   winds   on,   each   takes   a   unique   path  through   the   environment,   and   is   impinged   upon   differently.   These   different  impingings   result   in   different   modifications   of   each   sensory   field.   Thus   each  subjectival  perspective  has  access  to  a  qualitatively  different  array  of  qualia,  as  compared  with   other   subjects,   over   its   lifetime.   It   is   the   fact   of   these   different  points   of   view,   these   differently   located   ‘lookouts’   on   the   world,   that   then  grounds  the  character  of  the  peculiar  set  of  qualities  each  subject  experiences  at  a  given  time.35      Our  template   for  combination   is   the  assembly  of   two  hydrogen  and  one  oxygen  atom  into  a  molecule  of  water.  First  we’ll  consider  the  combination  in  particular-­‐terms,  then  in  property-­‐terms.  These  two  modes  function  in  much  the  same  way,  the  reason  being  that  they  operate  in  parallel:  combination  of  particulars  occurs  thanks   to   the   integration   of   their   properties,   and   combination   of   properties  occurs   as   the   bearers   of   the   properties   are   combined.   When   hydrogen   and  oxygen  atoms  combine   into  water   they  bond  covalently,   sharing  electrons.  The  oxygen   atom   completes   its   outer   shell   by   borrowing   an   electron   from   each  hydrogen.   Thus   the   three   atoms   are   deformed,   intrinsically   modified,   by  participating   in   the   combination   of   water.   Yet,   importantly,   all   three   atoms                                                                                                                  35  Cf.  Russell’s  ‘cameras’  (1927b:122).  What  must  also  help  fix  the  range  of  qualities  a  subject  is  capable  of  is  the  subject’s  own  physical  constitution.     17  continue  to  exist  once  combination   is  achieved.  Their  union  modifies  them,  but  they  survive  in  the  whole,  making  an  ongoing  contribution  to  its  nature.  This  is  clear  enough,  for  were  we  to  remove  one  of  the  hydrogens  (say)  the  result  would  be   destruction   of   the  water  molecule.   Combination,   thus,   is   the   formation   of   a  whole   from  components  where   the  components  continue   to  exist   in   the  whole,  but  are  intrinsically  altered  by  combining  with  one  another.  This  is  as  against  a  mere  aggregation  of  items,  which  need  not  condition  or  unite  those  items  in  any  way.  Other  intuitive  examples  are  the  combination  of  qualitatively  and  spatially  distinct  paint  patches  into  a  painting,  and  the  combination  of  cooking  ingredients  into  a  meal.  The  survival  of  the  components  is  entailed  by  saying  the  product  is  their   combination   or   union,   as   opposed   to   being   merely   their   effect   or  descendant.    Turning   now   to   properties:   a   combination   or   unity   possesses   novel   systemic  powers.  A  water  molecule  forms  a  dipole:  its  charge  is  ‘two-­‐faced’,  being  negative  towards   the   oxygen   side   and   positive   towards   the   hydrogen   side.   This   feature  accounts   for   the   way   water   molecules   bond,   and   water’s   boiling   point.   An  aggregate’s   powers,   by   contrast,   are   a  mere   jumble   of   the   powers   of   its   parts.      What   is   the   relationship   of   a   unity’s   new   systemic   power   to   the   powers   of   its  isolated,   pre-­‐combination   parts?   The   distinctive   power   of   the   combination   is  novel,   in   that   none   of   its   parts   possesses   it.   It   is   not   however   an   autonomous  higher-­‐level   power,   in   the   sense   of   being   inexplicable   with   reference   to   the  powers  of  the  parts.  Such  autonomous  higher-­‐level  powers  are  characteristic  of  emergents.  The  systemic  powers  of  unities  are,  rather,  structural  properties.  The  dipolar  property  of  a  water  molecule  is  intelligible  as  the  interactive  organization  of   the   charges   of   its   constituent   atoms:   these   charges   are   arranged   so   they  interact  (thus  altering  their  bearers  intrinsically—electrons  become  prised  away  and  shared),  and  the  upshot  of  their  interaction,  their  combination  as  charges,  is  the   dipolarity   of   the   molecule.   The   electrons   loaned   to   the   molecule   by   the  hydrogens  spend  most  time  around  the  oxygen  atom,  giving  this  side  a  relatively  negative   charge,   and   the   hydrogen   side   a   relatively   positive   charge.   As   with  particular-­‐combination,  it  is  crucial  that  the  pre-­‐combination  ingredients—  here  properties—survive   in   the   unity:   the   charges   of   the   pre-­‐combination   atoms,     18  though  modified  by  combining,  survive  in  the  ongoing  contribution  they  make  to  the  polarity  of  the  molecule.  If  any  of  those  charges  ceased  to  exist,  the  molecule  could  not  have  the  dipolarity  it  actually  manifests.      If  micro-­‐subjects  combined  into  macro-­‐subjects,  then,  what  we  should  anticipate  is   their   coming   together   closely   enough   to   interact,   thereby   modifying   their  properties,  whilst   all   the  while   they   survived   in   the  whole   they   formed.   Their  persistence  in  the  whole  would  amount  to  an  ongoing  contribution,  in  respect  of  their  natures,  to  the  product,  as  with  atoms  in  a  water  molecule.  The  constitutive  panpsychist  posits   subjectivity—which  we  analysed  as   the  having  of  a  point  of  view   to   which   qualities   are   present—as   a   fundamental   feature   of   matter,   the  model   being   other   fundamental   properties   like   mass   and   charge.   Now,   it   is  important   to   note   that   basic   mass   and   charge   are   directly   relevant   to   their  higher-­‐level  instantiations.  The  mass  of  a  helium  atomic  nucleus  is  the  mass  of  its  two  protons  and  two  neutrons,  minus  the  energy  used  to  bond  them  together  (a  good  example  of   combination).  We  have  already  seen   that  a  H2O’s  dipolarity   is  the   product   of   the   charges   of   its   atomic   parts;   their   charges   in   turn   are   the  product  of  those  pertaining  to  their  subatomic  constituents,  and  so  on  down  to  the   fundamental   level.   The   same   pattern   goes   for   instantiations   of   mass   and  charge   at   higher   levels   of   being:   both   are  ultimately   the   result   of  mass/charge  interactions  at  lower  levels,  down  to  the  ultimates.  In  a  way  the  very  reason  for  the  positing  of  fundamental  mass  and  charge  has  been  to  account  for  higher-­‐level  instantiations  of  these  properties,  those  directly  observable  by  us.  Similarly,  with  subjectivity   a   high-­‐level   feature   manifest   to   us,   the   constitutive   panpsychist  posits  fundamental  subjectivity  to  account  for  these  high-­‐level  instances.  For  this  to  work,   fundamental   instances  of  subjectivity—ultimate-­‐subjects—would  have  to   ‘add   up   to’   bigger   subjects,   as   fundamental   charges   and   masses   produce  higher-­‐level  instances  of  these  properties.      But   this  cannot  work,   simply  because  points  of  view  cannot  combine.  Consider  two  micro-­‐subjects,   eager   for   combination   into   a   higher-­‐level   individual.   How  might   they   combine?   Since   this   is   combination,   we   want   the   ingredients   to  survive   in   the   whole.   Just   as   atoms   are   not   obliterated,   only   deformed,   in     19  building  a  molecule,  subjects  would  have  to  persist  as  such  within  their  higher-­‐level   product.   This  means  we   can   rule   out   immediately   a   scenario  where   after  integration   just   a   single   subject   exists.   If   one   subject   is   left  where   formerly  we  had  two,  this  means  at  least  one  subject  has  gone  out  of  existence,  which  is  not  combination   but   a   fight   to   the   death.   It   doesn’t   improve   matters   if   we   try   to  imagine   the   two  original   subjects   as   somehow  each   contributing   a   ‘quantity   of  point-­‐of-­‐view-­‐edness’   to   the   surviving   subject.36  For   the   two   to   survive   in   the  whole  as  subjects,   there  would  have  to  persist  (at   least)  two  points  of  view.  Yet  by  hypothesis  we  have  a  single  subjective  point  of  view  left  over.  Thus  one  point  of  view,  and  corresponding  subject,  has  wholly  ceased  to  exist.  There’s  really  no  such  thing  as  a  ‘quantity’  of  point-­‐of-­‐view-­‐edness,  or  perspective.  Points  of  view  are   binary   entities:   they   exist   either   wholly   or   not   at   all.   Talk   of   subjects  contributing  quantities  of  point-­‐of-­‐view-­‐edness  to  other  subjects  could  really  only  mean  the  contribution  of  experiential  contents:  Perhaps  by  telepathy  you  could  add  to  my  stock  of  experienced  qualitative  elements,  by  giving  me  access  to  your  chocolate-­‐qualia.  But  this  isn’t  to  add  any  of  your  perspective  to  mine,  only  to  add  a  bit  of  what  yours  is  a  perspective  on.  Let’s  stipulate  that  the  singleton  successor  to  our  micro-­‐subject  pair  requires  the  donation  of  one  of  its  predecessors’  points  of   view,   so   there’s   a   point   of   view   around   after   integration.   But   with   this  contribution  made,  there’s  nothing  for  the  other  original  micro-­‐subject  to  add  to  the  successor  in  respect  of  its  having  a  point  of  view,  on  this  scenario  where  we  end  up  with  a  single  unified  perspective.  All  that  seems  required  of  her,  qua  point  of  view,  is  her  quiet  disappearance.  What  could  this  point  of  view  now  add  to  her  successor  except  her  subjective  diversity,  which  would  precisely  be  disruptive  of  its   one-­‐ness?  Thus   if   one   point   of   view   remains   at   least   one   point   of   view  has  been  eliminated,37  which  is  not  combination.38                                                                                                                  36  Thanks  to  a  reviewer  for  this  suggestion.  37  Whether  both  of  the  original  points  of  view  are  eliminated  depends  on  whether  we  construe  the  survivor  as  identical  to  one  of  the  originals,  or  as  a  descendant  inheriting  a  point  of  view.  But  since  points  of  view  correspond  to  subjects,  it  seems  that  the  survivor  will  be  identical  with  one  of  the  originals:  whosoever  donates  the  surviving  point  of  view.    38  The  proposal  that  some  subjects  are  eliminated  in  combination  might  not  seem  so  terrible  to  panpsychists,   even   if   it   doesn’t   qualify   as   ‘combination’   under   our   rubric.   In   the   next   section   I  explain  why  this  option  (unacceptably)  implies  emergentism.     20  The   two   original   points   of   view  must   survive   in   combination.   But  we   can   also  rule   out   a   scenario  where  precisely   their   two  points   of   view   remain.  What  we  wanted  was   to   assemble   our   two   subjects   so   as   to   constitute   a  unified   higher-­‐level   subject,   with   its   own   point   of   view.   If   we   are   left   with   all   and   only   the  original  pair  of  points  of  view  then  we  still  have  a  multitude,  and  are  nowhere  nearer  to  the  genuine  combination  of  subjectivities  into  one  subject.  This  would  be  so  even  were  both  subjects  for  some  reason  to  experience  just  the  same  range  of  qualities  for  a  time.  There  would  still  be  two  distinct  token  experiencings  of—perspectives  on—these  qualities.      The   serious   constitutive   panpsychist   proposal,   therefore,   is   this:   integration   of  our  two  subjects  must  produce  a  third  subject.  Might  this  represent  some  sort  of  overarching  ‘über-­‐subject’,  comprising  as  constituents  the  two  antecedent  points  of   view,  which   survive   in   the  whole?   As   regards   experiential   contents,   we   can  imagine  the  über-­‐subject’s  experiential   field  to  be  the  qualitative  product  of   the  experiential  contents  of  the  originals,  according  to  our  best  model  of  qualitative  combination.   If   one   antecedent   subject   experiences   a   unitary   phenomenal  blueness,   the   other   redness,   the   über-­‐subject   experiences   both   colors,   perhaps  blended  into  a  purple  block,  or  as  stripes.      Yet  we  are  still  no  closer  to  combining  points  of  view,  even  if  we  have  made  some  ground   in   integrating  experiential   contents.  Under   this   scenario  we  have   three  points  of  view  in  play—those  of  the  original  duo,  plus  that  of  the  new  subject.  Is  it   possible   to   understand   the   original   two  points   of   view  as  components   of   the  third?   It   is   not.   Here   are   two   ways   to   see   this,   both   of   which   bear   out   the  essential  discreteness  of  subject-­‐perspectives:    Consider   the   original   duo’s   points   of   view.   One—Blue’s—is   pervaded   by   a  unitary  blueness,   the  other—Red’s—by  redness,  and  that   is  all   they  experience,  respectively.   To   say   these   points   of   view   were   present   as   components   in   the  experiential  perspective  of  the  über-­‐subject  (‘Ub’)  would  therefore  be  to  say  that  Ub   experienced   a   unitary   phenomenal   blueness   and   a   unitary   phenomenal  redness,   i.e.  had  synchronous  experiences  as  of  each  of  these  qualities  alone,  to     21  the   exclusion   of   all   others.   For   it   is   these   qualities   each   on   their   own   that  characterise,   respectively,   the   perspectives   of   the   original   duo.   Experience  excludes,  as  well  as  includes.  Yet  nowhere  does  Ub  have  any  such  experiences:  he  precisely  combines  his  predecessors’  qualitative  experiential  contents.  Ub  doesn’t  experience   red-­‐to-­‐the-­‐exclusion-­‐of-­‐(blue-­‐and)-­‐all-­‐else,   nor   blue-­‐to-­‐the-­‐exclusion-­‐of-­‐(red-­‐and)-­‐all-­‐else,   let   alone—impossibly—both   together.   Thus   the  original   points   of   view   are   not   ingredients   in   Ub’s   subjectivity.   Only   their  contents—the  redness  and  blueness—are.  There  are  some  deceptive  conceptual  possibilities  in  the  neighborhood:  We  might  imagine,  first,  Ub  with  ‘stereoscopic’  vision—two  visual  fields,  one  filled  with  blue,  the  other  with  red.  But  that  is  one  point  of  view  experiencing  blue  and  red  conjunctively,  nothing   like  the  original  two  points  of  view.   If   these  visual   fields  are  genuinely  experientially   separated,  on   the  other  hand,   i.e.   not   given   to   the   same   consciousness,   then  we   just   have  two  separate  subjects,  much  as  if  Ub  never  came  to  be.  We  might  also  imagine  Ub  experiencing  all  and  only  blue,  then  all  and  only  red,  in  series.  But  that,  while  it  might  (perhaps)  count  as  occupying  now  Red’s  point  of  view,  now  Blue’s,  is  not  to  have  their  two  points  of  view  synchronously  compose  Ub’s  point  of  view,  which  is  what  combination  requires.39      Another  way  to  see  that  the  original  points  of  view  don’t  compose  the  third  is  to  imagine   subtracting   one   of   them.   Recall   that   in   a   combination   removal   of   a  component   compromises   the   whole—in   removing   a   hydrogen   from   H2O   we  destroy  the  molecule.  Now  imagine  Red  disappears.  Will  Ub  notice?  It  seems  he  need   not:   provided   Red’s   experiential   content—the   relevant   portion   of  phenomenal   redness  which  Ub   is   experiencing—remains,  what   it   is   like   for  Ub  won’t   change.   Thus   Red’s   point   of   view   did   not   phenomenally   compose   Ub’s.    Someone  might  object  that  if  Red  disappears,  so  does  her  experiential  content,  so  Ub   must   lose   the   redness   from   his   experience—his   purple   experience   will                                                                                                                  39  It’s  true  that  in  describing  combination  we  noted  that  constituents  are  modified  in  combining,  so   it  may   be   unduly   artificial   here   to   consider  Red  and  Blue’s   pre-­‐combination   perspectives   in  unmodified  form  (i.e.  as  filled  with  unitary  red  and  unitary  blue,  respectively).  Perhaps  the  right  picture  has  Red  and  Blue   interacting  to  produce  Ub,  with  all  three  now  experiencing  purple.  But  this  does  nothing  to  get  around  the  problem  the  artificial  setup  serves  to  highlight:  if  the  subjects  survive,   as   they   must,   there   will   be   three   actual   experiencings   of   purple.   It’s   not   possible   to  imagine   Ub’s   unified   point   of   view   as   comprising   two   synchronous   experiencings   of   purple  (pertaining  to  the  perspectives  of  Red  and  Blue).     22  devolve   to   blue.   But   that   would   at   best   prove   Red’s   experiential   content   was  integrated   in   Ub’s.   It   does   nothing   to   show   that   Red’s   very   perspective   was   a  component   of   Ub’s   perspective.   Indeed,   if   Red’s   point   of   view   did   partially  compose   Ub’s,   then   Red’s   disappearance   should   make   more   of   a   phenomenal  difference  to  Ub  than  the  mere  loss  of  the  red  content.  For  that  loss  is  achievable  just  by  Red’s  reaching  a  ‘zen  state’  of  pure  ‘contentless’  experience,  without  Red  as  a  point  of  view  departing  the  scene.  We  might  additionally  stipulate  that  Ub’s  existence  depends  on  Red’s  (plus  Blue’s),  so  that  if  Red’s  point  of  view  disappears  Ub  dies  off.  But  that’s  as  close  as  we  can  get—dependence  is  not  constitution.  No  sense   is   to   be   made   of   points   of   view   literally   composing,   as   points   of   view,  another  point  of  view.    Whatever  the  relationship  between  Ub’s  experience  and  those  of  the  original  duo  as  regards  content,  it  seems  Ub  as  the  bearer  of  a  point  of  view  can  never  be  said  to  be  the  combination  of  the  two  micro-­‐subjects,  even  if  he  is  after  some  manner  their  product  (by  James’s  ‘curious  physical  law’).  While  the  qualitative  contents  of  consciousness  may   perhaps   combine,   consciousnesses   themselves—subjects—cannot:  this  is  precluded  by  the  metaphysical  logic  of  points  of  view.40    6.  From  Constitutive  Panpsychism  to  Emergentism  Must  micro-­‐subjects  survive   in   the  higher-­‐level  subject?  Perhaps   it  wouldn’t  be  ‘combination’,  as  defined,  but  what  would  be  wrong  with  the  antecedent  subjects  generating  the  über-­‐subject  and  in  the  process  going  out  of  existence?  Then  their  various  points  of  view  wouldn’t  be  around  to  stick  out  like  such  sore  thumbs  for  the  single-­‐perspective  macro-­‐subjectivity  we  aim  to  construct.    Panpsychists   inclined   to   reply   thus   have   something   like   Humphreys’   fusion   in  mind.41  Humphreys   offers   fusion   as   a   model   of   the   generation   of   higher-­‐level  items   by   sets   of   lower-­‐level   items.   The   lower-­‐level   items   ‘fuse’   together,  producing   the   higher-­‐level   item,   and   in   the   process   are   obliterated.   All   that                                                                                                                  40  Nagel   apparently   spies   the  problem:   ‘How   could   a   single   self   be   composed  of  many   selves?’  (1979:194).  The  preceding  section,  and  the  next,  seek  to  bring  Nagel’s  difficulty  into  focus.    41  Humphreys  1997.     23  remains  in  existence  is  the  higher-­‐level  product.  In  this  vein,  panpsychists  might  propose  that  lower-­‐level  subjects  fuse  to  form  one  higher-­‐level  subject,  a  subject  like  one  of  us.  After  fusion,  what  remains  is  the  single  higher-­‐level  subject,  with  the  lower-­‐level  subjects  of  the  ‘fusion-­‐base’  having  ceased  to  exist.42  This  seems  what  Seager  intends  with  his  concept  of  panpsychic  ‘combinatorial  fusion’,43  and  Goff  briefly  entertains  the  same  idea:       Perhaps   the  parts  of  my  brain,  before   they  came   together   to   form  my   brain,   had   their   own   individual   phenomenal   lives.   But   when  they…form  my  brain  they  lose  their  individual  conscious  identities,  and  somehow  morph  into  o-­‐experience  had  by  the  whole  brain.44   But   fusion  cannot  help   the  panpsychist.  The  problem   lies   in  something  already  emphasised:   the   essentially   isolated   nature   of   individual   subjects   with   their  independent   experiential   points   of   view.   This   feature   of   subjects   ensures   their  fusion   could   only   provide   for   the   emergence   of   a   macro-­‐subject,   implying   a  violation  of  panpsychism’s  core  metaphysical  commitments.  To  see  why  this   is,  we   must   further   examine   the   constitution   of   structural   (i.e.   non-­‐emergent)  properties.    Consider  as  a  possible  case  of  fusion  the  melting  of  several  gold  ingots  into  one  big  gold  lump.  The  masses  of  the  ingots  fuse:  Each  ingot  has  its  own  mass  before  melting,  but  having  been  formed  into  one  chunk  of  gold,  these  individual  masses  no   longer  exist.  Only   the  mass  of   the  whole  exists,   formed  by   the   fusion  of   the  antecedent   ingots   and   their   respective   masses.45  What   is   important   to   note   is  this.   In   general,   to   avoid   emergence,   lower-­‐level   properties  must   contribute   to  their  novel  product  in  virtue  of  their  metaphysical  nature,  or,  otherwise  put,  while                                                                                                                  42  Humphreys  allows  fusion  of  properties  and  fusion  of  things.  43  ‘Perhaps  we  can  regard  the  parts  as  infusing  their  properties  into  the  whole  and  by  so  doing  effacing  themselves.’  (MS:14).  44  2009:308.    45  Someone  might   dispute   this   as   an   example   of   fusion—it   might   be   thought   the  mass   of   the  chunk   is   a   straightforward   combination:  perhaps   the  product  of   the   (persisting)  masses  of   the  ingots,   or   the  masses   of   constituent   gold  molecules,  which   certainly   do   not   cease   to   exist.   Not  much  hangs  on  the  choice  of  case,  however.  The  example  is  only  illustrative  of  the  deeper  point  developed  below:  that  for  a  structural  (i.e.  non-­‐emergent)  property  to  result,  whether  by  fusion  or  otherwise,   there  needs   to  be   an   intelligible  contribution   by   the   antecedent  properties   to   the  product.       24  remaining   true   to  what   they   are.   In   the   formation   of   a   structural   property,   its  lower-­‐level   antecedent   properties,   belonging   to   multiple   lower-­‐level   bearers,  interact   with   one   another   due   to   their   character,   and   the   upshot   of   this   self-­‐expressive  interaction  is  the  higher-­‐level  property.  There  is  thus  a  requirement  of   metaphysical   sense-­‐making   in   the   production   of   a   structural   property.  Antecedents   generate   the   novel   structure   by   interacting   according   to,   and  abiding   by,   what   they   already   are—so   that   there   is   a   corresponding   lack   of  surprise   in   the  product:   it   is   intelligible.   If  we   look  back   to   the  anti-­‐emergence  principle   as   expressed   by   Nagel   and   Strawson,   in   particular,   we   can   see   both  gesturing  towards  this  idea.46      Fusing  masses  meet   this   constraint:   the  masses   simply   add   up,   they  amass,   to  form  the  fused  mass.  The  lower-­‐level  masses  express  their  nature  in  producing  the   larger   mass;   amassing   is   a   characteristic   thing   masses   do.   Other   intuitive  examples   of   structural   properties   conform.   We   considered   earlier   the  combination  of  atomic  charges   into  a  dipole   in  water  molecules.  When  charges  interact  to  yield  some  resultant,  group  charge,  they  do  so,  affect  one  another,  as  charges.  Nothing  blocks  or  defies  the  influence  of  each  component  in  respect  of  being  charged—each   lower-­‐level   charge   is   at   liberty   to   contribute   its  nature   to  the   atomic   interaction,   and   the   resultant   molecular   dipole   is   simply   the  structural   upshot   of   this   free,   self-­‐expressive   interaction.   Another   example   is  shape:  one  can  see  that  in  building  a  Lego  penguin,  say,  the  overall  shape  has  the  relation  of  the  shapes  of  the  blocks  to  one  another  to  thank  for   its  determinate  nature:   their   relation   in   virtue   of   their   shape.  When   colors   blend   to   produce   a  new   color,   as  with  mixing   red   and   blue   into   purple,   it   is   a   colorful   interaction  with  a  colorful  product.      Contrastingly,  paradigm  cases  of  emergence  involve  the  metaphysical  defiance  or  thwarting   of   the   natures   of   the   lower-­‐level   properties.   Consider   two   examples  Strawson   employs:   the   emergence   of   the   concrete   from   the   abstract,   and   of                                                                                                                  46  Nagel,   recall,   says   ‘All   [non-­‐emergent]   properties   of   complex   systems…derive   from   the  properties   of   its   constituents   and   their   effects  on  each  other  when   so   combined’   (1979:182,  my  emphasis).   These   interactions   between   constituents   of   the   system   are   expressions   of   their  metaphysical  nature,  i.e.  of  their  characteristic  powers.       25  extension  from  the  unextended.  These  are  cases  where  the  underlying  properties  cannot   generate   their   product   structurally,   because   inputting  what   they   are—  abstraction,   non-­‐extendedness—makes   no   contribution   towards   what   results.  No  amount  of  interaction  or  accumulation  of  different   loci  of  abstraction  can  by  itself   yield   concreteness,   and   likewise   for   non-­‐extendedness.   Given   what   they  are,  abstraction  and  non-­‐extendedness   just  don’t  have  what  it  takes   to  produce  concreteness  and  extension.  Quite  the  reverse:  the  product  positively  defies  the  nature   of   the   antecedents.   Thus   concreteness   and   extension   must   emerge,   in  these  cases.  The   ‘bruteness’  philosophers  associate  with  emergence  is  precisely  this   metaphysical   defiance   of   the   natures   of   the   properties   in   the   emergence  base.   If   the   antecedents’   natures   don’t   constrain   their   product,   anything   is  possible,  so  the  actual  product  is  bound  to  appear  arbitrary.    We  can  support  this  account  by  defusing  a  counterexample:  liquidity  is  emergent  by  these  lights,  it  might  be  said,  since  (following  Strawson)  it  derives  from  non-­‐liquid   components.   Surely   the   ‘expression   of   their   nature’—non-­‐liquidity—cannot  structurally  account  for  the  production  of  liquidity?  But  it’s  important  to  see   that   liquidity   is   a   mere   matter   of   the   dynamics   between   a   liquid’s   parts:  molecules  are  sufficiently  loosely  bonded  that  they  can  slide  over  one  another,  in  effect.  Thus   liquidity   is   really   a  macro-­‐dynamic   structuring  of  micro-­‐dynamical  components:  its  generation  is  a  matter  of  dynamics  all  around.  As  Strawson  says  of  such  cases,  when  considering  the  micro-­‐ingredients  and  their  macro-­‐product  we  move   in   ‘a   small   set   of   conceptually   homogenous   shape-­‐size-­‐mass-­‐charge-­‐number-­‐position-­‐motion-­‐involving   physics   notions’47  Thus   liquidity   from   the  non-­‐liquid  is  not  emergence,  and  our  account  explains  why.    Subjects  being  essentially  discrete,  pre-­‐existing  subjects  can  make  no  intelligible  contribution   to   the   unified   subjectivity   of   a   subject   they   generate   in   respect  of  their  (the  predecessors’)  subjectivities.  The  end  subject’s  unity  is  precisely  in  the  most  direct  defiance  of  the  diversity  and  mutual  ontological  independence  of  the  antecedents,  which  is  what  their  being  a  set  of  subjects  (at  least  partly)  consists  in.   To   create   an   über-­‐subject   from   them,   each   predecessor’s   essential                                                                                                                  47  2006:13.     26  subjectivity—hence,   discreteness—is   precisely   the   characteristic   to   be  suppressed.   To   put   the   thought  more   revealingly:   a   set   of   points   of   view  have  nothing   to  contribute  as  such   to  a  single,  unified  successor  point  of  view.  Their  essential   property   defines   them  against   it:   in   so   far   as   they   are   points   of   view  they   are   experientially   distinct   and   isolated—they   have   different   streams   of  consciousness.   The   diversity   of   the   subject-­‐set,   of   course,   derives   from   the  essential   oneness   of   any   given   member:   since   each   subject   is   essentially   a  oneness,   a   set   of   subjects   are   essentially   diverse,   for   they   must   be   a   set   of  onenesses.   Essential   unity   from  essential   diversity—what  would  be   involved   in  panpsychic   fusion—is   thus   a   case   of   emergence,   by   our   ‘defiance   criterion’.  ‘Consciousness   fusion’   is  guaranteed  to  be  emergence   in  a  way  that  mass  (etc.)  fusion  is  not:  Masses  can  bequeath  their  massiness  to  their   fusion.  But  subjects  cannot  bequeath  their  subjectivity:  it  is  the  destruction  of  their  property  of  each  having  a  point  of  view  that  is  needed.48    If   points   of   view   are   annihilated   so   as   to   produce   a  macro-­‐subject,   the  macro-­‐subjectivity  is  not  a  structural  property.49  Instead,  the  only  way  to  construe  what  happens   is   to   say   the  micro-­‐subjects   brutely   cause   the   successor   to   come   into  being,  thereby  expending  their  own  claim  to  existence.  This  sort  of  causation  of  the  new  entity,  as  opposed  to  its  formation  by  antecedent  elements,  is  a  hallmark  of  emergence  for  O’Connor  and  Wong:       [emergents  are]  those  properties  whose  instantiation  does  not  even  partly  consist  in  the  instantiation  of  distinct  properties  by  the  entity                                                                                                                  48  With   liquidity   a   ‘deeper’   (dynamic)   property   base   explains   why   the   liquid   can   be   the  structuring  of  the  non-­‐liquid.  Similarly,  when  ocean  waves  meet  to  form  a  bigger  wave,  it  is  not  their  being  waves  that  contributes,  but  their  being  composed  of  units  that  can  be  recombined  into  a  single  wave.  The  smaller  waves  are  destroyed,  qua  waves,  and  their  components  made  into  the  larger  wave.  Thus  it   is  the  properties  of  these  lower-­‐level  components  that  are  operative  in  the  formation  of  the  big  wave  (it  is  not  just  from  waves  of  these  components  that  you  could  generate  the   big   wave).   This   ‘bypassing’   option   is   not   available   in   the   case   of   subjectivity,   since   the  panpsychist   posits   subjectivity   as   a   fundamental   property,   and   fundamental   properties   are  directly   involved  in  producing  their  higher-­‐level   instances.  After  all,   the  reason  the  panpsychist  posited   fundamental   subjectivity  was   to   account   for   its   higher-­‐level   instantiations.   If   a   deeper,  non-­‐subjective,   nature   accounted   for   macro-­‐subjectivity,   this   would   make   the   panpsychist’s  micro-­‐subjects  explanatorily—hence  ontologically—superfluous.  49  With   respect   to   the   micro-­‐subjectivities:   it   might   be   structural   with   respect   to   some   other  lower-­‐level  property—but  that  would  leave  the  micro-­‐subjects  explanatorily  otiose,  see  previous  note.       27  or   its   parts   [i.e.   structural   properties]…[emergents]   must   be  explained   in   terms   of   a   causal,   not   purely   formal,   relationship   to  underlying,  immediately  preceding  structures.50        Panpsychist   fusion   clearly   fits   this   rubric.   Therefore,   by   insisting   on   micro-­‐subjects  the  panpsychist  slides  from  constitutive  panpsychism  into  emergentism.  Recap   of   the   last   two   sections:   To   avoid   emergentism   the   panpsychist   must  render  macro-­‐subjectivity  as  a  structural  property  of  an  assembly  of  ultimates.  But   if   ultimates   are   subjects   they   cannot   combine   in   respect   of   subjectivity.   If,  alternatively,   they   fuse,   their   product   is   not   structurally   related   to   its  antecedents.   The   resulting   macro-­‐subject   can   thus   be   at   best   only   causally  related  to  its  micro-­‐subject  base.  Hence  the  macro-­‐subject  emerges.51        Yet   if   panpsychists   find   themselves   endorsing   emergence   at   this   juncture—to  account   for   the   production   of   high-­‐level   subjects—it’s   hard   to   see   why   they  fought  so  shy  of  it  earlier.  Recall  that  the  struggle  to  avoid  emergence  was  at  the  heart  of  panpsychism,  which  sought  a  smooth  ontological  transition  from  micro-­‐matter   to  macro-­‐consciousness.   Since  panpsychism   is  driven  by  an  aversion   to  emergentism,   the   result   we   face   is   that   a   panpsychism  which   posits   ultimate-­‐subjects  is  structurally  unsound—it  breaks  its  own  anti-­‐emergentist  pledge.      To  the  extent  one  considers  panpsychism  committed  to  micro-­‐subjects,  one  will  conclude  that  the  view  is  doomed:  it  suffers  from  an  internal  self-­‐contradiction.52  And   to   the   panpsychist   who   concedes   that   macro-­‐subjects   indeed   emerge  somehow   out   of  micro-­‐subjects,   but  who   has   no   better   reason   for   postulating  micro-­‐consciousness   than   to   avoid   its   emergence   in   us,   we   can   justifiably   say                                                                                                                  50  2001:10-­‐11.  This  isn’t  to  say  that  causal  generation  of  properties   is  a  necessary  condition  for  emergence,   only   a   sufficient   condition.   See  Wong   2006   for   helpful   classification   of   varieties   of  emergentism.  Another  point  to  note  is  that  the  causal  production  envisaged  in  this  formulation  of  emergentism   may   well   be   synchronic   causation,   which   perhaps   fits   better   with   traditional  construals  of  emergence.  51  There  was  perhaps  a   cheaper  way  of  getting   to   this   conclusion,  via   the   fact   that  Humphreys  explicitly   intends   fusion   to   be   a   variety   of   emergence.  What   this   cheaper  way  would   not   have  purchased,   however,   was   detailed   explanation   of   what   was   wrong   with   the   proposal   for  panpsychists  in  particular.  52  The  contradiction  is  performative  or  methodological  rather  than  strictly  logical:  in  attempting  to  evade  emergentism  the  panpsychist  who  posits  micro-­‐subjects  flees  into  the  arms  of  another  emergentism.       28  that   the   emergence   of   macro-­‐phenomenality   from   non-­‐phenomenal   physical  components   (classic   physicalism)   cannot   now   consistently   be   dismissed   as   a  possibility.   As   Seager   observes   ‘if   panpsychism…requires   a   mechanism   of  emergence  then  why  not  take  the  theoretically  more  economical  route  of  letting  consciousness  emerge  directly   from  the  physical  basis   itself  rather   than   from  a  mental  basis.’53  Indeed.54,55      7.  The  Neutral  Monist  Alternative  Panpsychism’s   internal   tension   is   encapsulable   as   follows.   Panpsychists   hold,  effectively,  that  all  non-­‐fundamental  properties  are  structural:  they  are  reducible  to  more  basic  properties  plus  the  arrangement  of  their  bearers.  This  is  the  non-­‐emergence  principle.  It  drives  theorists  to  panpsychism  since  they  consider  that,  short  of  bearing  phenomenal  properties,  physical  micro-­‐matter  is  an  inadequate  basis  for  consciousness.  If  physical  micro-­‐matter  lacked  phenomenal  properties,  macro-­‐phenomenal   properties   could   not   be   structural—they   would,  unacceptably,   have   to   emerge.   Yet   panpsychists   also   insist   that   phenomenal  properties—qualia—necessarily   exist   for   someone,   a   subject   who   experiences                                                                                                                  53  MS:4.  54  There  are  panpsychists  whose  main  motivation  is  not  aversion  to  emergence.  Some  are  moved  by  Russell’s   idea  that  physics  doesn’t  describe  the  intrinsic  natures  of  its  theoretical  postulates,  and  that  phenomenal  properties  provide  a  parsimonious  way  of   filling   this  gap  (e.g.  Rosenberg  2004).   Such   theorists   might   evade   the   thrust   of   my   argument;   however   it   is   clear   that   the  ‘intrinsic   nature   argument’   (see   Seager   2006)   is   highly   controversial—far   more   so   than   the  mundane   thought   that   conventional   physicalism   lacks   the   conceptual   resources   to   account   for  consciousness.   Moreover   the   explanatory   (anti-­‐emergentist)   motive   has   been   by   far   the   main  driver   for   panpsychism   historically,   so   most   panpsychists   are   vulnerable   to   the   present  argument.    55  Someone   might   claim   that   since   panpsychist   emergence   at   least   occurs   within   a   class   of  properties,  i.e.  the  emergence  of    (unified)  subjectivity  from  (plural)  subjectivity,  such  emergence  is   in  better  shape  than   ‘physicalist  emergence’—and  not  the  unacceptable  option  I  deem  it.  But  the  relevant  contrast   is  between  structural  and  non-­‐structural  generation  of  a  property.  Macro-­‐subjectivity   is   not   a   structural   property   with   respect   to   the   postulated   micro-­‐subject   base.  ‘Structurality’—or   non-­‐emergence—is   an   all   or   nothing   affair;   once  we   say   a   property   is   non-­‐structural,   it  doesn’t  matter  what   it  happens  to  have   in  common  with   its  base  (it  will  also  have  ‘being  spatio-­‐temporal’  in  common,  if  we  are  non-­‐dualists;  in  the  physicalist  case  both  properties  count  as  cognitive,  on  the  assumption  that  phenomenal  consciousness  is  cognitive).  The  point  is  that  the  new  property  is  not  derived  from  its  base;  its  instantiation  is  more  than  a  matter  of  the  organization   of   the   basal   items.   Panpsychist   and   physicalist   versions   of   emergence   equally  violate  the  structurality  requirement,  and  once  the  panpsychist  relinquishes  this  she  has  no  solid  ground  upon  which  to  dismiss  the  physicalist  version,  which,  lest  it  be  forgotten,  is  ontologically  cheaper  in  not  positing  all-­‐pervading  micro-­‐subjects.  To  this  soft  reply  might  be  added  a  harder  one:  talk  of  ‘subjectivity’  at  higher  and  lower  levels  disguises  the  deeper  contrast—what  really  is  required   to   emerge   is   essential   unity   from   essential   diversity,   and   this   shatters   the   illusion   of  ‘intra-­‐property  emergence’.       29  them.  Hence  the  ultimates  are  held  to  be  subjects.  But  a  macro-­‐subject  cannot  be  a  structural  entity  with  respect  to  a  lower-­‐level  basis  of  micro-­‐subjects,  as  we’ve  seen.   It   transpires,   therefore,   that   the   panpsychist’s   commitment   to   micro-­‐subjects   is   at   war   with   her   commitment   to   all   higher-­‐level   properties—particularly  consciousness—being  structural.  Something  has  to  give.      From   our   historical   survey,   we   can   take   it   that   the   panpsychist’s   anti-­‐emergentism  (her  ‘mereological  rationalism’,  in  Van  Cleve’s  memorable  phrase)  runs   deep.   Therefore   what   must   go   is   the   proliferation   of   subjects   in   micro-­‐ontology.   I   now   explore   the   sort   of   doctrine   that   results   from   this   concession.  What  I  sketch  below  is  something  of  a  roadmap,  indicating  the  future  direction  of  travel  for  those  motivated  by  panpsychism’s  anti-­‐emergentist  impulse.  Working  out  the  details  of  the  theory  is  something  for  future  research.      Panpsychists   are   plausibly   correct   in   holding   that   qualia—the   qualitative  properties  we  find  in  experience—are  irreducible,  and  so  (given  the  structurality  of   higher-­‐level   properties)   fundamental.   Where   they   err   is   in   attaching  subjectivity   essentially   to  qualia:   the  notion   that   there  must   exist   ‘someone’   to  experience   any   given   quale.   Making   the   ultimates   little   subjects   blocks   them  from  being   able   to   constitute   a  macro-­‐subject.   The  moral   of   this   failure   is   that  qualia  must  be  divorced  from  subjectivity—the  awareness  of  qualia  by  subjects.  Macro-­‐qualia  considered  merely  qualitatively,  like  red  patches  in  the  visual  field,  can   be   rendered   as   structural   properties   with   respect   to   qualitative   micro-­‐underpinnings.  But  since  subjects  cannot  combine  into  larger  subjects,   the  only  way   to   preserve   the   panpsychist   anti-­‐emergence   principle   when   it   comes   to  high-­‐level   subjecthood   is   to   allow   that,   while   quality   is   a   fundamental   affair,  subjectivity  must  be  susceptible  of  a  reductive  treatment.      A  position  taking  qualities  as   fundamental   features  of  matter,  but  which  makes  subjective   awareness   of   qualities   a   relational   (thus   reducible)   affair,   is  neutral  monism,   of   the   sort   James   later   inclines   towards. 56  On   neutral   monism,  unexperienced   qualities   permeate   basic   matter.   Certain   portions   of   matter                                                                                                                  56  James  1912/2003.     30  exhibit  a  configuration  which  provides  for  awareness  of  the  qualities  they  bear:  matter,  when  specially  arranged,  can  apprehend  its  own  quality,  in  effect.  This  is  consciousness.   I   now   take   these   ideas   in   turn,   explicating   first   a   conception   of  qualia   whereby   they   can   exist   unexperienced,   then   a   relational   conception   of  consciousness.  Overall,   the  proposed  movement  of   thought   takes  us   some  way  back   from   panpsychism   towards   physicalism,   so   it   won’t   be   surprising   if  physicalists  find  the  end  position  significantly  less  off-­‐putting  than  panpsychism.  The  difficulty  is  persuading  panpsychists  that  neutral  monism  is  the  way  to  get  what  they  want  most,  as  well  as  most  of  what  they  want.        When  discussing   Jamesian   ‘feelings’,  we  encountered   the  conceptual  possibility  of   qualitative   elements   of   experience   existing   apart   from   subjects.   This   is   a  conceptual  possibility   to  which  we  must  now  extend  metaphysical  seriousness.  Of   course,   the   notion   of   unexperienced   qualia   is   by   no   means   anathema   to  mainstream  physicalism.  When  a  normal-­‐sighted  person  sees  a  blue  sky,  there  is  a  blueness  present  in  her  visual  experience:  one  way  or  another,  and  regardless  for  now  of  its  location,  there  seems  to  exist  a  blue  expanse  of  which  the  subject  is  aware.  This  blueness   is   a  quale   instantiation.  Now,  direct   realists  who  are  also  color   realists   explicitly   externalise   our   qualia,   holding   that   the   blueness  apprehended   in   seeing   the   sky   belongs   to   the   sky   and   not   to   the  mind   of   the  seer.57  These  theorists  don’t  consider  the  blueness  in  question  to  evaporate  once  nobody   is   looking   at   the   sky,   for   they   are   decidedly   not   Berkeleians.   This  commits   them   to   the   thesis   that   qualia   can   endure  unexperienced.  That   is   just  the   proposal  we   need   to  make   sense   of   here,   although   panpsychists   are  more  likely   to   consider   the   qualia  we   are   aware   of   as   inhering   in   the  matter   of   the  brain.   Panpsychists   tend   to   be   indirect   realists   about   perception,   holding   that  one   is   perceptually   aware   of   external   items   by   first   being   aware   of   internally  instantiated  qualia.58                                                                                                                        57  See  e.g.  Tye  2009.    58  A  neutral  monist,   like  a  panpsychist,  doesn’t  have   to  be  an   indirect   realist  about  perception;  nevertheless,  these  views  seem  naturally  to  go  with  indirect  realism,  given  their  emphasis  on  the  reality  and  irreducibility  of  qualia.     31  Neutral   monism   holds   that   all   matter   possesses   qualia,   which   need   not   be  experienced  in  order  to  exist.  Just  as  the  sky’s  blueness  or  a  fire-­‐engine’s  redness  persist  when  no-­‐one   is  around  to  see  them,  on  a  commonsense  or  naïve  realist  perspective,  so  the  qualities  of  the  ultimates  persist  whether  or  not  any  subject  is  aware  of   them.  A  particular  ultimate,   then,  might  be  phenomenally  blue   in   the  way  a  direct  realist  (color  realist)  believes  the  sky  is  blue.59  On  neutral  monism  when   one   is   aware   of   a   phenomenal   blueness,   one   is   directly   aware   of   the  qualities  carried  by  ultimates  in  one’s  brain.      Strawson  represents  the  panpsychist  mainstream  in  holding  that   ‘There  cannot  be  an  experience  without  a   subject   [to  experience   it].’60  But   the  neutral  monist  thesis  that  the  qualities  exhibited  in  experience  can  exist  outside  of  experience  is  not   the   oxymoronic   claim   that   any   experience   can   exist   unexperienced.   It   is  rather  the  claim  that  some  ingredients  of  an  experience  need  not  be  experienced.  Rejection  of  this  thesis  would  convert  direct  realists  into  idealists,  so  it  cannot  be  completely  objectionable.  If  Strawson’s  claim,  alternatively,  is  that  such  qualities  are  ipso  facto  experiential,  then  that’s  simply  the  claim  neutral  monists  deny,  as  well   as   the   claim   blocking   panpsychist   explanatory   ambitions,   since   it   entails  micro-­‐subjects.   To   my   knowledge   no   panpsychist   has   provided   a   serious  argument   for   the   claim   that   qualia   cannot   exist   unexperienced.   That   claim  remains,   therefore,   in   the   realm   of   dogma   or   mere   intuition.   Opposing   this  intuition   is   common   sense,   where   colors   exist   without   perceivers,   and   pains  sometimes   wake   us   in   the   night.   If   pain   qualia   can   cause   one   to   come   to  consciousness  of  them,  then  clearly  the  qualia  existed  before  one  was  conscious  of  them.  So  much  for  my  attempt  gently  to  accommodate  panpsychists  to  the  idea  of  subjectless  qualia.  The  plain   fact   is   that  retaining  the  thesis   that  higher-­‐level  properties  are  structural  makes  subjectless  qualia  compulsory,  as  long  as  qualia  are  also  held  to  be  irreducible.                                                                                                                    59  Cf.   the   particulate   imaginings   of   Unger   2005.   There   are   theorists   for   whom   the   subatomic  entities   postulated   by   physics   stand   in   need   of   a   categorical   nature,   to   underpin   the   relations  physics  catalogues  with  its  equations  (see  Russell  1927a  for  an  influential  account  of  this  idea).  On  neutral  monism,  this  nature  is  constituted  by  (subjectless)  qualia.    60  2008:152.     32  The  neutral  monist  considers  that  qualities  don’t  require  subjects  to  experience  them—the  whole  material  world  is  en-­‐qualitied.  What  of  those  rare  spots  where  subjects  do  exist  who  are  aware  of  the  qualia  carried  by  matter,  subjects  like  us?  Panpsychists  require  macro-­‐subjectivity  to  be  a  structural  property,  and  neutral  monism   duly   obliges,   by   rendering   conscious   awareness   as   a   relation.   James  argues  that:     Consciousness   connotes   a   kind   of   external   relation…not…a  special  stuff  or  way  of  being…The  peculiarity  of  our  experiences,  that   they   not   only   are,   but   are   known,  which   their   “conscious”  quality   is   invoked   to   explain,   is   better   explained   by   their  relations.61    For  neutral  monists,  rather  than  a  magical  bubble  or  intrinsic  phenomenal  glow,  consciousness   is   simply   that   relation   whereby   qualities   are   brought   into  subjectival  awareness:  it  is  the  curling  of  the  material  world  back  upon  itself,  to  apprehend   its   own   character.  What   is   the   relation   in  question?  This   is   an   area  ripe   for   innovation,   for   those   sympathetic   to   the   present   argument.   James   is  vague   about   the   relation  he   envisages:   he   explains   that   qualia   instances   (‘pure  experiences’)  can  exist  both  in  subject  and  object  ‘position’,  as  it  were.  They  can  be   either   the   objects   of   ‘knowledge’,   by   other   qualia,   or   the   knowers.   Such  knowledge   is   the   consciousness-­‐constituting   relationship.   James   also   talks  suggestively  of  representation  playing  a  role:     As   “subjective”   we   say   that   the   experience   represents;   as  “objective”   it   is   represented.   What   represents   and   what   is  represented   is   here   numerically   the   same…Its   subjectivity   and  objectivity   are   functional   attributes   solely,   realized   only   when  the   experience   is   “taken”,   i.e.,   talked-­‐of,   twice…by   a   new  retrospective  experience  (1912/2003:12)    This  is  difficult.  If  we  decamp  to  neutral  monism,  we’ll  need  to  develop  detailed  models  of  the  relevant  representational  mechanism.  For  now  I  restrict  myself  to  one  tentative  concrete  suggestion  along  these  lines.                                                                                                                    61  1912/2003:13.     33  Many   find   the   higher-­‐order   thought   theory   of   consciousness   (HOTT)  unsatisfactory.62  On  HOTT,   it   is  when  a   sensory   state   in   the  brain   (e.g.   a   visual  percept   as  of   the  blue   sky)   is   appropriately   represented  by  a   thought   that   this  state   is  brought   to   conscious  awareness.  There   isn’t   space   to  delve  deeply   into  HOTT’s   perceived   shortcomings,   but   one   of   these   is   certainly   its   apparent  struggle   to   capture   the   phenomenology.   An   internal   representation   that   some  sensory   state   obtains   seems   rather   a   dry   thing,   inadequate   to   provide   for  immediate,  technicolor  phenomenology.  Yet  neutral  monists  are  placed  to  make  one   or   two   helpful   modifications   to   HOTT,   which   may   well   end   up   making   it  more  appealing  as  an  analysis  of  consciousness.  First,  we  now  take  the  qualia  of  sensory   states   to   be   ultimately   irreducible   features,   the   product   of   the  structuring   of   qualitative   ultimates   composing   these   states   in   the   brain.   Thus  qualia,  which  HOTT  struggles  to  generate,  are  already  built  into  our  theory.  The  other  side  of  the  difficulty  is  the  seeming  distance  between  higher-­‐order  thought  (HOT)   and   represented   sensory   state:   why   would   an   assertoric   thought,   even  about   an   irreducibly   en-­‐qualitied   substrate,   provide   for   the   immediacy   of  qualitative   conscious   experience?   The   HOT   might   do   better   were   it   more  intimately  associated  with  the  sensory  state  it  represents:  specifically,  we  might  venture   to   embed   qualia-­‐carrying   sensory   states  within   the   thoughts   asserting  them   to   be   present.   This   would   be   something   akin   to   Papineau’s   quotational  model   for   phenomenal   concepts,63  but   deployed   now   to   capture   subjectival  awareness  of  qualities.  A  HOT  would  then  have  the  structure  ‘This  state  obtains  “            “’   with   a   slot   into   which   the   (irreducibly)   sensory   state   literally   enters.   That  would  be  one  way  of  getting  qualia   right   into   the  mechanism  that  provides   for  awareness  of  them,  and  rendering  such  awareness  suitably  ‘immediate’.      I’ve   sketched   one   relationist/neutral  monist   attempt   to   capture   that   aspect   of  subjectivity   which   is   the   sheer   awareness   of   qualities—a.k.a.   consciousness.64                                                                                                                  62  For  HOTT  see  e.g.  Rosenthal  1991.  63  Papineau  2002.  64  It  is  worth  noting  that  unrepentant  panpsychists  will  require  their  own  mechanism  to  explain  macro-­‐subjectival  awareness,  since  they  don’t  hold  that  every  ultimate  makes   it   into  a  subject’s  experience.  Panpsychists  don’t   typically   think  we  experience   the  ultimates   in  our   toenails  or   in  Saturn’s   rings,   so   some   relation   amongst   the   privileged   ultimates   (in   the   brain?)   will   have   to  account  for  our  awareness  only  of  that  limited  set.  Neutral  monism  is  simply  more  parsimonious     34  What  about  the  other  aspect  of  subjectivity  I  have  emphasized,  the  separateness  of  subjects,  with  their  concomitant  points  of  view?  How  does  this  fit  into  the  sort  of   neutral   monism   under   development?   Here   is   a   suggestion.   If   the   conscious  awareness  relation  is  one  of  the  representation  (in  some  form)  of  qualia  carried  by   certain   portions   of   the   brain,   the   brain   is   to   be   viewed   as   a   device   evolved  with  two  key  tasks  regarding  consciousness:  It  firstly  marshals  micro-­‐qualia  into  macroscopic   instances   useful   to   the   organism,   such   as   macroscopic   pains   and  visual  percepts,  and   it  enables  awareness  of   these  qualia   for   the  organism.  The  set  of  qualia  of  which  a  given  brain  can  be  aware  is   limited  to  those  qualitative  instances   within   reach   of   its   representational   system—on   the   ‘neutral   monist  HOTT’,  to  those  qualitative  material  conglomerations  of  cranial  ultimates  which  can  be  embedded  in  the  relevant  higher-­‐order  thoughts.  Each  of  our  brains,  then,  houses   a   point   of   view,   a   representational   system,  which   can   take   up   only   the  qualia  instantiated  in  that  brain.  The  qualia  of  another  person’s  brain  are  simply  out   of   direct   representational   reach.   Brains   are   effectively   a   breed   of   self-­‐directed  microscopes,  revealing  their  own  inner  qualitative  character.65    The  neutral  monist  HOTT  is  an  example  of  a  relational  theory  of  subjectivity  the  neutral   monist   might   produce.   Many   other   possibilities   exist,   awaiting  development.  The   success  of   the  neutral  monist—and,   formerly,  panpsychist—anti-­‐emergentist  project  frankly  hangs  on  development  of  an  adequate  relational  model  of  subjectivity.  To  the  extent  one  considers  such  a  model  impossible,  one  must   be   dubious   about   the   prospects   for   a   structural   explanation   of  consciousness,  comprising  qualitative  and  subjective  elements.  The  alternatives  we  would  then  be  driven  towards  would  be  emergentism  on  the  one  hand,  and  dualism  on  the  other.      8.  Conclusion  I   have   argued,   overall,   that   to   remain   true   to   their   anti-­‐emergentism,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in  having  that  awareness-­‐constituting  relation  do  duty  for  ‘consciousness’  as  well.  Another  model  of   awareness   that   suggests   itself   is   the   self-­‐representational   theory,   see   e.g.   Kriegel   2009   –  though  I  doubt  he  would  have  much  time  for  irreducible  qualia  (for  an  argument  that  irreducible  qualia  are  compatible  with  physicalism  see  Coleman  forthcoming).    65  Thanks   to   Giovanni  Merlo   for   the  microscope  metaphor.   The   self-­‐representational  model   of  neutral  monism  perhaps  even  more  neatly  explains  the  limited  scope  of  subjectivity.       35  panpsychists   must   relinquish   micro-­‐subjects   of   experience,   even   as   they   take  qualia  to  be  irreducible,  and  should  aim  to  construct  a  relational  account  of  high-­‐level   subjectivity.   This   combination   amounts   to   a   form   of   neutral   monism,   so  panpsychists  should  be  neutral  monists.66  We  can  be  to  some  degree  optimistic  about  the  chances  of  this  shift,  since  even  panpsychist  Nagel  seems  open  to  the  leading  idea:  ‘Presumably’  he  says  ‘the  components  out  of  which  a  point  of  view  is  constructed  would  not  themselves  have  to  have  points  of  view.’67        References  Armstrong   D.   M.   (1978)   Universals   and   Scientific   Realism.   Vols.   1–2   (London:  Macmillan).  Broad,  C.  D.  (1925)  The  Mind  and  Its  Place  in  Nature  (London:  Kegan  Paul).  Brüntrup,  G.  (1998)  Is  Psycho-­‐Physical  Emergentism  Committed  to  Dualism?  The  Causal  Efficacy  of  Emergent  Mental  Properties.  In  Erkenntnis  48  (2/3):133-­‐151.  Chalmers,   D.   J.   (2002)  Does   conceivability   entail   possibility?   In   T.   Gendler  &   J.  Hawthorne   (eds.)   Conceivability   and   Possibility,   (Oxford:   Oxford   University  Press).  Coleman,  S.   (forthcoming  2013)  Neuro-­‐Cosmology.   In  P.  Coates  and  S.  Coleman   (eds.)   Perception   and   Sensory   Consciousness:   The   Nature   of  Phenomenal  Qualities  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press).  Goff,   P.   (2009)   Why   Panpsychism   doesn’t   help   us   explain   Consciousness.   In  Dialectica  63  (3):289-­‐311.  —(2006)   Experiences   don’t   Sum.   In   Journal   of   Consciousness   Studies   13   (10-­‐11):53-­‐61.  Humphreys  (1997)  How  Properties  Emerge.  In  Philosophy  of  Science  64:  1-­‐17.  James,  W.  (1912/2003)  Essays  in  Radical  Empiricism  (New  York:  Dover).  —(1890)  The  Principles  of  Psychology.  Kriegel,  U.  (2009)  Subjective  Consciousness:  A  Self-­‐Representational  Theory   (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press).  Nagel,   T.   (1979)   Panpsychism.   In   his  Mortal  Questions   (Cambridge:   Cambridge  University  Press).    —(1974)  What  is  it  like  to  be  a  Bat?  In  Philosophical  Review  83:435-­‐50.  O’Connor,   T.   and  Wong,  H.   (2005)  The  Metaphysics   of   Emergence.   In  Nous   39:  658–678.                                                                                                                  66  For  much  more  on  neutral  monism  and  its  varieties  see  Stubenberg’s  admirable  article  (2010).  67  1979:194.     36  Papineau,   D.   (2002)   Thinking   about   Consciousness   (Oxford:   Oxford   University  Press).  Rosenberg,  G.  (2004)  A  Place  for  Consciousness:  Probing  the  Deep  Structure  of  the  Natural  World  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press).  Rosenthal,   D.   M.   (1991)   The   Independence   of   Consciousness   and   Sensory  Quality.  In  Philosophical  Issues  1:  15-­‐36.  Russell,  B.  (1927a)  The  Analysis  of  Matter  (London:  Kegan  Paul).  —(1927b)  An  Outline  of  Philosophy  (London:  George  Allen  and  Unwin).  Seager,  W.  E.    (MS)  Panpsychism,  Aggregation  and  Combinatorial  Infusion.  (2006)   The   'Intrinsic   Nature'   Argument   for   Panpsychism.   In   Journal   of  Consciousness  Studies  13  (10-­‐11):129-­‐145.  —(1995)   Consciousness,   Information   and   Panpsychism.   In   Journal   of  Consciousness  Studies  2  (3):272-­‐288.  Strawson,  G.  (2008)  What  is  the  Relation  Between  an  Experience,  the  Subject  of  the  Experience,  and   the  Content  of   the  Experience?   In  his  Real  Materialism  and  Other  Essays  (Oxford:  Clarendon  Press).  —(2006)  Realistic  monism:  Why  Physicalism  entails  Panpsychism.  In  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  13(10–11):  3–31.  Stoljar  (2006)  Ignorance  and  Imagination  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press).    Stubenberg,   L.   (2010)   Neutral   Monism.   In   The   Stanford   Encyclopedia   of  Philosophy  available  at  http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/neutral-­‐monism/#5  Tye,   M.   (2009)   Consciousness   Revisited:   Materialism   without   Phenomenal  Concepts  (Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT  Press).    Unger,  P.  (2005)  All  the  Power  in  the  World  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press).    Van   Cleve,   J.   (1990)   Mind-­‐Dust   or   Magic?   Panpsychism   versus   Emergence.   In  Philosophical  Perspectives  4:  215-­‐226.  Wong,  H.  (2006)  Emergents  from  Fusion.  In  Philosophy  of  Science  73,  3:  345-­‐367.    