ABSTRACT: 
This study synthesizes two evaluations of a local climate change planning process in a rural town in British Columbia (Canada), which was supported through landscape visualizations. First, the impact of the visualizations, based on scientific environmental modeling and presented in three different presentation formats, verbal/visual presentation, posters and a virtual globe, was evaluated with regard to immediate impacts during the process. Second, the long-term impacts on decision-making and actual outcomes were evaluated in a retrospective evaluation 22 months after the end of the initial planning process. Two results are highlighted: according to the quantitative pre-/post-questionnaires, the visualizations contributed to increased awareness and understanding. Most importantly, the retrospective evaluation indicated that the process informed policy, operational and built changes in Kimberley, in which the landscape visualizations played a role. The post interviews with key decision-makers showed that they remembered most of the visualizations and some decision-makers were further using them, particularly the posters. The virtual globe seemed to be not a "sustainable" display format suitable for formal decision-making processes such as council meetings though. That may change with the further mainstreaming of visualization technologies or mobile devices. Until then, we recommend using display formats that can be re-used following a specific planning event such as an Open House, to ensure on-going support for effective decision-making over the longer-term. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This study synthesizes two evaluations of a local climate change planning process in a rural town in Britain Columbia (Canada), which was supported through landscape visualizations. First, the impact of the visualizations, based on scientific environmental modeling and presented in three different presentation formats, verbal/visual presentation, posters and a virtual globe, was evaluated with regard to immediate impacts during the process. Second, the long-term impacts on decision-making and actual outcomes were evaluated in a retrospective evaluation 22 months after the end of the initial planning process. Results are highlighted: according to the quantitative pre-/post-questionnaires, the visualizations contributed to increased awareness and understanding. Most importantly, the retrospective evaluation indicated that the process informed policy, operational and built changes in Kimberley, in which the landscape visualizations played a role. The post interviews with key decision-makers showed that they are more more viewed them, particularly the posters. The virtual globe seemed to be not a “sustainable” display format suitable for formal decision-making processes such as council meetings but that may change with the further mainstreaming of visualization technologies or mobile devices. Until then, we recommend using display formats that can be re-used following a specific planning event such as an Open House, to ensure on-going support for effective decision-making over the long-term. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 REcOab2h•••••aAAKCPLVPP11ptth0nLandscape and Urban Planning 142 (2015) 147–158Contents lists available at ScienceDirectLandscape and Urban Planningj our na l ho me pa g e: www.elsev ier .com/ locate / landurbplanesearch Papervaluating presentation formats of local climate change inommunity planning with regard to process and outcomeslaf Schrotha,∗, Ellen Pondb, Stephen R.J. SheppardbThe University of Sheffield, Arts Tower, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, United KingdomCollaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning (CALP), University of British-Columbia, UBC’s Centre for Interactive Research on Sustainability,321-2260 West Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada i g h l i g h t sVisualizations in a climate change planning process were assessed as very helpful by local stakeholders and residents.Visualizations presented in a virtual globe facilitated understanding and increased awareness during an open house.22 months later most decision-makers still remembered or used the visualizations.Visualizations embedded into process informed policy, operational and built changes.Although the virtual globe presentation format was effective during the process it was less so in the long term. r t i c l e i n f orticle history:vailable online 1 May 2015eywords:limate changearticipatory decision-makingandscape visualizationirtual globerocess evaluationolicy outcomesa b s t r a c tThis study synthesizes two evaluations of a local climate change planning process in a rural town inBritish Columbia (Canada), which was supported through landscape visualizations. First, the impact of thevisualizations, based on scientific environmental modeling and presented in three different presentationformats, verbal/visual presentation, posters and a virtual globe, was evaluated with regard to immediateimpacts during the process. Second, the long-term impacts on decision-making and actual outcomeswere evaluated in a retrospective evaluation 22 months after the end of the initial planning process.Two results are highlighted: according to the quantitative pre-/post-questionnaires, the visualizationscontributed to increased awareness and understanding. Most importantly, the retrospective evaluationindicated that the process informed policy, operational and built changes in Kimberley, in which thelandscape visualizations played a role. The post interviews with key decision-makers showed that theyremembered most of the visualizations and some decision-makers were further using them, particularlythe posters. The virtual globe seemed to be not a “sustainable” display format suitable for formal decision-making processes such as council meetings though. That may change with the further mainstreaming ofvisualization technologies or mobile devices. Until then, we recommend using display formats that canbe re-used following a specific planning event such as an Open House, to ensure on-going support foreffective decision-making over the longer-term.Crown Copyright © 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC. Introduction.1. Climate change communication in urban and landscapelanningClimate change is a complex problem with impacts and interac-ions at global to local scales. Mitigation alone will not be sufficiento ensure a sustainable future: local communities need to adapt∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1142220615.E-mail address: O.Schroth@sheffield.ac.uk (O. Schroth).ttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2015.03.011169-2046/Crown Copyright © 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access ard/4.0/).BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).their planning to climate change impacts and adaptation (IPCC,2014). While political and economic frameworks may be devel-oped at international and national levels, local communities willplay a key role in the implementation of both mitigation andadaptation actions (Moser & Dilling, 2007). Barriers to the com-munication and integration of climate change into spatial planninginclude the complexity of climate science and long time horizons(Blanco et al., 2009; Moser & Dilling, 2007). Climate change isonly meaningful in community planning if the potential impactsand response options can be understood and handled within localplanning processes and policy development (Batty, 2010); com-munity vulnerabilities and possible climate change impacts needticle under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-1 Urbat(wt(pr(pss1atf2mttam(tliStHefufaopropsoiuvpnlCudoSrniip(acar48 O. Schroth et al. / Landscape ando be relevant to local decision-makers, stakeholders and citizensO’Neill & Hulme, 2009). However, the long time scales do not alignell with human cognition, which generally seems to be limitedo anticipating 15–20 years into the future or 50 years at mostTonn, Hemrick, & Conrad, 2006). These complex spatial and tem-oral dimensions partially explain why climate change has onlyecently begun to be addressed in local Canadian land use policiese.g. Carlson, 2012). If they are to be effective, landscape and urbanlanning processes need to adopt visualization tools that make thepatio-temporal dimension of climate change apparent at the localcale and in the context of locally relevant themes..2. Objectives of this studyThis paper presents two evaluations: a process evaluation andn evaluation of the later outcomes of the Kimberley Climate Adap-ation Project (KCAP). The paper explores different presentationormats for visualization media (see Gill, Lange, Morgan, & Romano,013), i.e. oral/verbal presentation, posters and virtual globes withulti-dimensional interaction (defined as spatial, temporal andhematic navigation), in terms of (a) whether they can have posi-ive immediate impacts on local climate change planning processes,nd (b) how the visualization media support long-term decision-aking outcomes from those processes. Drawing on Pond et al.2012), immediate impacts are defined as those changes for par-icipants that occur during or immediately following the use of 3Dandscape visualizations and tools in a process, including: changesn awareness, attitude and understanding (Bishop, Pettit, Sheth, &harma, 2013; Walter, Helgenberger, Wiek, & Scholz, 2007); affec-ive responses (Sheppard, 2005; van Lammeren, Houtkamp, Colijn,ilferink, & Bouwman, 2010); and new scientific insights (Bishopt al., 2013; Walter et al., 2007). The study fits into the frameworkor visualization evaluation suggested by Bishop et al. (2013), whosed similar tools (based on the Google Earth API). Our study dif-ers in its real-world application with the public as participantsnd by adding a novel retrospective component to assess effectsn planning processes and decision-making. The specific planningrocess itself has already been studied and will be briefly summa-ized in this paper to enable a comparison with the later evaluationf outcomes.The first objective of the process evaluation was to assess thereferences of participants for the different presentation formats:lide presentation, posters, and virtual globe. The second objectivef the process evaluation was to measure any immediate changesn awareness about local climate change impacts and an increasednderstanding of the links between land use and climate changeulnerabilities during the KCAP’s public Open House and in therocess outputs, i.e. recommendations and plan documents. Untilow, this quantitative pre-/post comparison has only been ana-yzed for an unpublished project report (Schroth, Pond, Muir-Owen,ampbell, & Sheppard, 2009). The third objective was to assessser feedback on visualization utility and specifically the multi-imensional interaction for exploring spatio-temporal dimensionsf climate change. These results have been previously published inchroth, Pond, et al. (2011), and will be briefly summarized.The novel retrospective element is part of a longitudinal studyevisiting the long-term effectiveness of visualizations in plan-ing processes, filling a gap in landscape visualization researchdentified by Bishop et al. (2013) and described below. The def-nition of “longitudinal studies” varies across disciplines; in thisaper we are referring to qualitative longitudinal policy studiessee Holland, Thomson, & Henderson, 2006). Rist (1994) defines longitudinal policy study as covering different phases of a policyycle including policy formulation, implementation and account-bility. Elliot, Holland, and Thomson (2008) further distinguishetrospective studies as a common and very efficient way ofn Planning 142 (2015) 147–158collecting longitudinal data, i.e. looking back at past events and col-lecting data about the impact such past events have had over time.In this paper, we used two formal data collection periods: duringthe initial event and process in 2008–2009 and during follow-upinterviews in 2011. According to Elliot et al. such studies could bedescribed as collecting data “retrospectively as part of an on-goingprospective longitudinal study” (2008: 229). With regard to Bishopet al. (2013), Faludi (2000), Larsen and Gunnarsson-Östling (2009),Robinson and Tansey (2006), and Walter et al. (2007), the objectivesfor the longitudinal study element are:(1) Evaluate whether key decision-makers still remember the visu-alizations.(2) Determine the uptake of spatial planning and geo-visualizationtools. Is there any difference between the virtual globe (multi-dimensional interaction) and other presentation formats intheir long-term use?(3) If so, did the visualizations add depth to the deliberation aboutlocal impacts and response options?(4) Did the visualizations add to an increased capacity of partici-pants to act?(5) Evaluate retrospectively whether (a) the KCAP process in gen-eral and (b) the visualizations in particular had an impact onlocal decision-making processes.(6) Evaluate retrospectively the actual outcomes such as policy oroperational change and whether they suggest transformativeor incremental change toward a shared goal.A major limitation of such an explorative longitudinal studyis the variety of external, potentially confounding variables. Thefollow-up interviews provided some indications of influencesbeyond the visualization tools, such as policy variables and therole of local champions, in shaping final outcomes. However, theseinteractions were not formally assessed in the final analysis.2. Visualizations as tools for communicating climatechange planning optionsAs tools for participatory local planning, landscape visual-izations have been shown to help people understand possiblefuture or alternative conditions (e.g. Al-Kodmany, 1999; Bishop& Lange, 2005; Danahy, 2001; Lange, 2001; Lewis, 2012; Orland,Budthimedhee, & Uusitalo, 2001; Pettit, Raymond, Bryan, & Lewis,2011; Salter, Campbell, Journeay, & Sheppard, 2009; Schroth,Wissen-Hayek, Lange, Sheppard, & Schmid, 2011) and to “geode-sign” these futures (Steinitz, 2012). In addition, several authorshave addressed the potential of local landscape visualization as atool specifically for improved communication of climate changeimplications (Dockerty, Lovett, Appleton, Bone, & Sünnenberg,2006; Nicholson-Cole, 2005; O’Neill and Hume, 2009; Sheppard,2005). Landscape visualizations of iconic local places function asa shared platform to integrate and communicate scientific dataand local knowledge across multiple climate impacts and miti-gation/adaptation strategies (Cohen et al., 2013; Sheppard, 2012).Recent work (e.g. Bishop et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2012; Nicholson-Cole, 2005; Pettit, Bishop, Sposito, Aurambout, & Sheth, 2012;Sheppard, 2012) has thus established early evidence and principlesto support the role of landscape visualization together with climatechange scenarios in community engagement and decision-making.Until recently, the body of work referred primarily to static land-scape visualizations. While these have examined time sequences,various spatial viewpoints, and integrated or layered spatialdatasets, only a few studies have now started to specifically eval-uate the affordances of interactive landscape visualizations tocommunicate long-term climate change impacts (Bishop et al., Urban2t2nifl“2ucbwianatbpibihbt&igeciveticiiefipnal“s33ccwvo(ihsiO. Schroth et al. / Landscape and013; Pettit et al., 2012; Schroth, Pond, et al., 2011) and the uncer-ainty of climate change visualization (Niño Ruiz, Bishop, & Pettit,013). Multi-dimensional interaction, i.e. the extension of spatialavigation through time and by theme, is especially well developedn virtual globes/geovisualization software, with computer inter-aces that use the globe metaphor to allow users to “zoom” betweenocal and global scales and provide specific navigation features fortime travel” and layers for thematic navigation (Sheppard & Cizek,009).Multi-dimensional interaction may thus offer new ways forsers to assess climate impacts and vulnerabilities with regard toomplex spatio-temporal data, e.g. snowpack change over time,y providing seamless, dynamic transitions across space and time,ith free choice of viewpoints and access to an almost unlim-ted number of views/images or animated sequences. Sheppardnd Cizek (2009), in reviewing benefits and risks of virtual globes,ote the instant access to data layers, metadata, and realistic andccurate imagery with virtual globes, via an interface with real-ime response to queries or navigation choices. Other possibleenefits include the potential for stimulating interest among layeople, with considerable potential for use as ‘bottom-up’ partic-pation tools and user-generated data. However, questions haveeen raised about difficulties in users’ cognition, such as visualiz-ng abstract concepts in space (Craglia et al., 2008), the imposedeavy cognitive loads (i.e. the number of interactions the humanrain has to process simultaneously) (Ware & Plumlee, 2005) andhe risk of misinterpretation in a non-facilitated context (Sheppard Cizek, 2009). Some research on interactivity has been donen cartography for atlas systems with multi-dimensional navi-ation (Hurni, 2008) and in human computer interaction (HCI)xperiments (Lewis, 2001). Bishop et al. (2013) also introducedontrolled “laboratory” settings like in HCI to landscape visual-zation research; however, few evaluations of visualizations andirtual globes as used in real-world processes and planning settingsxist.Evaluation may focus on technical aspects of the tools: func-ionality, utility, and comprehension (Bishop et al., 2013) ornteractivity and preferred visualization media (Gill et al., 2013). Inomparison, longitudinal evaluation offers an opportunity to assessmpact on decision-making and outcomes rather than immediatempacts, and has been called for by Bishop et al. (2013). Bishopt al. note both the potential power of visualizations and the dif-culties in attribution of effect to direct cause: “Over an extendederiod, effective visualization tools may trigger changes in aware-ess or changes in work practices that lead to profound outcomes,nd direct links back to the visualization may be difficult to estab-ish” (2013: 219). In addition, real-world evaluation must deal withmessy” variables – cultural, political contexts, etc. – and risk pre-enting results that are not generalizable (Bishop et al., 2013).. Methods.1. Study context, participants and scenario approachThe Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project (KCAP), aommunity-led initiative to Learn, Share, and Plan about locallimate change impacts (Liepa, 2009), provided a case study inhich to test the use of different presentation formats includingirtual globes. With a population of approximately 6000, the Cityf Kimberley typifies small rural communities in British ColumbiaCanada) that need to plan for a range of climate change relatedssues and impacts, including rising snowlines and changingydrological regimes, forest pest infestations, and increasing fireeason lengths. The KCAP project ran over 2008–2009, culminatingn a community Open House and resulting in an adaptation plan Planning 142 (2015) 147–158 149with over 70 recommendations for further action on water, forests,and tourism.Aerial photos, development proposals, future snowpack mod-eling, flood risk, mountain pine beetle susceptibility (Fig. 1) and afire model were integrated into GIS and a virtual globe model (forthe modeling and geo-visualization workflow see Schroth, Pond,& Sheppard, 2012). These thematic layers enabled questions aboutpotential vulnerabilities now and in the future with climate changeto be asked, and options (scenarios) for the community’s futureadaptation as well as greenhouse gas mitigation to be explored.3.2. Presentation formatsThe projected climate change impacts, scenarios, and KCAP rec-ommendations were presented at a Community Open House in2009, using three presentation formats: a verbal/visual slideshowpresentation (i.e. the facilitator leading through a PowerPoint pre-sentation); posters; and a hands-on (i.e. user-directed with mouse)virtual globe station (Table 1). The slideshow contained 39 slideswith 19 static landscape visualizations, eight maps, four diagramsand four (map) animations controlled by the presenter. It was pro-jected onto a large screen in front of the audience. The eight colorposters contained 10 landscape visualizations, 11 maps and fourdiagrams and were printed in A1 and put on the wall during theopen house. The virtual globe contained a 3D city model, sevenbase data layers, multiple 3D icons (van Lammeren et al., 2010)for viewpoints and points of interest such as historic forest fires ordebris flooding, and between five and 10 map layers for each topic(please see the linked KML files). By turning layer sets on and off,it was possible for the virtual globe users to navigate through thedifferent themes in the virtual globe or compare thematic layers.It was running on a computer station in the room and interestedparticipants could explore it with the help of a researcher (the vir-tual globe model is described in more detail in Schroth, Pond, et al.,2011). After the open house, a report was written for disseminationto funders and city staff. Despite the different presentation formats,the content was always based on the same geospatial data and land-scape visualizations, and addressed the same themes. Temporalchange was presented with the help of animations in the presenta-tion, as map series on the posters (resulting in a higher number ofmaps on the posters) and using the time slider in the virtual globe(Fig. 2).3.3. Process evaluationThe research design was exploratory and based on the case studymethodology (Francis, 2001). The benefit of the case study methodis that it allows for testing in a realistic planning context. On theother hand, control over the research environment and researchvariables is limited, due to the need to fit the research to a real com-munity planning process. In order to provide robust results, mixedquantitative and qualitative methods were applied (as suggested inBishop et al., 2013) in a three-stage process evaluation and a retro-spective evaluation of the longitudinal impact on decision-making22 months later (see Section 3.6).The three stages of the Open House process evaluation were:- Pre-/post comparison of questionnaires with analysis of changesin participant awareness about climate change and their under-standing of the links with land use changes.- Analysis of subjective ranking by participants of the visualizationmedia used in the Open House.- Structured in-depth user interviews documenting the experienceof using multi-dimensional navigation within the virtual globestation; video- and recorded documenting the computer screen150 O. Schroth et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 142 (2015) 147–158Fig. 1. A series of maps produced in 2008 predicting mountain pine beetle susceptibility of forest stands for the next 80 years was presented in a virtual globe using zoom,time slider and layer functions. This selection of three images shows current and future Mountain Pine Beetle susceptibility for the years 2009, 2030 and 2070. The darkorange (dark shaded in black/white) areas represent high susceptibility, while the light orange (light shaded in black/white) represent medium susceptibility. The green areas(medium shaded in black/white) are low or very low susceptibility. For 2009–2010, the actual infestation was close to the predicted susceptibility (geodata© 2009 Google).Table 1Categorization of media components and presentation formats used in the Kimberley Open House presentation.Presentation formats Media componentsText 2D maps, aerialphotos,diagramsLandscapevisualizations(static)Landscapevisualizations(liveanimation)3D icons Interactiveself-guidedexplorationPosters Yes Yes Yes No No NoVerbal/visualpresentationYes Yes Yes Yes No NoVirtual Globe station• Spatial nav.• Time sliderYes Yes Yes Yes Yes YesCHcpt<>Fb• Layers• Pop-upsand user hand/mouse interactions at the time of the structuredinterviews, during the open house.As described in further detail in Schroth, Pond, Muir-Owen,ampbell, and Sheppard (2009), 46 people attended the Openouse, of which 36 completed the pre-questionnaires and 38ompleted the post-questionnaires. 11 respondents chose to notrovide personal data; the remaining sample was equally dis-ributed with 13 males and 14 females. The age representation was:20 two; 20–29 two; 30–39 five; 40–49 seven; 50–59 nine; and60 two. Self-reported experience with computer visualizationsig. 2. Spatial navigation in Google Earth: (a) move, (b) click & fly, and (c) zoom; tempoookmarks and tours (geodata© 2009 Google).varied: only one person reported having “no experience at all”;seven reported “very little”; six “some but not much”; 13 “quite alot”; nobody assessed themselves as “very experienced.” Ethnicitywas not included in the questionnaire; the community is predom-inantly euro-Canadian.3.4. Analysis of questionnairesThe pre-questionnaire (n = 36) asked participants to rate theirconcern level regarding climate change in comparison to otherglobal issues, their knowledge about the global and local impactsral navigation: (d) time-slider; (e) thematic navigation: layers and folders, and (f) UrbanompctwtiapassaftttinKrst3gtwrT(stcwaRr(8[iogtcr3ewnpmlipiaO. Schroth et al. / Landscape andf climate change, and their understanding of links between cli-ate change and land use using a five-point Likert scale. Theost-questionnaire (n = 38) contained the same questions, allowingomparison of pre-/post-questionnaires by 36 respondents (usinghe paired-samples t-test for related samples because the responsesere normally distributed) to show whether participants ratedheir levels of awareness about climate change and understand-ng of the links between climate change and land use differentlyfter the public Open House.Subjective assessment is a well-established empirical methodarticularly in participatory action research: respondents aresked to assess their perceived level of understanding, i.e. theirubjective assessments (see Bishop et al., 2013 who used aimilar approach). In the post-questionnaire, respondents weresked to assess how helpful different presentation options wereor the understanding of local climate change impacts, linkso land use, and mitigation and adaptation measures; to ratehe overall helpfulness of the combined visualizations; to rankhe presentation formats; and, to rank the multi-dimensionalnteractive features of the virtual globe. The full question-aire is archived online under http://www.lviz.org/uploads/CAP%20Questionnaire%20final%20version.pdf. The quantitativeesults were analyzed with descriptive and frequency tools (mean,tandard deviation, variance, minimum and maximum) in the sta-istical analysis software IBM SPSS Statistics 20..5. Analysis of interviews and video-taping of users at the virtuallobe stationIn addition to the quantitative pre-/post-questionnaire, struc-ured qualitative interviews were conducted with 17 users (n = 17)ho explored the hands-on Google Earth model, asking them toeport what they saw and how they interpreted the information.he sessions (lasting up to 20 min per person) were videotapedcomputer screen and hand/mouse) and audio-recorded.The qualitative feedback and transcripts from the virtual globetation interviews were analyzed and classified into 40 codes usinghe Qualitative Data Analysis & Research Software Atlas.ti. The mainategories of codes such as context, impact and technical issuesere formulated with regard to research question and literaturend further elaborated in sub-categories derived from the data.eliability was increased through data triangulation, i.e. comparingesults from four different data sources to determine consistencycf. Bishop et al., 2013). Rankings and responses under (a) Question in the post-questionnaire (“Please rank the [interactive] featuresshown below] in order of their helpfulness to you in understand-ng climate change adaptation and mitigation”) and the followingpen-ended question were compared to (b) the videotape of user-lobe interactions at the virtual globe station, (c) the audiotape ofhe station sessions and (d) structured interviews. If a statement isonfirmed through two or more sources of evidence, the derivedesult has a higher level of confidentiality than isolated evidence..6. Retrospective data collection as part of the longitudinalvaluationIn April 2011, 22 months after the Open House, phone interviewsere conducted with seven key decision-makers in the commu-ity: two (out of seven) city councillors from different sides of theolitical spectrum, a city officer responsible for planning, a seniorember of the fire department, a consulting fire ecologist, the faci-itator of the initial KCAP, and a community representative whos also locally active in two environmental NGOs. They all partici-ated in the KCAP process, on the local working group or providingnput to the process. While this is a small sample, it representsbout half of the working group members, especially those with Planning 142 (2015) 147–158 151decision-making responsibilities, and also represents the rangeof working group stakeholder types. In late 2013, Kimber-ley’s Integrated Community Sustainability Plan ICSP (Centre forSustainability Whistler, 2011) and other recent planning outcomessuch as the Mark Creek Flume Flood Management and Stream Reha-bilitation Project were reviewed and compared to the interviews ina document analysis. The phone interviews were semi-structured,following a script that encompassed both questions about theprocess and, where possible, more specific assessments of visual-ization tools used. It also included both the interviewees’ responsein hindsight to the original process, as well as subsequent usesand outcomes. All interviews were audio-recorded and transcribedbefore analysis through coding in the Atlas.ti software. Six codeswere derived from the evaluation goals: (1) references to visu-alizations from the KCAP, (2) how tools were used for planningtasks, (3) change of awareness, (4) change in individual knowledgeand capacity to act, (5) impacts on decision-making practice, and(6) physical outcomes in the built environment. References to thevisualizations (1) were cross-linked to issues identified in any ofthe other codes where relevant, since we expected some inter-action between the continued use of the visualizations and thedecision-making process. While variables had been controlled asfar as possible during the open house, the retrospective data col-lection was cognizant of additional factors that may have impactedlong-term outcomes, although these were not subjected to formalanalysis.4. Results of the process evaluationThe following section summarizes results from the question-naires (quantitative and qualitative) and the virtual globe stationinterviews during the Open House. Results are presented on imme-diate impact on awareness, attitudes and knowledge, and reportedpreferences for and utility of presentation formats. Results on long-term outcomes are presented in Section 5. In the following, theterm “respondents” refers to participants quoted from the ques-tionnaires, and “users” to the subset of participants quoted frominterviews at the virtual globe station. Longitudinal study partici-pants are referred to as interviewees.4.1. Immediate changes in awareness, attitudes and knowledgeduring the Open HouseMean results show already high initial levels of concern on afive-point Likert scale (the average of all means is 4.56, see Table 2).Respondents’ subjective assessment of their concern about cli-mate change impacts on the local community, local ecosystemsand future generations increased significantly between pre andpost questionnaires, with a significance level of 0.05. Subjectiveassessment of climate change concerning their families and under-standing the link between climate change and future land usedevelopment showed a significant increase with a significance levelof 0.01 (Table 2).4.2. Visualization utility and preferred media34 out of 38 respondents rated the visualization material ashelpful or very helpful in understanding climate change adapta-tion and mitigation options in Kimberley. Both posters and virtualglobes had fairly high median rankings of 2. The virtual globeranked first 16 times and last 11 times (out of 38), showing abimodal distribution (Schroth, Pond, et al., 2011). Posters rankedfirst 12 times and only once ranked last. The (almost) one third ofrespondents who ranked the posters first ranked the virtual globelast on average, while respondents who liked the virtual globe also152 O. Schroth et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 142 (2015) 147–158Table 2Paired-samples statistics and paired-sample t-test for self-assessed ratings of concern about climate change and assessment of climate change and land use links before andafter the Open House (pre-/post-questionnaire).Paired samples statisticsConcern about climate change Mean N Std. deviation Std. error meanPair 1 Pre concern globally 4.89 36 .319 .053Post concern globally 4.92 36 .280 .047Pair 2 Pre concern about localcommunity4.56 36 .504 .084Post concern about localcommunity4.72 36 .454 .076Pair 3 Pre concern local ecosystems 4.61 36 .494 .082Post concern local ecosystems 4.78 36 .422 .070Pair 4 Pre concern family 4.22 36 .760 .127Post concern family 4.47 36 .654 .109Pair 5 Pre concern future generations 4.69 36 .624 .104Post concern futuregenerations4.86 36 .424 .071Pair 6 Pre assessment of how stronglyclimate change and future landuse are linked3.74 34 .898 .154Post assessment of how strongclimate change and future landuse are linked4.24 34 .431 .074Paired samples testConcern about climate change Paired Differences t df Sig. (2-tailed)95% Confidence Interval of the DifferenceUpperPair 1 Level of concern globally .029 −1.000 35 .324Pair 2 Level of concern about localcommunity−.039 −2.646 35 .012*Pair 3 Level of concern regardinglocal ecosystems−.039 −2.646 35 .012*Pair 4 Level of concern regardingfamily−.081 −3.000 35 .005**Pair 5 Level of concern regardingfuture generations−.039 −2.646 35 .012*Pair 6 Assessment of how strongclimate change and future landuse are linked−.199 −3.384 33 .002**n.s. = not significant (p ≥ 0.05).* Significant p < 0.05.*lettprFtftnatc4mcs[et** Very significant p < 0.01.** Highly significant p < 0.001.iked the posters. Given the real-world Open House where a vari-ty of media were employed, it is possible that participation inhe hands-on station may have had an effect (positive or nega-ive) on virtual globe rankings. In the open feedback part of theost-questionnaire, 25 comments were received from 25 differentespondents on the visualizations and virtual globes specifically.ifteen of these comments were positive about the use of visualiza-ions including virtual globes, e.g. “It is a great tool. Very applicableor community planning process.” Three respondents stated thathey had not learned much from the visualizations or that this wasot the right medium for them: e.g. “an awful lot to absorb in such short time. [. . .] For older people, probably visuals are too muchoo fast too hard to follow. Younger people more accustomed toomputer visualizations probably absorb all this very readily.”.3. User experience of the virtual globe modelThe interview data from the virtual globe stations suggests thatulti-dimensional interaction in particular aids in understandinglimate change impacts and risks such as extended forest fire sea-ons and flood risk: “the forest fire one I thought was really great.. . .] I don’t think people realize how often they’ve happened sospecially when they hear about interface [. . .] how serious of ahreat it is to town.” A major outcome in terms of understandingcame from the exploration of mountain pine beetle susceptibilityand flood risk. During the Open House presentation, the researchersfirst used the susceptibility model to demonstrate the visual impactof future pine beetle spread; then after an overlay was added ofpine beetle endangered forest stands and flood risk, it became obvi-ous to users that the risk of debris flooding will increase: “Floodrisks [. . .] look at Mark Creek. [. . .] So this is based on a sce-nario where [. . .] a flood would occur because of [. . .] a jam ona bridge here [. . .].” (see Fig. 3). In this point, the interview datamatches and supports the questionnaire feedback (data triangula-tion).The various themes have very different time scales: eight hoursfor the fire spread model and up to 100 years for urban developmentand mountain pine beetle cycle. Different temporal phenomena andtime scales need to be distinguished in the context of risk assess-ments. While frequency of forest fires was visualized in a static map,progression (fire spread model, urban development) was interac-tively animated as a time-lapse sequence with the Google Earthtime slider. Interview transcriptions show that both visualizationswere understood correctly, although the time slider animationswere more dramatic. One user reported that the “fire viz. was mostpowerful – [you] could feel it in the room” (the role of drama inlandscape visualization is discussed in further detail in Sheppard &Cizek, 2009).O. Schroth et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 142 (2015) 147–158 153Fig. 3. This figure shows the Kimberley town center with an overlay of potential flood areas as identified in the municipal flood risk study (highlighted through circles) andthe areas for future mountain pine beetle susceptibility, derived from the susceptibility model (orange/dark shading in black/white for high susceptibility and yellow/lights tain pfl (For inv5cd••••••5edwttoeashading in black/white for medium). It led to the conclusion that increased mounood risk from debris jams at the highlighted bottlenecks (geodata© 2009 Google). ersion of the article.). Longitudinal evaluationThe evaluation of long-term impacts of both the case study pro-ess and its embedded visualization tools considered the followingimensions:Interviewees’ recall of the presentation in the original processand/or in subsequent use, as an indicator of vividness and influ-ence on current thinking.Interviewees’ perceived assessment of the addedvalue/effectiveness of the visualizations and visualizationdevelopment process in the KCAP.Reported use of spatial planning and presentation formats includ-ing their perceived utility, reported uptake and on-going use.Interviewees’ views of contribution to decision-making, andincreased capacity of decision-makers to act.Actual outcomes in terms of policies, and the built environment,including transformative or incremental change toward a sharedgoal.Unexpected findings..1. Recall of visualizations and perceived added valueAll interviewees remembered the visualized scenarios in gen-ral; two interviewees described the most influential images inetail. The interviewee who had copies of the posters on display atork and who used the virtual globe after the Open House providedhe most detailed description of the material, covering eight specifichematic visualizations. One interviewee missed the presentation;ne interviewee did not recall the visualizations in any detail. How-ver, five interviewees (all except the councillors) referred to thenimation of the fire spread model.For example, one interviewee not only referenced the fireequence, but also the mountain pine beetle, watershed andine beetle damage will increase the amount of dead wood and therefore increaseterpretation of the references to color in this text, the reader is referred to the webrevisioning the downtown/proximity to groceries. All the inter-viewees noted that the visualizations “added value” to theadaptation planning process.5.2. Perceived increase in awareness and understanding, addingdepth to on-going deliberationsInterviewees had different conceptions of how far awarenessamong local residents, city council and stakeholders has changedas a consequence of the KCAP and the visualizations. The coun-cillors thought that the multi-dimensional visualizations did havean impact on the city Council overall, although the virtual globeformat might not be as suitable for older users. Even the moreskeptical councillor stated, “the process [. . .] really enlightened meand I can say opened my eyes about [. . .] climate change.” Twointerviewees explained that they were already well informed aboutclimate change and therefore, the visualizations did not changetheir awareness but may have added details to their understand-ing; one stated that he had thought more about what can be donesince the KCAP. With regard to the general public, most interview-ees thought that the KCAP had informed the public but did notsignificantly change public opinions.Three interviewees emphasized that the temporal dimensionwas key, i.e. being able to see past events and changes 50–100 yearsinto the future with linkages between the topics.“The key thing is just being able to talk about [. . .] very spe-cific things that we learned as a result of [the] visualizations. . . fire risk, by looking at mountain pine beetle in watershed.It provided more detail, more detailed understanding, a richerunderstanding of what was going on, which then makes it easierto communicate and articulate further.”Several interviewees noted that the collaborative client-centered process (i.e. that the visualizations had been developed154 O. Schroth et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 142 (2015) 147–158F of thvCtw5epaiadpvig. 4. Landscape architecture conceptual design proposal for the adaptive redesignirtual globe.redit: Muir-Owen and Pond (2009).ogether with the stakeholder working group) was important, asas having an introduction or mediation:“It’s just really good [that] before people go into one of theseglobes that there’s some introductory material to say what it isand what it isn’t.”.3. Reported use of tools: utility, uptake and on-going useOne interviewee stressed that the forum in which people arengaged is important: is it a public meeting, is the participationrocess a one-off event or on-going and who has access?“I think that using visualizations like that are a good idea. I thinkyou can get people to respond and react to them more than justa bunch of text on a piece of paper. The limitation is how do youget people to look at it? Where are your forums to allow that tohappen?”Another interviewee commented: “how do you keep doing it onn on-going basis to reach all the other people that haven’t seent?”Relevant posters were actually displayed at the city booth at Green Building conference the following year and permanentlyisplayed on a wall at City Hall for further reference in everydaylanning. The posters are used in “coffee conversation,” such as:“The design for Mark Creek looked to deal with the concreteflume and the flood risk there. We looked at that [poster] quitea bit. And the other one that’s been a really good one was theGreen River vision. We used that to talk about some of our trailplanning and initiatives and stuff that we’ve been doing.”A second interviewee reported using the multi-dimensionalisualizations “extensively” after the Open House: in a fuele Kimberley flood risk area – a planning outcome of the KCAP and visualized in themanagement workshop, when talking about landscaping,irrigation, xeriscaping, etc. and as argument to promote a waterconservation scheme and sprinkler bylaw. This interviewee hadalso contacted the researchers asking to convert the model fromthe virtual globe format into a time-lapse wildfire video and firemitigation poster.Two interviewees used the virtual globe on their own follow-ing the Open House, but both reported technical difficulties andglitches with the technology. They thought that the technologywas not reliable enough, especially for a larger setting such as acouncil meeting at city hall. One interviewee had not re-used anyvisual materials but “was keeping them in the back of her head.”The posters and to a lesser degree the final KCAP report, producedfollowing the Open House, were described as the long-term legacyof the project; one interviewee stated that “actual output materi-als are needed to make a long-term impact beyond the end of theactual process.”5.4. Contribution to the decision-making processes in council andoperationsOne interviewee noted that there are more local champions fol-lowing the process now than before the KCAP. Another spoke to thechanges at the Council and staff level:“When we first started this process I think climate change wasjust a word. But I think now that we’ve got into it, and again ourstaff continues continually [to] remind Council that we have todo this. As a result, the Council is now more pro-active.”For example, two interviewees emphasized that primarily “localchampions” drive change; the visualizations were powerful talk-ing points supporting transformative change but unlikely to workon their own. As an additional caveat, one interviewee noted thatO. Schroth et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 142 (2015) 147–158 155 RehS icwebt“pv5eoFaFig. 5. Implementation of the Mark Creek Flume Flood Management and Streamource: City of Kimberley, retrieved on January 19, 2014 from https://kimberley.civhe process [and by extension, the visualizations] may have beenpreaching to the converted” and that other variables such asolitical and economic pressure will be more important than theisualizations..5. Actual outcomes in terms of policies and the builtnvironmentParts of Kimberley’s Integrated Community Sustainability Planr ICSP (Centre for Sustainability Whistler, 2011) were informed byig. 6. Photo of the first phase of work on the Mark Creek Flume Flood Managementnd Stream Rehabilitation Project in April 2013 (photo: T. Pollock, 2013).abilitation Project 2012 Construction Program – Habitat Features and Planting..net/Documents/DocumentList.aspx?ID=1606.the KCAP. However, no visualizations were included in the ICSP – itstill seems unusual to include visualizations in strategic policy doc-uments. Nevertheless, interviewees identified a dozen operationalchanges, policy changes and built projects that were informed bythe adaptation process and visualizations, including that Councildecided on a new water conservation scheme, a sprinkler bylaw,and solar lights for the trails. Above all, the first phase of a re-naturalized creek and flood retention zone now mitigates floodrisk in the town center, similar to the conceptual green infrastruc-ture design from the visualizations (personal communication, twointerviewees, see Figs. 4–6).Other ideas from the KCAP such as a composting facility, solarpanels on the roof of the community pool and a biomass facilityhave continued to be discussed. A solar photovoltaic farm, locatedon the former mining concentrator site and similar to the one inthe visualizations, is now being constructed by a public/privateconsortium. The private company launched the idea without know-ing about the KCAP. Conceptually, however, the ground had beenprepared with staff, council and citizens, demonstrating the util-ity of scenarios that go beyond adaptation to include mitigationsolutions.5.6. Unexpected results: breadth of influence and behavioralchangeA surprising finding was the breadth of uses of the visualizations,from fire awareness to green buildings to creek re-naturalization.In hindsight, this should have been expected as the project hadlinked multiple thematic layers under climate change planning.These have now dis-aggregated back into their “silos.” Secondly,1 Urbaoioe6vpacTcspsitsigumesgtti“weeup6itannchmivvpoatamSfavHs56 O. Schroth et al. / Landscape andne interviewee reported his department had begun carpool-ng to work. Such individual changes in behavior, more thanne year after the KCAP process and Open House, had not beenxpected.. Discussion and conclusionsThe key findings from the process evaluation were that theisualization materials, presented through posters, in a slideshowresentation and in a virtual globe, helped to increase participantwareness and understanding of the community’s vulnerabilities,limate impacts and response options including land use choices.he Open House increased self-reported concern over local impli-ations of climate change in Kimberley, with some participantstating their intention to take action in response to the informationrovided. Comparable results have been found in other geographicettings (e.g. Bishop et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2012, 2013). Follow-upnterviews 22 months later confirmed that participants perceivedhe visualizations to be helpful, and had continued to use them inome settings.Real-world settings may provide results that laboratory sett-ngs can build on for further investigation. For example, virtuallobes were ranked highly by only half the respondents, with justnder 50% of questionnaire respondents ranking them last in visualedia and a small minority of respondents (three out of 38) statingxplicitly that they preferred traditional means of communicationuch as posters. In other words, they explicitly rejected virtuallobes and “rapid digital media” as being inaccessible for some par-icipants. Bishop et al. (2013) could not confirm this finding butheir sample of participants consisted of experts only. In contrast,nterviewee statements from the KCAP process note challenges forolder users,” i.e. users who grew up before digital technologiesere widespread. Visualization experiments may need to expresslyxpand participant diversity to a broader set of “publics” beyondxpert stakeholders. We suggest further experiments comparingsers of different age groups and comparing domain experts to layeople..1. Longitudinal evaluation indicates transformative orncremental change toward a shared goalBased on multiple evaluation streams, it is clear that changeoward climate change planning goals has occurred in Kimberleys a result of the Kimberly Climate Adaptation Project. Aware-ess increased among decision-makers, stakeholders and citizens,umerous policies and operations have been changed, and spe-ific adaptation and mitigation projects put forward in the KCAPave been built in the following five years, suggesting a transfor-ative change toward planning for climate change. Though it ismpossible to directly link the long-term outcomes solely to theisualizations, on the whole, the interviewees agreed that both theisualizations and the broader adaptation planning process sup-orted the changes in the City following the KCAP. The main meritf the visualizations – and the scenarios they depicted – lay in cre-ting and communicating ideas and practical solutions to moveoward a more resilient community, thereby adding value to a newdaptation process.The added value of the visualizations came both from the digitaledia and the longer-term availability of more traditional media.imilar to findings in Bishop et al. (2013), this study found that theree exploration of the virtual globe tool (multi-dimensional inter-ction) was appreciated by participants as “helpful” and “addingalue” during the process, with the previously discussed caveats.owever, traditional presentation formats like posters and reportseemed to be more accessible during the later planning stages thann Planning 142 (2015) 147–158the virtual globe. Galler, Krätzig, Warren-Kretzschmar, and vonHaaren (2014) demonstrated similar results for an online surveyamong planning officials in German landscape and environmentalplanning: by far the most popular digital presentation format werePDF documents because they are easily accessible and fulfill thesame legal requirements as printed documents. This situation maychange over time, with increased mainstreaming of the technol-ogy and improved Internet access in rural/smaller communities sothat more interactive presentation formats may also become moreimportant in the long-term.6.2. Limitations of the evaluation methodsUnfortunately, the videotaping of virtual globe users did notreveal additional insights on user interactions beyond verbal com-mentary. That was partly due to ethics because, unlike Gill et al.(2013), we were not allowed to film the person but only the screen.If we had been allowed to film the person as well, gestures andhead positions could have also indicated how users interact withthe virtual globe.The retrospective evaluation may be subject to intrinsic biasesthat can occur with any interview process where the researcher isassociated with the earlier process and is known to the intervie-wee, in terms of a possible tendency to say what they think theresearcher wants to hear. Bishop et al. (2013: 231f) suggest the“pooling of results from different research groups” to characterizethe issue across studies.6.3. Visualizations embedded in the process inform change on thegroundVisualizations are only as good as the participatory process inwhich they are embedded (Lewis, 2012) and therefore, both haveto be well integrated in practice (Pond et al., 2010) and examinedtogether. Three types of combined visualization/process outcomeswere identified by the interviewees:• Individual behavioral change, e.g. car pooling or that a formerclimate skeptic decision-maker started considering the urgencyof climate action; no information is available on general changeof behavior among the local public.• Operational, policy and built changes (e.g. the Flood Managementand Stream Rehabilitation Project 2012) were informed by theKCAP and its visualizations.• Local “champions” are driving change in the community usingthe visualization products.Again, we cannot attribute these to the visualizations alone,but there is evidence that visualizations contributed to the overallimpact of the KCAP, and thus to the outcomes to date. Althoughthe visualization work took place between 2008 and 2009, thevirtual globe software has changed surprisingly little, e.g. Bishopet al. (2013) were using the same API. What has changed is therange of display options and controllers, e.g. Gill et al. (2013) testwireless videogame controllers and 3D glasses in addition to tra-ditional displays and the same authors propose mobile devicescapable of augmented reality (Gill & Lange, 2013). Based on thisstudy and Bishop et al. (2013), Gill et al. (2013), Lewis (2012) andPond et al. (2010), we recommend further careful application andtesting of virtual globes to enhance public understanding of localclimate change risks and future response options, with a focus onhow to sustain the communication over time, and the testing ofnovel display types. Further insights might be provided througha study tracking the continued use of influential scientific anddesign visualizations in spatial planning and geodesign (Steinitz, Urban2iAlcaCtf1mFkfnvf(lC1vTpCpGiooLmataaAi2RABBBBCO. Schroth et al. / Landscape and012) processes, including monitoring the impact of changing dig-tal media technologies over the longer term.cknowledgementsThe Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project (KCAP) was a year-ong community engagement process looking at local climatehange impacts and response options for the City of Kimberley,nd was funded by the Columbia Basin Trust as part of the CBT’sommunities Adapting to Climate Change initiative.The CALP pilot component of the Kimberley Climate Adapta-ion Project was supported by the City of Kimberley with fundingrom the Real Estate Foundation of British Columbia (16R45753,6R43378, 16S70956) and the Ministry of Community Develop-ent – Smart Development Partnership Program 16R32784 (Smartorests) (BC Environment) 16R44450, 16R63592. Additional in-ind support was provided by Dr. Olaf Schroth’s post-doctoralunding from the Swiss National Science Foundation (fellowshipumber PBEZP1-122976); the European Biosphere 3D open sourceirtual globe team who designed 3D tree models specificallyor the Kimberley project; the Columbia Basin Trust 16R65260Stewart Cohen); the Geospatial Research Centre at Selkirk Col-ege (GEOIDE) 16R65906, 16R45255, 16R78095; and the Pacificlimate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) ((PICS) 16R65069, 16R64820,6R63896, 16R47168, 16R08614, 16R07664, 16R06546) who pro-ided project-specific snowpack modeling, with special thanks torevor Murdock. Teck-Cominco supplied high-quality City aerialhotos. The CBT Climate Advisory Committee, particularly Stewartohen, offered insight and review of the visualizations. Data for theroject was additionally supplied by the City’s Fire Consultant Bobray, and the Provincial Forestry Service’s entomologist Art Stockn Nelson, BC. A strong local project supports effective visualizationutcomes: the CALP work could not have been accomplished with-ut the support of Mayor and Council, KCAP co-ordination by Ingridiepa, and the feedback and support of the KCAP Steering Com-ittee and Working Group members. The Project Team gratefullycknowledges the funding provided by the Real Estate Foundation,he Ministry of Community Development, the City of Kimberley,nd the Columbia Basin trust to pilot innovative climate changedaptation planning.ppendix A. Supplementary dataSupplementary data associated with this article can be found,n the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.015.03.011eferencesl-Kodmany, K. (1999). Using visualization techniques for enhancing public par-ticipation in planning and design: Process, implementation, and evaluation.Landscape and Urban Planning, 45(1), 37–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2046(99)00024-9atty, M. (2010). The unpredictability of the near and far future. Environmentand Planning B: Planning and Design, 37(6), 958–960. http://dx.doi.org/10.1068/b3706edishop, I. D., & Lange, E. (2005). Visualization in landscape and environmentalplanning—Technology and application. London/New York: Taylor & Francis.ishop, I. D., Pettit, C. J., Sheth, F., & Sharma, S. (2013). Evaluation of data visualisationoptions for land-use policy and decision making in response to climate change.Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 40(2), 213–233. http://dx.doi.org/10.1068/b38159lanco, H., Alberti, M., Forsyth, A., Krizek, K. J., Rodríguez, D. A., Talen, E., et al. (2009).Hot, congested, crowded and diverse: Emerging research agendas in planning.Progress in Planning, 71(4), 153–205.arlson, D. (2012). Preparing for climate change: An implementation guide for LocalGovernments in British Columbia (Report). West Coast Environmental Law.,retrieved from http://www.retooling.ca/ Library/docs/WCEL climate changeFINAL.pdf Planning 142 (2015) 147–158 157Centre for Sustainability Whistler. (2011). Imagine Kimberley Integrated Commu-nity Sustainability Plan. Whistler., retrieved from http://www.whistlercentre.ca/project/kimberley-icsp/Cohen, S., Sheppard, S. R. J., Shaw, A., Flanders, D., Burch, S., Taylor, W., et al.(2012). Downscaling and visioning of mountain snow packs and other climatechange implications in North Vancouver, British Columbia. Mitigation Adapta-tion Strategies for Global Change, 17(1), 25–49. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11027-011-9307-9Cohen, S., Laurie, M., Liepa, I., Pearce, C., Pond, E., & Schroth, O. (2013). Sharedlearning on adapting to climate change: experiences from Columbia basintrust—Communities adapting to climate change initiative. In J. Palutikof, S. LBoulter, A. J. Ash, & M. S. Smith (Eds.), Climate adaptation futures (pp. 177–189).Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.Craglia, M., Goodchild, M. F., Annoni, A., Camara, G., Gould, M., Kuhn, W., et al. (2008).Next-generation Digital Earth: A position paper from the Vespucci Initiativefor the Advancement of Geographic Information Science. International Journalof Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 3, 146–167. http://dx.doi.org/10.2902/1725-0463.2008.03.art9Danahy, J. W. (2001). Technology for dynamic viewing and peripheral vision in land-scape visualization. Landscape and Urban Planning, 54(1–4), 127–138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2046(01)00131-1Dockerty, T., Lovett, A., Appleton, K., Bone, A., & Sünnenberg, G. (2006). Developingscenarios and visualisations to illustrate potential policy and climatic influenceson future agricultural landscapes. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 114(1),103–120. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2005.11.008Elliot, Holland, & Thomson. (2008). Longitudinal and panel studies. In P Alasuutari, L.Bickman, & J. Brannen (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of social research methods (pp.228–245). London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi, Singapore: SAGE PublicationsLtd.Faludi, A. (2000). The performance of spatial planning. Planning Practice and Research,15(4), 299–318. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/713691907Francis, M. (2001). A case study method for landscape architecture. Landscape Jour-nal, 20(1), 15–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.3368/lj.20.1.15Galler, C., Krätzig, S., Warren-Kretzschmar, B., & von Haaren, C. (2014). Integratedapproaches in digital/interactive landscape planning. In U. Wissen Hayek, P.Fricker, & E. Buhmann (Eds.), Peer reviewed proceedings of digital landscape archi-tecture 2014 at ETH Zurich (pp. 70–83). Berlin/Offenbach: Herbert WichmannVerlag, VDE VERLAG GMBH.Gill, L., & Lange, E. (2013). Visualizing landscapes. In P. Howard, I. Thompson, & E.Waterton (Eds.), The Routledge companion to landscape studies (pp. 417–426).London, New York: Routledge.Gill, L., Lange, E., Morgan, E., & Romano, D. (2013). An analysis of usage of differenttypes of visualisation media within a collaborative planning workshop environ-ment. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 40(4), 742–754. http://dx.doi.org/10.1068/b38049Holland, J., Thomson, R., & Henderson, S. (2006). Qualitative longitudinalresearch: A discussion paper. London: London South Bank University., retrieved from http://www1.lsbu.ac.uk/ahs/downloads/families/familieswp21.pdfHurni, L. (2008). Multimedia atlas information systems. In S. Shekhar, & H. Xiong(Eds.), Encyclopedia of GIS (pp. 759–763). New York: Springer.IPCC. (2014). Summary for policymakers. In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C.Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L.White (Eds.), Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. part A:Global and sectoral aspects. Contribution of working group II to the fifth assessmentreport of the intergovernmental panel on climate change (pp. 1–32). Cambridge,United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.Lange, E. (2001). The limits of realism: Perceptions of virtual landscapes. Land-scape and Urban Planning, 54(1–4), 163–182. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2046(01)00134-7Larsen, K., & Gunnarsson-Östling, U. (2009). Climate change scenarios andcitizen-participation: Mitigation and adaptation perspectives in constructingsustainable futures. Habitat International, 33(3), 260–266. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2008.10.007Lewis, J. R. (2001). Introduction: Current issues in usability evaluation. InternationalJournal of Human–Computer Interaction, 13(4), 343–349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15327590IJHC1304Lewis, J. L. (2012). More art than science: The sources and effects of stylistic variationin visualization for planning and design. Environment and Planning B: Planningand Design, 39(3), 551–565. http://dx.doi.org/10.1068/b37148Liepa, I. (2009). Adapting to climate change in Kimberley, BC (Report and Recom-mendations). Kimberley: City of Kimberley., retrieved from http://www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/KImberley CACCI Phase 1 Adaptation Report.pdfMoser, S., & Dilling, L. (Eds.). (2007). Creating a climate for change: Communicatingclimate change and facilitating social change. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Nicholson-Cole, S. A. (2005). Representing climate change futures: A critique on theuse of images for visual communication. Computers, Environment and Urban Sys-tems, 29(3), 255–273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2004.05.002Niño Ruiz, M., Bishop, I., & Pettit, C. J. (2013). Spatial model steering, an exploratoryapproach to uncertainty awareness in land use allocation. Environmental Mod-elling & Software, 39, 70–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2012.06.009O’Neill, S. J., & Hulme, M. (2009). An iconic approach for representing climatechange. Global Environmental Change, 19(4), 402–410. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2009.07.0041 UrbaOPPPPRRSSSSS58 O. Schroth et al. / Landscape andrland, B., Budthimedhee, K., & Uusitalo, J. (2001). Considering virtual worlds as rep-resentations of landscape realities and as tools for landscape planning. Landscapeand Urban Planning, 54(1) http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2046(01)00132-3ettit, C. J., Raymond, C. M., Bryan, B. A., & Lewis, H. (2011). Identifying strengthsand weaknesses of landscape visualisation for effective communication of futurealternatives. Landscape and Urban Planning, 100(3), 231–241. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.01001ettit, C. J., Bishop, I., Sposito, V., Aurambout, J., & Sheth, F. (2012). Developing a multi-scale visualisation framework for use in climate change response. LandscapeEcology, 27(4), 487–508. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10980-012-9716-5ond, E., Schroth, O., Sheppard, S. R. J., Muir-Owen, S., Liepa, I., Campbell, C., et al.(2010). Local climate change visioning and landscape visualizations. Guidance man-ual. Vancouver: Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning., retrieved fromhttp://web.forestry.ubc.ca/calp/CALP-Visioning-Guidance-Manual-V1-1.pdfond, E., Schroth, O., Sheppard, S. R. J., Feick, R., Marceau, D., Danahy, J., et al. (2012).Collaborative processes and geo-spatial tools in support of local climate changevisioning and planning. In N. Chrisman, & M. Wachowicz (Eds.), The added value ofscientific networking: Perspectives from the GEOIDE network members 1998–2012(pp. 213–250). Quebec City: GEOIDE Network.ist, R. C. (1994). Influencing the policy process with qualitative research. In N.Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 545–557).Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi: SAGE Publications Ltd.obinson, J., & Tansey, J. (2006). Co-production, emergent properties and stronginteractive social research: The Georgia Basin Futures Project. Science and PublicPolicy, 33(2), 151–160. http://dx.doi.org/10.3152/147154306781779064alter, J. D., Campbell, C., Journeay, M., & Sheppard, S. R. J. (2009). The digital work-shop: Exploring the use of interactive and immersive visualisation tools inparticipatory planning. Journal of Environmental Management, 90(6), 2090–2101.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.08.023chroth, O., Pond, E., Muir-Owen, S., Campbell, C., & Sheppard, S. R. J. (2009). Tools forthe understanding of spatio-temporal climate scenarios in local planning: Kimberley(BC) case study. Bern, Switzerland: Swiss National Science Foundation SNSF.chroth, O., Wissen-Hayek, U., Lange, E., Sheppard, S. R. J., & Schmid, W. A. (2011).Multiple-case study of landscape visualizations as a tool in transdisciplinaryplanning workshops. Landscape Journal, 30(1), 53–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.3368/lj.30.1.53chroth, O., Pond, E., Campbell, C., Cizek, P., Bohus, S., & Sheppard, S. R. J. (2011). Toolor toy? Virtual globes in landscape planning. Future Internet, 3, 204–227. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/fi3040204chroth, O., Pond, E., & Sheppard, S. R. J. (2012). Integration of spatial outputsfrom mathematical models in climate change visioning tools for communitydecision-making on the landscape scale. In Buhmann, Ervin, & Pietsch (Eds.),Peer-reviewed Procs. of digital landscape architecture. Germany: Anhalt Universityof Applied Sciences.n Planning 142 (2015) 147–158Sheppard, S. R. J. (2005). Landscape visualisation and climate change: The potentialfor influencing perceptions and behaviour. Environmental Science and Policy, 8,637–654.Sheppard, S. R. J. (2012). Visualizing climate change: A guide to visual com-munication of climate change and developing local solutions. Abingdon, UK:Earthscan/Routledge.Sheppard, S. R. J., & Cizek, P. (2009). The ethics of Google Earth: Crossing thresholdsfrom spatial data to landscape visualisation. Journal of Environmental Manage-ment, 90(6), 2102–2117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.09.012Steinitz, C. (2012). A framework for geodesign: Changing geography by design. Red-mond: ESRI.Tonn, B., Hemrick, A., & Conrad, F. (2006). Cognitive representations of the future:Survey results. Futures, 38(7), 810–829. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2005.12.005van Lammeren, R., Houtkamp, J., Colijn, S., Hilferink, M., & Bouwman,. A. (2010).Affective appraisal of 3D land use visualization. Computers, Environment andUrban Systems, 34(6), 465–475. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2010.07.001Walter, A. I., Helgenberger, S., Wiek, A., & Scholz, R. W. (2007). Measuring societaleffects of transdisciplinary research projects: Design and application of an eval-uation method. Evaluation and Program Planning, 30(4), 325–338. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2007.08.002Ware, C., & Plumlee, M. (2005). 3D geovisualization and the structure ofvisual space. In J. Dykes, A. MacEachren, & M.-J. Kraak (Eds.), Explor-ing geovisualization (pp. 567–576). Amsterdam, San Diego, Oxford, London:Elsevier.Dr. Schroth completed graduate work and his PhD in landscape planning in Europe,focusing on the planning and GIS/geovisualization interface for participatory plan-ning. He joined the University of British Columbia’s Collaborative for AdvancedLandscape Planning (CALP) in 2008 to lead the development of interactive visualiza-tions for the Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project. In 2012, he started as lecturerin landscape planning and GIS at the Department of Landscape at the University ofSheffield.Ellen Pond develops leading edge climate change and sustainable energy solu-tions in collaboration with local governments. In her work at CALP at UBC,Ellen designed and evaluated climate change planning processes with localcommunities.Prof. Dr. Sheppard teaches sustainable landscape planning, aesthetics, and visu-alization in the Faculty of Forestry and Landscape Architecture program at UBC.Current research interests include climate change perceptions and planning, theaesthetics of sustainability, and visualization theory and ethics.