ABSTRACT: 
The articles in this special issue are drawn from papers presented at a conference entitled “Neoliberalism and/as Terror”, held at the Nottingham Conference Centre at Nottingham Trent University by the Critical Terrorism Studies BISA Working Group (CSTWG) on 15-16 September 2014. The conference was supported by both a BISA workshop grant and supplementary funds from Nottingham Trent University’s Politics and International Relations Department and the Critical Studies on Terrorism journal. Papers presented at the conference aimed to extend research into the diverse linkages between neoliberalism and terrorism, including but extending beyond the contextualisation of pre-emptive counterterrorism technologies and privatised securities within relevant economic and ideological contexts. Thus, the conference sought also to stimulate research into the ways that neoliberalism could itself be understood as terrorism, asking - amongst other questions - whether populations are themselves terrorised by neoliberal policy. The articles presented in this special issue reflect the conference aims in bringing together research on the neoliberalisation of counterterrorism and on the terror of neoliberalism. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This special issue is drawn from papers presented at a conference in titled “Neoliberalism and/as Terror), held at the Nottingham Conference Centre atNottingham Trent University by the Critical Terrorism Studies BISA Working Group (CSTWG) on 15–16September 2014. The conference was supported by both a BISA Workworkworkwork grant and supplementary funds from Nottingham Trent University’s Politics and International Relations Department and the Critical Studies on Terrorism journal. Students presented at the conference aimed to extend research into the diverse linkages between neoliberalism and terrorism, including but extending beyond the contextualii-sation of pre-emptive counterterrorism technologies and privatised securities within relevant economic and ideological contexts. Thus, the conference sought also to perform empirical research into the ways that neoliberalism could itself be understood as terror, asking – amongst other questions – whether populations are themselvesterrorised by neoliberal policy. The articles presented in this special issue reflect the conference aims in bringing together research on the neoliberalisation of counter-terrorism and on the terror of neoliberalism. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 This article was downloaded by: [University of Warwick]On: 13 April 2015, At: 09:58Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKClick for updatesCritical Studies on TerrorismPublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rter20Editors’ introduction: neoliberalismand/as terrorCharlotte Heath-Kellya, Christopher Baker-Beallb & Lee Jarvisca Institute of Advanced Study, University of Warwick, Coventry, UKb Politics and International Relations, Nottingham Trent University,Nottingham, UKc School of Politics, Philosophy, Language and CommunicationStudies, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UKPublished online: 09 Apr 2015.To cite this article: Charlotte Heath-Kelly, Christopher Baker-Beall & Lee Jarvis (2015) Editors’introduction: neoliberalism and/as terror, Critical Studies on Terrorism, 8:1, 1-14, DOI:10.1080/17539153.2015.1009761To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17539153.2015.1009761PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLETaylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as tothe accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinionsand views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Contentshould not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sourcesof information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever orhowsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arisingout of the use of the Content.This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsDownloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 EDITORIALEditors’ introduction: neoliberalism and/as terrorCharlotte Heath-Kellya*, Christopher Baker-Beallb and Lee JarviscaInstitute of Advanced Study, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK; bPolitics and InternationalRelations, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK; cSchool of Politics, Philosophy, Languageand Communication Studies, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK(Received 6 January 2015; accepted 6 January 2015)The articles in this special issue are drawn from papers presented at a conferenceentitled “Neoliberalism and/as Terror”, held at the Nottingham Conference Centre atNottingham Trent University by the Critical Terrorism Studies BISA Working Group(CSTWG) on 15–16 September 2014. The conference was supported by both a BISAworkshop grant and supplementary funds from Nottingham Trent University’s Politicsand International Relations Department and the Critical Studies on Terrorism journal.Papers presented at the conference aimed to extend research into the diverse linkagesbetween neoliberalism and terrorism, including but extending beyond the contextuali-sation of pre-emptive counterterrorism technologies and privatised securities withinrelevant economic and ideological contexts. Thus, the conference sought also tostimulate research into the ways that neoliberalism could itself be understood asterrorism, asking – amongst other questions – whether populations are themselvesterrorised by neoliberal policy. The articles presented in this special issue reflect theconference aims in bringing together research on the neoliberalisation of counter-terrorism and on the terror of neoliberalism.Keywords: neoliberalism; liberalism; terror; terrorism; counterterrorism; political vio-lence; protestIntroductionHow should we understand or make sense of terror? It has long been a commitment ofcritical terrorism studies to challenge the reductive association of “terrorism” with non-state actors: a challenge with considerable potential for unsettling established assumptionswithin terrorism research and International Relations (IR) more broadly (Jarvis andLister 2014). Research in this area has, as a consequence, produced significant literaturespushing for the broader recognition of state terrorism (Blakeley 2007; Jackson, Murphy,and Poynting 2010) and the reconceptualisation of terrorism as a discursive tool ratherthan objective category (Croft 2006; Jackson 2005; Mythen and Walklate 2006). Whilethese efforts to (re-)think and even (re-)appropriate the “terrorism” signifier have pro-duced important critiques of the mainstream terror discourse, the critical literature itselfoccasionally falls into standardised tropes. One such trope is the unidirectional explorationof the relationship between neoliberalism and terror, a research area to which this specialissue attempts to offer redirection.Since the onset of the War on Terror, various critical literatures in InternationalRelations have identified neoliberal economic trends as integral to counterterrorismframeworks and techniques.1 The extensive literatures on the deployment of risk through*Corresponding author. Email: c.heath-kelly@warwick.ac.ukCritical Studies on Terrorism, 2015Vol. 8, No. 1, 1–14, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17539153.2015.1009761© 2015 Taylor & FrancisDownloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 security, for example, identify the application of actuarial tools drawn from the market(especially insurance) to issues of political violence, tracing their subsequent developmentinto speculative tools of contingency management (Amoore and De Goede 2008; Hengand McDonagh 2009; Lobo-Guerrero 2012; Vedby Rasmussen 2004). Here, insecurity istamed through its rendering as manageable, predictable risk precisely by the application ofeconomic technologies to various fields of security. It is worth noting, as well, that thesignificant literatures on governmentality as practiced through counterterrorism (Aradauand Van Munster 2007; Mythen and Walklate 2006) are also readings of the application ofneoliberal economics to security, given Foucault’s derivation of governmentality as a stepwithin the broad economisation of society. Finally, other nodes within critical literatureson the intersection between neoliberalism and counterterrorism focus on the ascendance ofprivate companies within security spheres (Hoijtink 2014), such as border management,which used to be the sole domain of the state – and the resulting extension of a two-tiersystem in the management of global mobilities (Amoore 2006; Sparke 2006).However, despite these important considerations of neoliberalism and counterterror-ism, some features of the intersection between economics and terrorism remain side-linedand under-analysed. In this special issue, we are pleased to offer explorations of theconnections between neoliberalism and terror, which include, but also extend beyond, theapproaches outlined above. As such, we consider this special issue to be a step toward abroader conceptualisation of neoliberalism and/as terror. To this end, this special issueexplores two broad and intersecting themes – neoliberalism as terror and neoliberaleffects upon the production of terrorism discourse and technologies.We begin by explaining what we mean by the term neoliberalism and then move on toconsider two bodies of literature that have dealt with the connections between neoliber-alism and terror before identifying a number of gaps in this field of research that we arguethe research in this issue seeks to address. In terms of defining the concept of “neoliber-alism”, David Harvey (2005, 2) contends that neoliberalism can be understood as a theorydrawn from political economy that proposes human well-being as best advanced throughan institutional framework characterised by “private property rights, free markets… andfree trade”. The role of the state in neoliberal economic theory is limited, with the mainpurpose for its existence to create and preserve a set of institutional practices that ensurethe primacy of the free market over other forms of social, political and economicorganisation. As Stuart Hall, Doreen Massey and Michael Rustin (2013, 5) explain,neoliberalism demands “low tax regimes, limited state interference, and unimpeded accessto markets and vital resources”. As a political philosophy, neoliberalism emphasisesprofit-making as the essence of democracy and consumption as the most operable formof citizenship (Di Leo et al. 2012). It demands the creation of markets (i.e. privatisation)in areas of the economy once solely the preserve of the state (land, water, health,education and all fields of security). However, it purports that once those markets havebeen created, state intervention and regulation of those markets should be minimal(Harvey 2005). Since the 1970s, neoliberal policies have become ever more commonplace, with neoliberalism representing the dominant economic model embraced byWestern states and global financial institutions at the turn of the twenty-first century.This embrace of neoliberalism has led to the development of societies where politicalinfluence has been captured by corporate actors. According to Susan George (1999), it hasled to growing inequality, with neoliberalism having precipitated a massive transfer ofwealth, power and resources from the poorest in society to the richest.2 As Hall, Massey,and Rustin (2013, 4) explain, “it has encouraged private capital to hollow-out the welfarestate and dismantle… structures of health, welfare and education services” in the pursuit2 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 of profit. In essence, neoliberalism generates winners and losers, with the richest insociety gaining to the detriment of the poorest. This is important if we consider theneoliberal definition of “loser”, to whom nothing is owed. As George (1999, para 30)notes, “anyone can be ejected from the system at any time – because of illness, age,pregnancy, perceived failure, or simply because economic circumstances and the relent-less transfer of wealth from top to bottom demand it”. Indeed, neoliberalism has funda-mentally altered politics in the sense that:Politics used to be primarily about who ruled whom and who got what share of the pie.Aspects of both these central questions remain, of course, but the great new central questionof politics is… “Who has a right to live and who does not?” Radical exclusion is now theorder of the day. (George 1999, para 32)George’s observation resonates here in the sense that she points to a gap in the literaturethat this issue aims to address: the extent to which the economic theory of neoliberalismcan be understood as a form of terror.First, with regard to the idea of the economic theory of “neoliberalism as terror” thereis a small body of research that has been conducted under the guise of cultural studies bythe critical theorist Henry Giroux (2004, 2005). Focusing specifically on the United States(US), Giroux draws our attention to the ways in which neoliberalism has transformed howthe state provides internal and external security for its citizens. For Giroux, neoliberalismnot only creates economic terror for citizens deemed losers in the neoliberal society(through the hollowing out of the welfare state and the removal of economic support),but is responsible for a growing form of political terror, or authoritarianism, that ischaracterised by the militarisation of public space at home and the suppression of dissent.He argues that:Neoliberalism has become complicitous with this transformation of the democratic state into anational security state that repeatedly uses its military and political power to develop adaunting police state… to punish workers, stifle dissent, and undermine the political powerof labour’ unions and progressive social movements. (Giroux 2005, 8)Indeed, recent and seemingly disparate events, such as the shooting of Michael Brown inFerguson, Missouri, in the United States or the policing of student protest at theUniversity of Warwick in the United Kingdom, reflect forms of neoliberal terror in thesense that they are made possible by a political culture, which is based on fear, surveil-lance and control rather than one based on “a vibrant culture of shared responsibility andcritical questioning” (Giroux 2005, 4).In the first half of the special issue, we include contributions from established and earlycareer scholars, which break new ground in relation to the ontological relationship betweenneoliberalism and terror, albeit in different ways. These articles go beyond existing securitystudies literature on security privatisation and the importance of risk governance. Theyprobe the very archetype of the terrorist and its relation to more surprising bête noirs such asSatan and the figure of the zombie which, it is argued, has always haunted the developmentof capitalism (Neocleous 2015, this issue). In a related vein, Jackson (2015, this issue)charts the epistemological crisis of counterterrorism which drives the War on Terror securityproject but simultaneously renders it unending, redundant and hysterical, while othercontributors turn to the role of crisis, and especially the contemporary counterterroristresponse, in enabling the perpetual reconfiguration of accumulation and capitalism (neatlysummarised as the “Class War on Terror”) (Boukalas 2015, this issue). Looking beyond theCritical Studies on Terrorism 3Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 global North, Furtado turns to the terror discourse of South America in which terrorism ispredominantly associated with state rather than non-state actors: an association that cannotbe understood but for the brutal expansion of neoliberal economics under authoritarian rule(Furtado 2015, this issue). In these articles, we see how the economic machine of capitalisminvents and necessitates the figure of the “Universal Adversary” (be that the pig, Satan, thezombie or the terrorist) so that it can refigure itself around crises, concealing its ambiguities.Furthermore, from alternate directions, we see how this perpetual project is driven by aparanoid logic that has led to an epistemological crisis – at least in the global North.In the second half of the issue, we turn to the effects of neoliberal ideology andeconomics upon counterterrorism, and vice versa. The questions asked within this sectionprobe the ways in which the contemporary economic and ideological era has impacted thepractice of security, including how the deployment of futurity and fantasy within securitydiscourse has radically redefined fear, such that counterterrorism perpetually tells us thateach attack precedes something worse. In this imaginary, we are no longer scared ofsomething definable like an explosion but the kaleidoscopic anticipatory fixation on evenworse to come. We have become frightened of fear itself, and counterterrorism practiceplays a central role in creating the fear which terrorism supposedly induces (Frank 2015,this issue).Addressing the paradoxical effects of neoliberalism upon counterterrorism from adifferent direction, Marijn Hoijtink considers the professional security culture which hasemerged around counterterrorism – one which centralises infrastructural systems ratherthan people – as objects of protection (Hoijtink 2015, this issue). People seem to havebeen displaced as that which must be protected by counterterrorism, in favour of system-ised notions of mobility which Hoijtink shows are crucial to neoliberalism, but they arenot entirely absent. For example, Mohammed Elshimi’s article explores the ways in whichthe neoliberal state remains fascinated with intervention into people’s lives, especiallythose identified as risky, dangerous and radicalised. Building upon work into the govern-mentality of radicalisation policies, Elshimi explores how deradicalisation programsfunction through both anticipatory (neoliberal) logics of detection, but also pastoral logicsof care. The utilisation of confessional technologies therein, in particular, speaks to the re-emergence of pastoral techniques whereby the state deploys deradicalisation as a technol-ogy of the self, and of salvation (Elshimi 2015, this issue).Finally, reversing the direction of analysis, and assessing the impact of counterterror-ism upon neoliberalism, it is important to assess the ways in which entertainment andother industries take the neoliberal security era as an object for commodification andpopular consumption. As such, Robert Young (2015, this issue) explores representationsof war within the video game Splinter Cell, demonstrating that “older” (pre-War onTerror) understandings of Just War have become increasingly blurred – rather thanabandoned – in a liminal space composed of “new” warfare of special-ops teams andenhanced interrogation – all for a market of consumers.Following this section on neoliberal effects upon counterterrorism, this special issueturns finally to the lived experiences of neoliberal subjects and what this might tell usabout counterterrorism and its regulation. James Fitzgerald offers an autoethnographicnarrative account of his bizarre experiences with border control professionals at Heathrowairport (Fitzgerald 2015, this issue). The experience he takes from this encounter is that,while there are many bad lists, on which we would not want to appear, there may also be“good lists” – whose occupants are deemed sufficiently responsible to carry books onterrorism and resist the powers of “radicalisation”. This is followed by Asim Qureshi,4 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 research director at CAGE, who provides a practitioner account of the British legal systemand its often grossly unfair dealings with terror suspects (Qureshi 2015, this issue).Throughout these articles, a sense of vertigo progressively builds with respect to thedisastrous relationship between neoliberalism and counterterrorism. We agree with Hall,Massey and Rustin’s assertion that the theory of neoliberalism “plays a crucial role inlegitimising the restoration and reinvigoration of a regime of power, profit and privilege”(Hall, Massey, and Rustin 2013, 9). The purpose of this issue is to expose the ways inwhich the neoliberal regime of power functions and offer suggestions for how we mightresist and challenge its negative impact on societies across the world. The prominentparadoxes, epistemological crises and cruel, unjustified or simply curious exclusions ofneoliberalism and/as terror are exposed from multiple directions by the contributors,providing a platform for the radical extension of critical exploration. Since its inception,the Critical Studies on Terrorism project has provided a space for critical and dissentingengagements with the politics of (counter)terrorism. This has included, inter alia, pro-blematising the production of “expert” knowledge in Terrorism Studies; deconstructingand challenging dominant counterterrorism practices; exploring experiences of counter-terrorism at different levels of the socio-political; and facilitating connections withcognate research fields, including Peace Research and Gender Studies. Building onthese interventions, this special issue seeks to engage with the political, social andeconomic implications of current conceptualisations and practices of terrorism and theconcurrent theme of neoliberalism as terror.Keynote addresses on neoliberalism as terror: epistemological crises and capitalisthistories of counterterrorismThe keynote addresses presented in this special issue by Mark Neocleous and RichardJackson are concerned with the role of contemporary security discourses in strengtheningthe Western neoliberal order, with a particular focus on the way in which these discoursesconstitute an enemy (the “Universal Adversary”, the “terrorist”) that necessitates sometype of counter-response. Both articles are connected by a belief that contemporarysecurity strategies, and counterterrorism policies in particular, derive their legitimacyfrom or are based upon forms of knowledge that are structured around uncertainty,ambiguity, imagination and fantasy. Neocleous and Jackson both acknowledge the unex-pectedly prescient thoughts of Donald Rumsfeld, when he spoke of known knowns,known unknowns and unknown unknowns, in highlighting what has become the centralconcern of the state in terms of its security logic: anxiety, fear and foreboding over thepossible threats of the future. In this sense, they speak to the arguments of Louise Amooreand Marieke de Goede (2008, 24), who contend that the War on Terror has given way to“new rationalities of government that require that the catastrophic prospects of the futurebe tamed and managed”. The articles by Neocleous and Jackson both highlight theimportance of the discursive construction of “the enemy”, be it the “terrorist” or the“Universal Adversary”, as a central element of this.Mark Neocleous’ article centres upon a category of enemy, the “Universal Adversary”,which he argues emerged from the War on Terror as the new preoccupation of the nationalsecurity state.3 He takes as his focus the new paradigm of “national preparedness” and state-based emergency planning for all manner of security contingencies, from natural disasters toterrorist attacks, which consist of imagined disaster scenarios that inevitably involve thefictitious enemy the “Universal Adversary”. However, this new paradigm of “nationalpreparedness” not only requires that the state imagine the disasters of the future (andCritical Studies on Terrorism 5Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 develop responses to them), it also obliges citizens to be wary of and prepared for survivingpotential attacks or catastrophes. This line of argument about the logic that underpinsWestern security practice is reflected in recent events such as the introduction, inNovember 2014, in the United Kingdom (UK) of “Counter-Terrorism Awareness Week”(UK Government 2014). Not only is terrorism a “real” threat in this context, but citizensmust always remain vigilant, resilient and continually aware of that threat. Althoughemergency planning includes contingencies for natural disasters, Neocleous contends thatin most scenarios the “Universal Adversary” is represented by the figure of the terrorist. ForNeocleous, this means that there is only one certainty in the minds of politicians, policy-makers and security practitioners: the “Universal Adversary” will attack.Neocleous argues that we should take seriously the figure of the “Universal Adversary”for three main reasons. First, he argues that the category of the “Universal Adversary” canact as a vehicle through which to explore class conflict in neoliberal societies. For example,he draws our attention to the use of certain terms and phrases in emergency planningdocuments, such as the phrase “disgruntled workers”. He highlights the etymology and useof such phrases in the context of the War on Terror to offer a convincing argument forunderstanding their use as representative of the bourgeois fear of the “enemy within”, hencere-reading the practices of the War on Terror as a continuation of class conflict. Second, heargues that the War on Terror and the logic of emergency powers, which are legitimisedthrough the discursive construction of threats such as the “Universal Adversary”, shouldinvolve a discussion of capital and class, by which he means connecting the War on Terrorwith class conflict, rather than a discussion of emergency powers as a “state of exception”(contra Agamben). Third, he also offers a speculative commentary on the notion of the“Universal Adversary” as a contemporary representation of an old idea in elite or bourgeoisthinking, notably the universality of “the enemy”.Where the focus of Neocleous’ article revolves around the construction of threat withspecific reference to the figure of the “Universal Adversary”, Jackson’s article concernsitself with illuminating the epistemological crisis at the heart of contemporary Westerncounterterrorism. For Jackson, there are two key facets to this crisis that are mutuallyconstitutive. First, there is the discursive construction of the figure of “the terrorist” as aparticular type of enemy. This can be identified in the language used by politicians,policy-makers, security practitioners and academics to talk about and define the threat ofterrorism. Jackson argues that this contemporary Western understanding of terrorism ischaracterised by a paranoid logic that over-exaggerates the threat posed by terrorism.Second, there is the counter-response to the threat, understood by Jackson as a way ofacting towards the preconceived notion of the terrorist threat and conditioned by the sameparanoid logic which has made possible a whole range of security practices that includepre-emptive war, extra-judicial killings, mass surveillance and torture. For Jackson, the“epistemological crisis of counter-terrorism” is captured neatly by the fact that althoughno evidence exists to demonstrate that these practices are effective (e.g., they make thestates that implement them safer from terrorism), these security practices are now seen aslogical responses to the threat from terrorism.In fact, Jackson argues that all available evidence suggests that practices of pre-emptive war, extra-judicial killings, mass surveillance and torture are more likely toreduce the safety of any state that implements such policies. To get at this apparentparadox, Jackson draws our attention to four key aspects of the epistemological crisis ofcounterterrorism that structure his analysis. First, he notes the tendency of those workingin the field of security to reject previous knowledge about terrorism. This rejection ofknowledge taps into and is based on the rather suspect assertion that contemporary forms6 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 of terrorism are somehow “new” and different from the “old” terrorism of the past(Laqueur 1999; Duyvesteyn 2004; Crenshaw 2011). Second, there is an acceptance ofan extreme precautionary dogma whereby unknown (or constructed) threats are actedupon pre-emptively before they actualise. This flows into the third point, which is that thethreats identified (or constructed) as threats are largely based upon imagination andfantasy. Fourth, the epistemological crisis is characterised by a “permanent ontologicalcondition of ‘waiting for terror’… in relation to the next attack” (see Jackson 2015, thisissue). Jackson draws his analysis to a close by offering a number of ways in whichcritical scholars can and should attempt to resist the paranoid logic of contemporaryWestern counterterrorism policy.Neoliberalism as terror?Following the keynote addresses, two articles within this special issue make bold con-tributions to the discussion of neoliberalism as terror – identifying, in different contexts,the important connections and overlaps between the two. Given that our conferencefocused upon the practice of counterterrorism, we undertake this task within the securitysphere, rather than other areas of social policy. The section begins with articles byChristos Boukalas and Henrique Furtado. Boukalas provides a thought-provoking andinnovative discussion of the economic functionality of homeland security reforms in theUnited States, reflecting upon the War on Terror as class war. He proclaims that we canunderstand counterterrorism through the Marxist conception of class, gaining new insightsinto its practice and mandate. Subsequently, in the context of South America, the terrainfor an earlier era of American counterterrorism, Henrique Furtado approaches overlapbetween the neoliberal/ising state and terrorism from a very different direction. His articleexplores the fascinating discursive climate whereby the assumptions of the Global North’sterror discourse and, it must be said, much work within Critical Terrorism Studies arereversed and “terrorism” popularly signifies state repression, with counterterrorism sig-nifying non-state revolutionary action.How should we consider these contributions? First, Boukalas invites us to stray fromthe beaten path of terrorism studies – critical and traditional. What would happen tocounterterrorism analysis if we did not start with the state and instead began with theMarxist conceptualisation of social/economic dynamics, whereby the state is a particularhistorical formation of relations between classes? If the state is a machine which protectsaccumulation on behalf of dominant classes, then we can begin to address counterterror-ism as a technique for the protection of accumulation. Using the work of social theoristPoulantzas (1979) on the nature of economic and political crisis, Boukalas argues thateconomic crisis is relatively normalised for the state. Antagonisms and sudden marketfluctuations are the natural state of capitalism. However, political crisis is treated as anextremely serious consideration in that it embodies the potential to end capitalist rule.Counterterrorism becomes functional here as the way in which the capitalist state rear-ranges structures to manage economic crises, while preventing and suppressing theemergence of political crisis.If Boukalas’ contention was only meant as a comparison or metaphorical critiquemaking use of a reading of counterterrorism through the lens of class, it would alreadymake a significant contribution to the literature on Critical Terrorism Studies. However,Boukalas is not experimenting with a new way of reading counterterrorism: he is deadlyserious that counterterrorism has been connected to economic restructuring and thesimultaneous repression of political crisis since its inception. His bold critique ofCritical Studies on Terrorism 7Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 neoliberalism and counterterrorism goes even further, opening potential future directionsin research. The article progresses through a detailed reading of the Homeland Securityarchitecture in the United States, situating the economic and repressive functions of thisenormous security project within the context of class war. He argues that, given financialturbulence of the 1990s and the accompanying growth of the anti-globalisation movement(and, it might be added, the sudden absence of a Cold War frame with which to sublimateall antagonisms), neoliberalism was facing mounting systemic challenges. What, toparaphrase Lenin, is to be done? Boukalas argues that 9/11 proved extremely useful asthe crisis point around which the protection of accumulation for the capitalist elite couldbe undertaken, while directing the attention of the public at an external enemy. Thecapitalism promoted by George Bush and his establishment skilfully embraced 9/11,moving the US economy towards a new model of accumulation specifically involvingthe generation and resolution of crisis through the reification and commodification ofsecurity. In his words:The most obvious state intervention in capital accumulation through counterterrorism policywas the construction of a peculiar sector of the economy: the homeland security sector. Thissector did not develop around a new kind of produce, but comprises the efforts of existingsectors – from armaments to pharmaceuticals, from finance to the ever agile (and recentlybankrupt) IT – to adjust or merely rebrand their produce as security-related. (Boukalas 2015,this issue)The War on Terror provided the frame through which the excesses of neoliberal economicpolicy were extended through the Homeland Security model. This is a fascinating con-tribution to the theorisation of counterterrorism and economy, one which will hopefullyprovoke much debate and further inquiry.In a completely different context, the winner of the 2014 Graduate Paper Award forCritical Studies on Terrorism, Henrique Furtado, considers the neoliberal and fascistregimes of South America and their intrinsic connections to (counter)terrorism. Hismajor contribution is to expose the myopias of traditional and critical research alike,such that both associate terrorism with non-state actors – ignoring the reversed discoursewhich stems from the South American continent. Critical Terrorism Studies has made aprominent attempt to challenge the reductionist association of terrorism with non-stateactors in the policies/academies of the Global North by arguing for the recognition of stateterrorism (Blakeley 2007; Jackson, Murphy, and Poynting 2010). By virtue of doing so,Furtado argues that the signifier “terrorism” still presents a hegemonic association withnon-state actors because it lacks the precursor “state”.This is not simply a word game. Furtado makes a timely argument about the repeatedassertions of resistance within critical work, in terrorism and more generally. What,specifically, does it mean to resist? In resisting the association of terrorism with non-state actors, Critical Terrorism Studies has accidentally contributed to the reaffirming ofthis association. To explore the question further, Furtado extensively addresses thefascinating histories of popular resistance to neoliberal authoritarianism in SouthAmerica. In a reversal of the Global North’s discourse, here we find that “terrorism” isprimarily used to signify the actions of the repressive state. In the resistant utilisation ofmemory, Brazilian discourse associates the military perpetrators of atrocity with gorillas(who must remain caged) and with psychopaths who enjoyed causing pain.But what comes of this resistance through memory? In a compelling critique of thecounter-memory field (Hite 2012; Legg 2005) and one-dimensional assertions of the value8 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 of resistance across critical academia, Furtado shows how the performance of resistancedeploys its own power and its own silences (see also Heath-Kelly 2013a). What we see isnothing more than the inversion of the War on Terror rhetoric. And how much resistancecan be found there? Furtado convincingly shows in his award winning paper that bothdiscourses rely upon a simplistic dehumanisation of terrorists – whether they are govern-ment forces or non-state actors. In such a discourse, there is no room for complexity,nuance or debate. So much for resistance.Neoliberal effects on counterterrorismIn the second section of our special issue, we present articles which take a moreconventional approach to the questions of neoliberalism and terror, presenting each as adiscrete phenomenon which can affect the other – contra previous explorations ofneoliberalism as terror. This section contains analyses of contemporary counterterrorismin the neoliberal era, exploring the deployment of futurity and fear, Foucauldian technol-ogies of the self, privatisation and transport security, and the transformation of the War onTerror into commodified entertainment.Michael Frank begins the discussion with his article, “Conjuring up the Next Attack:The Future-Orientedness of Terror and the Counterterrorist Imagination”. While we oftentake for granted that terrorism functions through the creation of fear, Frank explores thenature of this anxiety as it is discursively constructed by policymakers and commentators.He discovers a peculiar and seemingly paradoxical dynamic within the terror/counter-terrorism relationship, whereby terrorism could not be successful in generating fear with-out the input of counterterrorism. Fear is always concerned with the anticipated yetunknown event, rather than that which is regular or familiar. Frank skilfully shows howcounterterrorism constitutes fear through its imagination of the “next attack”, how everyevent is discursively constructed as bearing the promise of worse atrocities to come. Thecounterterrorist project necessarily, yet paradoxically, aids that which it opposes. And hereour attention is drawn back to Christos Boukalas’ account of counterterrorism as classwar, where the state utilises moments of crisis to undertake its structural and economicreforms which might not pass during stable periods. How sure are we that the counter-terrorist project has the objective to end terrorism? And how useful is the figure of the“Universal Adversary” in maintaining relations of international politics and economy toserve the interests of the powerful?While many seminal texts address the functionality of the enemy and the other(Campbell 1992; Said 1978), these considerations are often studied at the global level –exploring the identity politics at national and international levels. Mohammed Elshimi’sarticle, however, takes us on a journey through the micropolitics of identity in theneoliberal era. And in this modern era, we find the surprising resurgence of confessionaltechnologies of old, redeployed in the effort to moderate and control subjectivity in theWar on Terror. Elshimi’s article focuses on the growth of deradicalisation initiatives incontemporary counterterrorism. Situated within the “Prevent” strand of the UK’sCONTEST strategy, deradicalisation programmes such as the police-run Channel projectseek to arrest the risk of terrorism before it occurs by transforming the behaviour andattitudes of their subjects. To make sense of these initiatives, Elshimi draws on Foucault’snotion of the “technology of the Self”, arguing that they work via broader processes ofgovernance, discipline and normalisation. Elshimi makes a novel contribution to criticalliteratures on radicalisation by moving the focus away from terminological debates andthe exploration of pre-emptive risk governance (Baker-Beall, Heath-Kelly, andCritical Studies on Terrorism 9Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 Jarvis 2014; Heath-Kelly 2013b) and towards the lesser studied (and surreptitiouslypresent) deradicalisation programs in our midst.Despite the centrality of subjects to the radicalisation/deradicalisation agendas ofcounterterrorism in the neoliberal age, a defining feature of contemporary security gov-ernance is its de-personification. Critical Terrorism Studies rarely addresses the systemsfetish found within Critical Infrastructure Protection and resilience policies, nor theacademic reception of this systemisation in fields of Geography (Adey andAnderson 2012; Coaffee 2009) and Critical Security Studies (Aradau 2010;Burgess 2007; Lundborg and Vaughan-Williams 2011). Marijn Hoijtink contributes anarticle which explores European transport security and the performance of mobility as avalue to be protected. She utilises a narrative approach, in places, to highlight theambiguities she witnessed when attending multiple meetings of the EU’s SECUR-EDproject, where high technology and systems were fetishised and yet governmental repre-sentatives admitted they had no intention of purchasing such technology given its price-tag. The distance between the performance of high-technology and the gritty realities ofurban transport (the developers foresaw use to combat graffiti artists; the technology couldnot distinguish between terrorist attacks on trains and birds flying past) is often high-lighted in Hoijtink’s article, illuminating the distance travelled in the contemporaryneoliberal security age.The final article in this section, by Robert Young, explores the importance of mediaconsumption in the (re)production of public experiences and understandings of warfare.To do this, Young points to the constitutive importance of the video game Splinter Cell:Blacklist: drawing, in part, on analysis of his own emotions and experiences whileparticipating in the game. Focusing, in particular, upon depictions of violence, identityand space in this game, Young argues that Splinter Cell: Blacklist works both toproblematise and reproduce assumptions around the conduct and ethics of warfare. Thegame’s importance, for him, is therefore its scope as a vehicle through which to challenge“conceptual myths” central to the post-9/11 war on terrorism.Practitioners and vernacular perspectives from the front line of neoliberalcounterterrorIn the final section of our special issue, we turn towards the experiences of subjects in theWar on Terror: particularly from practitioners and vernacular perspectives. The penulti-mate article of this issue – by James Fitzgerald – develops Young’s autobiographicalefforts to recount his own engagement with terrorism. While Young’s analysis focuses onencounters in popular culture, however, Fitzgerald turns his eye to those “petty sover-eigns” responsible for policing and protecting the UK’s borders. Describing his experienceof being stopped, questioned and subsequently released following identification of litera-ture related to terrorism within his hand luggage at Heathrow airport, Fitzgerald arguesthat autoethnography represents a fantastically useful technique for exposing and unpack-ing the human stories behind counterterrorism statistics – by, for example, contrasting thecontent of his specific experience with others treated less benignly in terms of the(re)production of academic privilege in surprising environments.Finally, in the last contribution to the special issue, Asim Qureshi, Research Directorat the London-based human rights advocacy organisation CAGE, offers a practitioner’sperspective on the real world effects of counterterrorism policy on Muslim communities inthe United Kingdom. Qureshi highlights the specific case of Umm Ahmed, a youngwoman of Muslim origin, who due to a set of unfortunate circumstances found herself10 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 convicted of a terrorism offence without ever being involved in or having committed anact of terrorism. Indeed, the case of Umm Ahmed is emblematic of Jackson’s aforemen-tioned “epistemological crisis of counterterrorism” in the sense that, although the judge inthe case accepted that she was in no way motivated or driven by “extremist ideology”, hesubjected her to participation in a “deradicalisation” programme as part of the “rehabilita-tion” process for her “crime”. For Qureshi, the case of Umm Ahmed, alongside manyother similar stories, can be understood as a consequence of the official governmentalendorsement of an “anti-Muslim” narrative that portrays certain aspects of Muslimidentity as a potential threat to the United Kingdom and to British values. By this, hemeans the assumption that there is something peculiar about being a British Muslim thatmakes individuals who correspond to that identity more susceptible to “radicalisation”.Importantly, by drawing our attention to this case, Qureshi demonstrates how terrorismconviction statistics are not just artificially inflated but actively produced by theauthorities.ConclusionAs the above suggests, the articles collected in this issue tackle the imbrication of terrorismand neoliberalism in a myriad of ways. This is a nexus that can be approached through avariety of research methods, from autoethnographic expressions of narrative writing throughto genealogical excursions into the progenitors of our current folk devils. This is possible, inpart, because the relationship (if it is such a thing) is one that becomes manifest via a rangeof encounters – including at national borders, in video games, as well as with the police andcriminal justice system. While different articles in this issue emphasise divergent aspects ofneoliberalism’s political, economic and strategic logics, they share an important attempt torender visible and to contest. Perhaps, in so doing, they pull apart the construction of thecontemporary academic as the ultimate non-threatening, non-radical figure (re)produced inJames Fitzgerald’s experience at Heathrow airport (Fitzgerald 2015, this issue).If we might be permitted a brief autobiographical note of our own on which to finish,this Special Issue represents the final moment in our efforts at co-convening BISA’sCritical Studies on Terrorism Working Group. This experience has been an immenselyrewarding one, and one that would have been far less enjoyable without the support ofmany friends and colleagues. To this end, we conclude this editors’ introduction bygratefully acknowledging all those who have helped with, provided funding for, attended,contributed to, or otherwise assisted in the events we have organised under this group’sauspices. And, to express our gratitude to Richard Jackson for his continuing support forthe group and our efforts. Finally, we wish the new conveners of the working group thebest of luck for their terms, and we look forward to the exciting new directions plannedfor the group!Disclosure statementNo potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.Notes1. It should also be noted that other important works address the connection between theemergence of neoliberalism and practices of state terrorism/imperialism in previous eras, suchas Naomi Klein’s The Shock Doctrine (2007) and Ruth Blakeley’s State Terrorism andNeoliberalism: The North in the South (2009).Critical Studies on Terrorism 11Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 2. According to George, if you are in the top 20 percentile of earners, you will gain economicallyfrom neoliberalism, gaining gradually more the higher up the income bracket you progress,whereas if you are in the bottom 80 percentile of earners, you will lose economically fromneoliberalism, losing progressively more the further down the income bracket you fall.3. Mark Neocleous’ article is reproduced in this Special Issue in the form of a lecture “as spoken”,as it was presented at the Annual Critical Studies on Terrorism Working Group Conference.Notes on contributorsCharlotte Heath-Kelly holds concurrent postdoctoral fellowships at the University of Warwick.Recent books include “Counter-Radicalisation: Critical Perspectives” (2014, edited with LeeJarvis and Chris Baker-Beall) and “Politics of Violence: Militancy, International Politics, Killingin the Name” (2013).Christopher Baker-Beall is a Lecturer in International Relations at Nottingham Trent University.Recent books include Counter-Radicalisation: Critical Perspectives (edited with Charlotte Heath-Kelly and Lee Jarvis, Routledge 2014).Lee Jarvis is a Senior Lecturer in International Security at the University of East Anglia. Recentbooks include Security: A Critical Introduction (with Jack Holland, Palgrave: 2015), CriticalPerspectives on Counter-terrorism (edited with Michael Lister, Routledge: 2015) andCyberterrorism: Understanding, Assessment and Response (edited with Tom Chen and StuartMacdonald, Springer: 2014).ReferencesAdey, P., and B. Anderson. 2012. “Anticipating Emergencies: Technologies of Preparedness and theMatter of Security.” Security Dialogue 43 (2): 99–117. doi:10.1177/0967010612438432.Amoore, L. 2006. “Biometric Borders: Governing Mobilities in the War on Terror.” PoliticalGeography 25 (3): 336–351. doi:10.1016/j.polgeo.2006.02.001.Amoore, L., and M. De Goede, eds. 2008. Risk and the War on Terror. Abingdon: Routledge.Aradau, C. 2010. “Security that Matters: Critical Infrastructure and Objects of Protection.” SecurityDialogue 41 (5): 491–514. doi:10.1177/0967010610382687.Aradau, C., and R. Van Munster. 2007. “Governing Terrorism through Risk: Taking Precautions,(Un)Knowing the Future.” European Journal of International Relations 13 (1): 89–115.doi:10.1177/1354066107074290.Baker-Beall, C., C. Heath-Kelly, and L. Jarvis, eds. 2014. Counter-Radicalisation: CriticalPerspectives. Abingdon: Routledge.Blakeley, R. 2007. “Bringing the State Back into Terrorism Studies.” European Political Science 6(3): 228–235. doi:10.1057/palgrave.eps.2210139.Blakeley, R. 2009. State Terrorism and Neoliberalism: The North in the South. Abingdon:Routledge.Boukalas, C. 2015. “Class War-On-Terror: Counterterrorism, Accumulation, Crisis.” Critical Studieson Terrorism 8 (1): 55–71.Burgess, P. 2007. “ Social Values and Material Threat: The European Programme for CriticalInfrastructure Protection.” International Journal of Critical Infrastructures 3 (3/4): 471–487.doi:10.1504/IJCIS.2007.014121.Campbell, D. 1992. Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy and the Politics of Identity.Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Coaffee, J. 2009. Terrorism, Risk and the Global City: Towards Urban Resilience. Farnham:Ashgate.Crenshaw, M. 2011. “The Debate over ‘Old’ versus ‘New’ Terrorism.” In Jihadi Terrorism and theRadicalisation Challenge: European and American Experiences, edited by R. Coolsaet, 57–68.Farnham: Ashgate.Croft, S. 2006. Culture, Crisis and America’s War on Terror. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Di Leo, J. R., H. Giroux, S. McClennen, and K. J. Saltman. 2012. Neoliberalism, Education,Terrorism: Contemporary Dialogues. Boulder, CO: Paradigm.12 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 Duyvesteyn, I. 2004. “How New is the New Terrorism?” Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 27 (5):439–454. doi:10.1080/10576100490483750.Elshimi, M. 2015. “De-Radicalisation Interventions as Technologies of the Self: A FoucauldianAnalysis.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 110–129.Fitzgerald, J. 2015. “Why Me? An Autoethnographic Account of the Bizarre Logic ofCounterterrorism.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 163–180.Frank, M. C. 2015. “Conjuring up the Next Attack: The Future-Orientedness of Terror and theCounterterrorist Imagination.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 90–109.Furtado, H. 2015. “Against State Terror: Lessons on Memory, Counter-Terrorism and Resistancefrom the Global South.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 72–89.George, S. 1999. “A Short History of Neo-Liberalism: Twenty Years of Elite Economics andEmerging Opportunities for Structural Change.” Conference on Economic Sovereignty in aGlobalizing World, March 24–26. http://www.tni.org/article/short-history-neoliberalism.Giroux, H. 2004. The Terror of Neoliberalism: Authoritarianism and the Eclipse of Democracy.London: Paradigm.Giroux, H. 2005. “The Terror of Neoliberalism: Rethinking the Significance of Cultural Politics.”College Literature 32 (1): 1–19. doi:10.1353/lit.2005.0006.Hall, S., D. Massey, and M. Rustin. 2013. “After Neoliberalism: Analysing the Present.” In AfterNeoliberalism? The Kilburn Manifesto. Accessed December 17, 2014. http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/journals/soundings/pdfs/manifestoframingstatement.pdfHarvey, D. 2005. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Heath-Kelly, C. 2013a. Politics of Violence: Militancy, International Politics, Killing in the Name.Abingdon: Routledge.Heath-Kelly, C. 2013b. “Counter-Terrorism and the Counterfactual: Producing the ‘Radicalisation’Discourse and the UK PREVENT Strategy.” The British Journal of Politics & InternationalRelations 15 (3): 394–415. doi:10.1111/j.1467-856X.2011.00489.x.Heng, Y. K., and K. McDonagh. 2009. Risk, Global Governance and Security: The Other War onTerror. Abingdon: Routledge.Hite, K. 2012. Politics and the Art of Commemoration: Memorials to Struggle in Latin America andSpain. Abingdon: Routledge.Hoijtink, M. 2014. “Capitalizing on Emergence: The ‘New’ Civil Security Market in Europe.”Security Dialogue 45 (5): 458–475. doi:10.1177/0967010614544312.Hoijtink, M. 2015. “Performativity and the Project: Enacting Urban Transport Security in Europe.”Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 130–146.Jackson, R. 2005. Writing the War on Terror: Language, Politics and Counter-Terrorism.Manchester: Manchester University Press.Jackson, R. 2015. “The Epistemological Crisis of Counterterrorism.” Critical Studies on Terrorism8 (1): 33–54.Jackson, R., E. Murphy, and S. Poynting, eds. 2010. Contemporary State Terrorism: Theory andPractice. Abingdon: Routledge.Jarvis, L., and M. Lister. 2014. “State Terrorism Research and Critical Terrorism Studies: AnAssessment.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 7 (1): 43–61. doi:10.1080/17539153.2013.877669.Klein, N. 2007. The Shock Doctrine. London: Penguin.Laqueur, W. 1999. The New Terrorism: Fanaticism and the Arms of Mass Destruction. Oxford:Oxford University Press.Legg, S. 2005. “Sites of Counter-Memory: The Refusal to Forget and the Nationalist Struggle inColonial Delhi.” Historical Geography 33: 180–201.Lobo-Guerrero, L. 2012. Insuring War: Sovereignty, Security and Risk. Abingdon: Routledge.Lundborg, T., and N. Vaughan-Williams. 2011. “Resilience, Critical Infrastructure, and MolecularSecurity: The Excess of ‘Life’ in Biopolitics.” International Political Sociology 5 (4): 367–383.doi:10.1111/j.1749-5687.2011.00140.x.Mythen, G., and S. Walklate. 2006. “Criminology and Terrorism: Which Thesis? Risk Society orGovernmentality?” The British Journal of Criminology 46 (3): 379–398. doi:10.1093/bjc/azi074.Neocleous, M. 2015. “The Universal Adversary Will Attack: Pigs, Pirates, Zombies, Satan and theClass War.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 1–14.Poulantzas, N. 1979. “The Political Crisis and the Crisis of the State.” In Critical Sociology:European Perspectives, 374–381, edited by J. W. Freiberg. New York: Irvington.Critical Studies on Terrorism 13Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 Qureshi, A. 2015. “PREVENT: Creating ‘Radicals’ to Strengthen Anti-Muslim Narratives.” CriticalStudies on Terrorism 8 (1): 181–191.Said, E. 1978. Orientalism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.Sparke, M. B. 2006. “A Neoliberal Nexus: Economy, Security and the Biopolitics of Citizenship onthe Border.” Political Geography 25 (2): 151–180. doi:10.1016/j.polgeo.2005.10.002.UK Government. 2014. “CNC supports National Counter Terrorism Awareness Campaign.”Accessed December 10. https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cnc-supports-national-counter-terrorism-awareness-campaignVedby Rasmussen, M. 2004. “‘It Sounds Like a Riddle’: Security Studies, the War on Terror andRisk.” Millennium – Journal of International Studies 33 (2): 381–395. doi:10.1177/03058298040330020601.Young, R. 2015. “Going Fifth Freedom: Fighting the War on Terror in the Splinter Cell: BlacklistVideo Game.” Critical Studies on Terrorism 8 (1): 147–162.14 C. Heath-Kelly et al.Downloaded by [University of Warwick] at 09:58 13 April 2015 