ABSTRACT: 
Using the discussion of self-reflexivity as an organizing principle, this article examines how mobilizing digital video technology during fieldwork opens up empirical and theoretical space for reconceptualizing the relationship between anthropologists and informants. Placing the field of visual anthropology into critical conversation with long-standing theoretical arguments about the objectivist limitations of native anthropologists, I argue that the slipperiness of nativity as an anthropological designation helps to provide analytical tools for examining filmmaking as a kind of gift-giving process between native ethnographic filmmakers and the subjects of their films. This article highlights some of the ways in which my own filmic and videographic exploits in Harlem, New York, mark integral connections between seeing and being the proverbial other, probing social exchanges predicated on the usefulness of low-budget digital technology as a means of fostering politically and epistemologically valuable ethnographic collaborations. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article examines the cultural and cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural cultural culture. It argues that the cultural and cultural cultural cultural cultural anthropologist is a critical re-reversal between native and nonnative anthropologist, and the anthropological reversal between the native and the native. It argues that the cultural and cultural cultural anthropologist is a critical re-reversal between native and nonnative anthropological, and the anthropological reversal of the cultural other. It argues that the cultural and cultural cultural anthropologist is a critical re-relational between native and nonnative anthropological, and the cultural other, as a re-supposition of anthropologists and their own pre-suppositions. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  [Keywords: BlackAmerica, native anthropology, visual anthropology, reflexivity, gifts]LIKE OTHER CONTEMPORARY HARLEM LANDMARKS,Sylvia’s restaurant exemplifies the presentational self-consciousness and self-referentiality that defines prevalentforms of Black visual culture today. Entering the soul foodestablishment’s main lobby entranceway, a multitieredglass case on the near right wall displays an assortment ofmass-produced Sylvia’s merchandise manufactured for a na-tional retail and wholesale market: Sylvia’s-brand hotsauces and salad dressings, powdered pancake mixes andcanned collard greens, glossy cookbooks and silk-screenedT-shirts, prepackaged candied yams and black-eyed peas,even moisturizing shampoos and men’s colognes. Almostall of it is marked with the selfsame photographic portraitof an iconic Sylvia Woods donning a chef’s hat and offer-ing up her best motherly smile. Along the walls of the cen-tral dining room, autographed publicity photos of variousinternational celebrities hang interspersed with candidshots of other famous patrons posing inside Sylvia’s withtheir arms wrapped around the back of its locally mythicalowner, the “Queen of Soul Food.” Each photo is signed toeither Sylvia or Sylvia’s and expresses appreciation for theexistence of such “an important local institution,” onethat “does Harlem proud!”On this particular day, a double-decker bus full oftourists spits its contents out onto the sidewalk space infront of the restaurant. Disembarking sightseers mill aboutalong Lenox Avenue, snapping pictures and recording Hi-8and mini-DV video footage of themselves and their friendsgrinning eagerly beneath Sylvia’s flickering yellow neonsign. Back inside the dining area, two young Asian womentap Sylvia on the shoulder to ask if they can take a picturewith her. She graciously obliges, adjusting her hair andblouse as one of the women removes a small digital camerafrom the dark blue Harlem USA knapsack strapped to herback.Two tables away, I am eating fried chicken under formerMayor Rudolph Giuliani’s framed, frozen gaze and talkingwith local tenant activist Nellie Bailey. I have taken Nellieto Sylvia’s so that I can finally pin her down for an upcom-ing film shoot. I am coproducing an ethnographic film ongentrification with a local Harlem filmmaker, and we aretrying to finish principal photography by capturing the en-ergy and activity of Nellie’s daily grind; we want to spend afew weeks trailing her with a mini-DV camera as she visitslocal tenants who complain of landlord harassment andunlawful eviction attempts. But Nellie has a request forme, too. Her organization, the Harlem Tenant’s Council,has just been given the go-ahead to use local community-access cable equipment to produce their own documen-tary, and Nellie wants to put together a video guide forsenior citizens explaining their rights as tenants and de-lineating clear-cut strategies for tenant organizing. Withher busy schedule, she has little time to produce such afilmic document herself, and so she proffers a quid pro quo: Ican film some of her activist work in Harlem (“no prob-lem,” she says), but she also wants help putting togetherAMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 106(1):32–42. COPYRIGHT © 2004, AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATIONthis short documentary for elderly Harlemites. “That’s theway we have to get these things done,” she says. “We haveto share our skills and expertise so that we can make themost out of the resources we have. There are tons of tal-ented people here in Harlem. We just have to learn tomake use of one another’s skills. Pool our resources. Thatway we all win. Harlem wins.”This short ethnographic scene from Sylvia’s famouseatery helps to concretize some of the connections be-tween visual anthropology and native anthropology, con-nections that overdetermine the kinds of exchanges andinteractions possible for an African American filmmaker/anthropologist working in contemporary Black America.The questions that these two subfields put to the center ofthe discipline they share are fundamental and founda-tional indeed; however, these queries are also predicatedon certain renditions of ethnographic subjectivity andpraxis that beg for (and usually receive) unrelenting criti-cism and deconstruction: What/who is a “native anthro-pologist” and how does knowledge produced by such a re-searcher compare with the so-called nonnative variety(Aguilar 1981; Jacobs-Huey 2002; Nakhleh 1979; Okely1996)? What are the intradisciplinary limits of “visual an-thropology” (i.e., what on earth would not be called visualanthropology)? How might that institutionally policedand explicitly labeled subfield be understood in the contextof traditional anthropological inquiries that have alwaysbeen organized around a certain ocularcentrist privilegingof what anthropologists see as the centerpiece for whatthey can be said to know about the social world (Banksand Morphy 1997; Hockings 1995; Jay 1993; Warnke 1993)?Using ethnographic fieldwork in contemporary BlackAmerica as a backdrop and rehearsal space for my own at-tempts at anthropological theorizing, I analyze just a fewof the ways in which the “native” and the “visual” in con-temporary anthropological discourse and practice mightbe said to productively intersect. As the abovementionedSylvia’s example highlights, there is much that “visualstudies” can bring to bear on a place like Harlem: a placewhere tourist technophiles take still and moving images ofcommunity landmarks; where local business ownersauthenticate their establishments with recourse to signedand wall-mounted celebrity snapshots; where communityactivists mobilize free community-access video equipmentto educate low-income tenants about their rights; andwhere anthropologists flout neutrality by agreeing to co-produce activists’ documentaries, unabashedly and com-plicatedly “participating in the processes of cultural objec-tification” (Ginsburg et al. 2002:22). I would like to placethese visual matters in conversation with my current con-cern about the politics and pragmatics of native anthro-pology, a concern specifically sparked by the fact that myown relationship to Harlem as an ethnographic field site isusually understood (by academic colleagues and Har-lemites alike) as an example of just such nativist research.I’m interested in the assumptions at play here and howthey impact ethnographic fieldwork. Moreover, how muchwould the application of new media technology alter thatintersubjective landscape?Toward these ends, I provide a brief overview of theliteratures on native anthropology and visual anthropol-ogy and argue for a more reflexive understanding of howthese two literatures inform one another. I make a distinc-tion between “rigorous reflexivity” and more mechanicalor superficial varieties. I also consider how certain mobili-zations of media technology (specifically, digital videocameras) help to redefine the commonsensical borders weprop up between natives and foreigners, anthropologistsand informants, ethnographic facts and ethnographic fic-tions. Examining how these two porous spheres of anthro-pological knowledge production (visual and native an-thropology) complicate one another, while redefining therelationships ethnographers have in the field, could addsome new-fangled nuance to important discussions al-ready afoot within cultural anthropology about the limitsof anthropological knowledge and the methodologicalmechanisms for securing cross-cultural truths (Asad 1973;Clifford 1988, 1997; Clifford and Marcus 1986; Jackson1989; Pratt 1992). I end by mobilizing the notion of ex-change (specifically, gift giving) to illuminate the theoreti-cal and personal consequences of my own video work incontemporary urban communities.ANTHROPOLOGICAL NATIVITY SCENES: THE BASICFAULT LINESOne way to start a discussion about the underpinnings ofanthropological knowledge production is to argue the ob-vious: that Western anthropologists’ authority is predi-cated on displaying an intimate and exhaustive under-standing of divergent cultural landscapes. The point hasbeen to master the life-ways of specific cultures so thor-oughly and completely as to understand those cultures asthough one were looking through the natives’ own eyes.Traditionally, this kind of perspective was labeled “emic”and likened to an approximation of nativist self-under-standing (Harris 1999; Headland 1991). Of course, if thatmaneuver was ethnographically sufficient, the nativescould just speak for themselves (provided we first con-ceded the representativeness of any specific native asstand-in for all natives from a given community). How-ever, instead of reducing the anthropological project tosuch a narrowly mimetic faculty, an analytic (and etic)layer of explanatory scaffolding is placed atop these emicunderstandings, elucidating deeper significances of for-eign cultural worlds—deeper meanings not necessarily ap-parent or even recognizable to the native practitionersthemselves. It is this secondary impulse, the move fromemic to etic comprehension, which grounds anthropologi-cal claims about scientific knowledge production. Anthro-pological truths are not reducible to knowing the other asif one were an other; they also entail translating those localunderstandings into a more general theory of translocalfactuality and objectivity: Georg Simmel’s oft-invokedJackson • An Ethnographic Filmflam 33“stranger” (1950) reimagined as Barley’s “innocent an-thropologist” (1983) capable of examining a foreign landwith much less prejudicial bias than any overly investednative could muster.1This is where tensions between the native and thenonnative in anthropology begin to tug at each other’sheuristic limits. The scientific researcher engages in in-tense and long-term participant observation so as to un-derstand a culture from the inside out; however, that isjust the first half of a two-pronged process. The conven-tional Western anthropologist, remember, is not really anative and, therefore, finds it quite necessary to determinewhen enough is enough, when it is finally time to emergefrom the fray of the field to write-up (Sanjek 1990). Suchwriting allows space (in the literally geographical sense)for a certain critical separation between native and re-civilized anthropologist, a crucial distance that permitsthe anthropologist to see not just through the native’s eyesbut also to examine those natives’ eyes through a muchmore powerfully scientific pair. Thus, even if the nativeanthropologist might be said to understand his/her nativepopulation more intimately and intensely than the for-eign researcher, the native anthropologist is still assumedto be less adept at creating the kind of objective detach-ment needed to properly interpret the emic etically, toturn humanistic rumination into true scientific fact. Assome anthropologists argue, “this attitude strongly im-plies that native and female [women working on feministissues] anthropologists are seen as potential ‘tools’ to beused to provide important information to the ‘real,’ whitemale anthropologists” (Jones 1970:252). That is, unlessthose “real, white male anthropologists” go “native” à laFrank Cushing—the anthropological equivalent of a Tar-zanian complex wherein Western anthropologists unlearntheir ability to speak (i.e., to publish) and apingly over-identify with the behavioral alterity of that researchedother (McFeely 2001; Paul 1953).Native ethnographers are believed to start out fromthis overly identificatory position, relinquishing some oftheir ability to create requisite dissociation from the fieldthat writing up is supposed to encapsulate. The huntersand trappers conquer the wild other; they do not, like Tar-zan and Cushing, become it. Native anthropologists areassumed to be agential extensions of this same wildness;they do not, like real anthropologists, stand above and be-yond it in a posture of laboratorial scrutiny—even whenthese anthropologists are U.S. citizens working in minor-ity communities in the United States.Since at least the early 1970s, this same argumentabout native anthropology’s implications and limitationshas been rehearsed and rerehearsed in various guises (Abu-Lughod 1988; Jacobs-Huey 2002; Ohnuki-Tierney 1984).The personal investments and community-shared histo-ries of native anthropologists may be presumed to providea richer subjective knowledge of a given social group, butthat same subjectivity is believed to compromise attemptsat the objective disinterest necessary for anthropologicalneutrality and scientificity. Of course, once the hardestand fastest scientific claims of anthropology were throwninto doubt with metaethnographic arguments about eth-nography’s fictionalized constructedness (about howtruth-claims get secured through rhetorical, narratologi-cal, and textual strategies), the earth began to shake andcrumble a bit beneath the impartial ground of nonnativeanthropological inquiry (Clifford 1988; Rosenau 1991).2Some of the most compelling renditions of native an-thropology start with the premise that it provides much-needed “correctives” to traditional ethnographic repre-sentations, representations reread and reinterpreted less asscientifically objective than orientalistically fantastic(Gwaltney 1981; Said 1978). Some of anthropology’sclaims to detached impartiality were said to mask very bi-ased and stereotypical presuppositions—stereotypes thatthe native anthropologist felt chosen, even annointed, todispel. Once scientistic and objectivist claims for privileg-ing the outsider anthropologist over the insider began tofall away, however, another political project became evenmore important to the native anthropological cause: theuse of ethnographic research for the explicit politicalbenefit of one’s people, the co-natives under study. Thismeant changing the epistemologies and methodologiesthat were operative in the field, requiring due diligence onthe part of the native ethnographer: “The native anthro-pologist, the insider, must be ideologically conscious dur-ing her study else her research become coopted” (Haniff1985:107). Doing native anthropology becomes doing avery different kind of anthropology entirely. It means em-bracing a certain brand of “native politics” (Slocum2001:146). Delmos Jones put it quite forcefully: “A BlackMan in this century cannot avoid identifying with hispeople. I am an intrinsic part of the social situation that Iam attempting to study. As part of the situation, I mustalso attempt to forge a solution” (Jones 1970:255). Thiswas a notion of native anthropology that was not simplyan epistemological or methodological corrective; it wasalso a distinctively political intervention: “Foregroundingnative in relation to anthropology, or oneself as a nativeanthropologist, can act as an empowering gesture and cri-tique of the positionings of natives in the stagnant slot ofthe Other” (Jacobs-Huey 2002:800). Here, ethnography isnot just a research method; it is also a new work ethic, anew scientific policy, a new kind of salvage ethnographythat saves natives from the abuses of feigned neutrality.These same sentiments rest at the center of NellieBailey’s aforementioned cable-access request and speak di-rectly to anthropological debates about nativity, politics,and ethnographic practice. When Bailey asks me to helpproduce her documentary film for seniors, she is operatingwith the reasonable assumption that my engagement withher (and with the discipline of anthropology) extends be-yond claims to scientific impartiality. I am presumed toembody a racial politic, a presumption based, at least par-tially, on commonsensical acceptance of my nativity as anAfrican American working in Harlem—someone who surely34 American Anthropologist • Vol. 106, No. 1 • March 2004stands to benefit whenever “Harlem wins.” Victory in Har-lem often translates into a decidedly racial winner’s circle.Alongside these same concerns/assumptions about na-tivist solidarity, one can locate equally valuable theoreticalarguments that deconstruct the discreteness and mutualexclusivity of categories like “native” and “nonnative” asadjectival parsings of anthropologists and their sociopoli-tical locations. As the title for Kirin Narayan’s important1993 article stated: “How native is a native anthropolo-gist” anyway? That is, if middle-class African Americansare the advancing front guard for a gentrification push thatthreatens to displace poorer Harlem residents (the verysame tenants that Nellie Bailey wants to educate throughmedia technology), how can it be assumed that my ownprofessionally middle-class status will not compromise mycommitment to keeping poorer Black Harlemites housed?This is especially complicated since some of the residentsmost interested in my Harlem research (and probablymost likely to purchase my books) are these same newlyarriving Black middle-class community members.Discussing this very dynamic, John Augilar (1981) andDonald Messerschmidt (1981) have characterized acade-mia’s professionalization process as socializing a certainkind of elite difference within all of its initiates, regardlessof their supposedly nativist beginnings. It is this sameproblematic that guided poet and feminist Audre Lorde’sdifferently bifurcated discussion about the limits of na-tivist reappropriations—specifically, whether slaves canuse their master’s tools to actually dismantle their master’shomes (Lorde 1984). That is, how clean is a methodologi-cal baby formerly washed in Westernized bathwater? Andhow can anthropology ever be “decolonized” (Harrison1991) from within its own ivory-towered and institution-alized comfort zone? Revolutionary Martinican scholarFrantz Fanon (1967) also made this point when he arguedthat the metropole-trained native is just as foreign (vis-à-vis the colony) as the foreigner—if not more so—and cer-tainly just as potentially detrimental to the revolutionaryproject. As an African American anthropologist working inurban Black America, one tiptoes gingerly along a tight-rope hoisted high above and between the Scylla of racialbelonging and the Charybdis of class-based cooptation.According to some, the script is already written, the rolescast: One can play only sellout or savior.Narayan eschews the binaries of native–foreigner, in-sider–outsider, colonizer–colonized, and sellout–savior forthe idea that “we might more profitably view each anthro-pologist in terms of shifting identifications amid a field ofinterpenetrating communities and power relations” (1993:671). She calls for “the enactment of hybridity in our texts”and an understanding of all anthropological authors “asminimally bicultural” (1993:672). All ethnographers areasked to embrace both the native and the foreigner insidethem. For some, this might sound a little like Zen and theart of identificatory voluntarism. As Karla Slocum (2001)points out, this particular argument, however ultimatelycompelling, might also be said to finesse the issue ofpower differentials that make certain embraceable identi-ties more or less valid than others, more or less nativethan others, more or less marked than others.3These questions about the precarious possibility ofunproblematically being native and the political implica-tions of embracing nativity speak to some of the importantfault-lines that define how native anthropology is under-stood in contemporary contexts, especially when the rela-tionship between informant and researcher is often inher-ently hierarchized no matter how closely the nativefieldworker identifies with those in the field. This is a hier-archization that is recognized from across both sides of theethnographic track, a recognition that Brackette Williamsflags as comprehension of the differences between “skin-folk” and true “kinfolk” (Williams 1996). Some of thesekinds of s/kinfolk distinctions are a function of class dif-ferences between the middle-class native anthropologistand the less-well-off informant being studied—a reminderthat class differences exist even among members of margi-nalized communities and that one can also “study up” (Nader1974) within racially stigmatized groups by examining thelives of people like Sylvia Woods or Nellie Bailey and notjust focusing exclusively on Harlem’s poorest residents.4German philosopher Walter Benjamin (1968) mightoffer some of the best routes of escape from both simplis-tic dismissals of native naiveté and countervailing essen-tialist excesses about native authenticity. Benjamin matter-of-factly declares that the storyteller (as much the uranthropologist as Simmel’s “stranger” ever was) can hailfrom both faraway lands and the very center of the teller’sown community. If anthropology is a powerful techniquefor telling stories about the stories we tell ourselves aboutourselves, then the so-called native is simply mandated tooffer up a tale that compels us all to huddle that muchcloser around the scholastic campfire. And how much tighterthe yarn gets spun when the anthropologist/storyteller isalso able to use media technology to peer over that flameand catch the native looking at the anthropologist lookingat the native watching back (Michaels 1982).FROMNATIVIZING TO VISUALIZING THEANTHROPOLOGISTVisual anthropology has constantly asserted and reas-serted itself as a vibrant and valuable subfield within thediscipline. In fact, visual technologies were given an im-portant role in ethnographic research from quite early on(Marks 1995; Rony 1996). Just as the Lumière brothers un-veiled their crowd-pleasing filmic invention in the 1890s,scientists and naturalists (protoanthropologists) were us-ing that same equipment on ethnographic excursions toEurope’s Oceanic “other” as well as in internationally at-tended exhibits of Europe’s African “others” presentedright in the middle of Paris—and all before the 20th cen-tury (Grimshaw 2001). From the very beginning, theorizingthe relationship between this new media form and a stillrelatively new (and newly institutionalized) disciplinaryJackson • An Ethnographic Filmflam 35practice (academic anthropology) entailed making claimsabout film’s scientific pedigree and usefulness, whichmeant likening it to the microscope, telescope, and ther-mometer in terms of realist specificity (Winston 1993).Again, the point was greater scientific objectivity and neu-trality—and it was argued that the cinematographe wouldsurely assist in that cause.As film’s grammar was refined and reformulated byfilmmakers like Eisenstein, Vertov and Griffith in the firstand second decades of the 20th century, anthropology re-defined its relationship to this new medium (Ginsburg1994; Grimshaw 2001). In the early 1920s, as Malinowskiwas reconfiguring the nature of anthropological research,Robert Flaherty conjured the formal beginnings of ethno-graphic filmmaking. Flaherty told an overly romanticizedstory about a character he renamed Nanook and depictedalongside a fictitious Inuit family (Barbash and Taylor 1997;Rony 1996). In the 1930s and 1940s, the Mead–Batesonfilmic collaborations helped to continue the discipline’sfascination with the prospect of using visual data as po-tential ethnographic data—combating the literary andtextual fetishizations of an anthropology that Mead wouldlater disapprovingly label “a discipline of words” (Ginsburg1994; Mead 1975; Ruby 2000). In 1950s Europe, JeanRouch continued the kind of fiction/nonfiction boundaryblurring that Flaherty had utilized for Nanook (and evenmore self-consciously), engaging in what he labeled“shared anthropology” and offering viewers “ethnofic-tions” (films purposefully embracing fictional techniquesto tell ethnographic truths). “Fiction,” Rouch argued, “isthe only way to penetrate reality” (Feld 2003:6). Rouchclaimed to actually produce his films for the very Africansdepicted in them—what might be called a spectatoriallynative cinema (Diawara 1995a; Stoller 1992).In the United States over the past 40 years, just asquestions of the visual in anthropology were beginning togain a new kind of theoretical significance, academicspaces were opened up for the codification of visual an-thropology as an officially sanctioned subfield within theacademy—replete with its own section in the AmericanAnthropological Association and its own refereed journals.In the 1960s, Wenner-Gren funding created the Programin Ethnographic Film out of an initiative spearheaded by agroup of New England-based anthropologists and film-makers. This was soon followed by institutions like the So-ciety for the Anthropology of Visual Communication inthe 1970s and the Society for Visual Anthropology in themid-1980s (Ruby 2001). At Temple, Penn, USC, and NYU,people like Sol Worth, Timothy Asch, Jay Ruby, and FayeGinsburg further institutionalized the pedagogical pur-chase of this burgeoning field and its pressing questions(Ginsburg 1994, 1996; Prins and Ruby 2001). How can vis-ual matter (found in the field or created by the field-worker) tell stories about the cultural other? How truthfuland scientifically useful will such stories be? Visual an-thropologists attempt to answer these questions by exam-ining the processes behind the productions, placing massmedia texts in the context of social mediation itself(Ginsburg et al. 2002). A film becomes read not only as aparticular story about the social world but also as a text oc-cupying an extradiegetical and profilmic space, anothercultural character in a larger ethnographic tale about thewider social world of which that film is a part. This marksa move from what some might think of as mere “ethno-graphic film” to more substantive engagement with (andexamination of) the cross-fertilizing links between “mediaand culture” (Ginsburg 1994).Here, too, in visual anthropology, the native has ar-rived to challenge the legitimacy of conventional ethno-graphic films and the ethnographers who make them. Ifanthropologists use films to write stories about the other,what do those projects mean in a contemporary contextwhere relatively cheaper digital video cameras and non-linear editing systems have made the once-cost-prohibi-tive practices of the ethnographic filmmaker more feasiblyutilized by others themselves? With the democratization ofvideo producing comes the increased vibrancy of indige-nous filmmaking, but will this lead to a more “participa-tory cinema” or just an already doomed “bargaining withMephistopheles” (Ginsburg 1992:361; MacDougall 1975;Ruby 1995; Turner 1992)? Moreover, what do these newmedia offerings mean for the traditional ethnographicfilms made by the nonnative anthropologist—aforemen-tioned skepticism about that dividing line between nativeand nonnative notwithstanding? For some, native mediamaking is interpreted as the disqualification of nonna-tively produced ethnographic film (Ruby 1995). The eth-nographic filmmaker loses all claims to the film/videocamera as a tool for writing the other once subalterns havegained the technical skills to speak for themselves throughfilm—and it is implied, to even speak more accurately.This is another point at which the native mirrors thefilmic in anthropological epistemology. Both entail as-sumptions of immediacy: the native anthropologist as di-rect extension of some native ethos and the film image asrealist, transparent index of a concrete, physical world(Morris 1994). There is also a concomitant push for “re-verse anthropology” (Diawara 1995a), for the “native” toturn the camera around and create a filmic subject out ofthe erstwhile ethnographic filmmaker—yet anothermechanism for blurring the borders between those twocategorical designations.The influx of more and more indigenous film offer-ings creates the need for an ethnographic cinema that rec-ognizes the importance of what Faye Ginsburg calls the“parallax effect” (1994) in contemporary visual anthropol-ogy. The parallax effect becomes a way to explain howboth conventional ethnographic films and indigenous onescan be placed in complementary conversation, taking seri-ously what they have to say to one another as forms ofcultural critique and ethnographic representation. Look-ing at the same cultural material from slightly differentpositions creates a more holistic and multidimensionalunderstanding of the world than either vantage point would36 American Anthropologist • Vol. 106, No. 1 • March 2004produce alone—and, hence, explains the profound valueof a parallax effect for the future of visual anthropology.TOWARDA RIGOROUS REFLEXIVITYThe parallax effect says that different kinds of subjectivi-ties can tell different kinds of truths about the social world,truths that do not negate one another but, rather, fill insome of each other’s unavoidable lacunae. Jeff Himpele(2002) uses Michael Taussig’s notion of “mimetic vertigo”to argue that a parallax effect also takes place wheneverunwitting anthropologists get “drawn into the projects ofother cultural producers” (2002:302). By showing the un-canny similarities between his own anthropological ap-propriations and the tactical maneuverings of a Boliviantalk show host, he argues that an appreciation of the par-allax effect reinforces a need for reflexivity in the dizzyinggive-and-take of anthropological research.Ginsburg’s “parallax effect” asks for very specific kindsof reflexivity in the collaborative conversations forged be-tween anthropologists and subjects. It is this same call forcollaboration and intersubjectivity that is at the thematiccenter of a recent article on reflexivity penned by two ur-ban ethnographers working in contemporary Chicago,Mary Pattillo-McCoy and Reuben A. Buford May (2000).Even when doing qualitative research in the same place atthe same time, these two ethnographers see quite differentthings in the field—indeed, they see quite different fields.What complicates matters even further is the fact thatboth of these social scientists would equally be labeled“native” researchers. Both study Black Americans in Chi-cago and are Black Americans (one from Chicago, the otherfrom a city not more than an hour away). What makestheir article so interesting is that Pattillo-McCoy and Mayshow that even with all of their demographic similarities,they still often observe very different things in the field,even during the exact same ethnographic encounters. Aswith Ginsburg’s parallax effect, they attempt to highlightthe necessary complementarities of differing ethnographicperspectives—further complicating the native–foreignerdichotomy by showing the importance of divisions withinthe native category itself. There is never one unproblema-tized native but, rather, as much variety in the categoricalother as there are actual others themselves.In their attempt at a critical reflexivity (Ruby 2000),Pattillo-McCoy and May offer demographic differences be-tween the two of them (in terms of gender, class, and evenmarital status) as explanation for intraracial divergences intheir respective ethnographic visions in/of the field. Theyargue that a determination of one’s social standpoint be-gins to explain one’s social viewpoints. This is a quite nec-essary maneuver, but along with it we might want to pro-vide more “vulnerable” forms of reflexivity, forms crafteda little closer to Himpele’s notion of parallax as vertigo.Here, I mean to invoke Ruth Behar’s notion of the vulner-able ethnographer whose vulnerability is predicated on areflexivity that is not reducible to simple social taxono-mies (1996). Often, when scholars theorize reflexivity,they are making a case for how the social slots into whichresearchers can be placed shed light on the kinds of pre-suppositions and biases they bring with them to the eth-nographic moment. In this context, one’s social identitiesare grocery-listed as a technique for exposing one’s ideo-logical cards. If one is writing or filming about race, class,gender, and/or sexuality, it becomes imperative that onereveal one’s own particular inhabiting of such categories,especially since such habitation can determine what onewill and will not see. However, that is just the beginning(not the end) of the reflexive impulse, of what’s importantabout such self-revelatory maneuvers, of why reflexivityhas theoretical and heuristic purchase. To stop there is tocome dangerously close to making little more than emptyautobiographical gestures. Surely, there are better andworse ways to invoke the “I” (Ruby 2000; Salzman 2002).5Behar’s notion of vulnerability says that these samesociological categories into which we fit ourselves can ob-fuscate as much as they enlighten. And, as such, we arecharged to dig deeper, to find out how differently (andmaybe even idiosyncratically) we inhabit these overly rei-fied social categories. Reflexivity for Behar is not reducibleto easy sociological classification in its final instant. In-stead, true reflexivity would trouble the very categoriesthemselves. In this context, marking oneself as Black anda researcher does not simply make one native in the con-text of urban Afro-America; it only provides phenom-enological pretext for the fraught social interactions onewill necessarily experience in the field. Being a middle-class African American scholar (in Pattillo-McCoy andMay’s case—as in my own) would not only mean decon-structing notions of “race” that would have it operate assome kind of all-encompassing mechanism for superglue-ing assumed connections across the material chasm ofclass differences but also not just axiomatically acceptinga certain kind of social alienation from non-middle-classBlack informants. It mandates an understanding of howclass differences and similarities infuse every moment ofthe intersubjective ethnographic project—even for Blackanthropologists working in Black America. A rigorous re-flexivity says that the answers don’t come automaticallywith the admission of one’s social location vis-à-vis race,class, gender, and so on, but that such an admission isonly a more sophisticated way to begin asking the sameimportant questions about the kinds of knowledge-pro-ducing interactions possible out there in the world.In effect, for the so-called native anthropologist work-ing in film/video, this is an important difference betweenreflexivity as a kind of double vision and reflexivity as atruly DuBoisan manifestation of “double consiousness”(DuBois 1994; Messerschmidt 1981). While W. E. B. DuBoisdoes not invoke “double-vision” per se, he does use an op-tical metaphor to ground his psychological point.6 Hetalks about the African American being “a seventh son,born with a veil, and gifted with second-sight” (Dubois1994:2). That second-sight is similar to what GinsburgJackson • An Ethnographic Filmflam 37wants to call a “parallax effect”: It is the ability to see fromtwo different locations at once. For DuBois, the distinctionis between black and white, but that color-coded logic quitepersuasively mirrors the scopic distance between informant–anthropologist, native filmmaker–nonnative filmmaker,savior–sellout. This DuBoisian twoness makes one’s ethno-graphic vision more layered and multidimensional. How-ever, superficial invocations of reflexivity are less likeDuBoisian double-consciousness-as-doubled vision thanthey are headache-inducing instances of seeing double—instances predicated on, say, a sharp whack upside one’shead. Seeing double is hardly seeing better—if it is evenseeing at all—and a far cry from the kind of social “stereos-copy” (Messerschmidt 1981) talked about by DuBois (al-though it might still resonate well with Himpelean notionsof vertigous reflexivity). For a truly rigorous reflexivity,simply flashing one’s social categories is not nearly vulner-able enough. There is a difference between vulnerable re-flexivities and mechanical ones, differences in levels ofself-transparency, differences in methodological rigor (Ruby1995). Here, distance becomes important in placing spacenot only between the anthropologist and the culturalother but also between anthropologists and their own pre-suppositions, especially presuppositions about what criti-cally defines the self in the first place, distinguishing be-tween postpositivisms and truly honest invocations ofsubjectivity.A filmic double vision and rigorous reflexivity can emergeout of collaborations between indigenous and conventionalethnographic filmmakers, or it can take place within asingular filmmaker herself. I am thinking here of FatimahTobing Rony’s notion of “mobilizing the third eye” (1996:198) to eschew simplistic zero-sum equations about thecategorical difference between objectivity and subjectiv-ity. She instead proposes a model of seeing that looks pastsuch simplistic reifications for moments of practical de-construction and even small-scale transcendence. Ronyuses Zora Neale Hurston’s powerful raw film footage as aprime example of how such “third eyes” operate. This is away of “showing seeing” (Mitchell 2002) to ourselves sothat we can look at how we look at the world—and maybeeven craft slightly new ways of spying it. For Ruth Behar,this showing of how we see, this vulnerability born ofcritical reflexivity, sometimes takes on a kind of psycho-analytic tinge, offering readers a way into Behar’s anthro-pological self through the return of her own psychologicalrepressions.7 That may be a degree of psychological reduc-tionism and personal confessionalism that others are notup to—and it need not be the only way to think abouthow we might problematize the self through self-distanc-ing while avoiding solipsistic excesses. Even though theyalso explicitly liken reflexivity to confession, Jay Ruby andBarbara Myerhoff (1982), Myerhoff and Littman (1983),and Myerhoff (1979) offer it less as ethnographic penancethan as a model for scientific rigor, social empathy, andpolitical commitment.CONCLUSION: READING AMOS ANDANDREWDuring my field research in Harlem from 1995–2003, thevisual and the native were both operative as importantnodes of ethnographic understanding. I can hardly over-state the extent to which televisual and filmic images in-formed my readings of Harlem residents, not to mentionHarlemites’ readings of one another and of me. To explainwhat I mean, let me invoke the 1993 Nicholas Cage andSamuel L. Jackson film Amos and Andrew as a gateway intoan example of the potential for mutually constitutive rela-tions between nativity and visuality.Amos and Andrew is a comedy about a racist Americantown’s misreading of a Black cultural anthropologist ascriminal intruder and their bumbling attempts at rectify-ing that mistaken assumption. The first time I watched thefilm, it was in the one-bedroom apartment of a local Har-lem resident who offered the film up as her way of clarify-ing what it meant for me to be a Black cultural anthropol-ogist, the only Black cultural anthropologist she claimedto have ever met. The copy of the tape she had screenedfor me was important first as an entry into how films areused to communicate both parasocially (between specta-tors and television characters) and socially (among specificspectators). However, it was also important because ofwhat its actual acquisition can tell us about the local po-litical economy of the visual (as determined by video salesand rentals) in underserved Black communities. At thetime, Blockbuster was only beginning to think about mak-ing its way into Harlem, and so a community of over300,000 residents was serviced by smaller local mom-and-pop video providers, often corner groceries and bodegaswith videotapes displayed on metal racks behind theircheck-out counters.Amos and Andrew is an obviously self-conscious playon the Amos and Andy radio/television serials of the earlierparts of this century, complete with Nicholas Cage’s pro-vocative blackfaced scenes foregrounding that explicitconnection to a show with roots in the minstrelsy tradi-tion. But the profilmic plot thickens. In the absence ofBlockbuster and other national video chains, the particu-lar copy of Amos and Andrew that I first watched in an in-formant’s one-bedroom apartment was picked up at a lo-cal Harlem institution (a store up the block from Sylvia’s)that is playfully and hyperbolically famous among localresidents for having any and all African American (andmartial arts) films ever made. These are not official copies,mind you. Instead, they are dubbed versions, completewith dot-matrix-printed titles of each film on the VHStape’s spine label. Before you purchase your film, the em-ployee pops it into one of the two VCR’s stationed in frontof the counter so that you can see the image quality beforethe monetary transaction takes place. Indeed, part of whatdefines many urban city streets is the ease with which pe-destrians can find such bootlegged and/or stolen copies ofall sorts of pop cultural fare—from films to CDs and audio-cassettes to hardcover bestsellers and fake Prada bags, often38 American Anthropologist • Vol. 106, No. 1 • March 2004sold right on the sidewalk space itself, a sprawling and ag-gressively commercialized “black public sphere” (Diawara1995b).With any talk of visuality and urban ethnography incontemporary Harlem, one must also point out the brick-and-mortar changes to the landscape that are part andparcel of a gentrification process that Nellie Bailey cri-tiques—and, yet, another obvious site for marking muta-tions in the visual with respect to urban America. This isan Empowerment Zoned context in which storefrontschange almost overnight. Stores set up shop and move outthe next day—transformations that create a palimpsestialHarlem. Like depressed urban landscapes throughout theUnited States, one of the most common eyesores is theabandoned and dilapidated building that serves as a sitefor jumbo, bigger-than-life, Times-Square-style billboardadvertisements of everything from hair-care products tohip-hop albums—billboards placed right atop old storesigns and darkened apartment windows. I started to takestill photos of these spaces in the mid-1990s, chroniclingthe ironies and oddities of an urban landscape commodifi-cation where buildings are more important as backdropsfor ads than as residences for potential tenants.And not only did I take still photographs, I also used asmall mini-DV camera to capture video footage during mytime in the field. Some of these images were shot for myeyes only, a kind of video field note taking; others wereearmarked specifically for future ethnographic film pro-jects. And it was this particular imbrication of the visualand the ethnographic (taking stills and shooting videos inHarlem) that brought home the complicated ways in whichcertain forms of visuality press one closer to (or farther awayfrom) notions of nativity, to the occupation of a native an-thropological positionality. Walking the street with myvideo camera, I am conspicuously the tourist or, even worse,the carpetbagger: still phenotypically Black but not assumedto unproblematically or preternaturally belong. In thecontext of contemporary gentrifying forces (and with theBlack gentry leading a multiracial residential charge thatNellie and others equate with low-income tenant disloca-tion), being a tourist of any kind links one to that incom-ing threat. Hostile questions abound, suspicious stares:“What’cha taking pictures for? Looking to buy somethingaround here?” Such queries are offered less out of pedes-trian curiosity than suspicious exasperation. In some ways,one’s native status becomes troubled with such a mobili-zation of visuality by way of “prosumer” video equipment;a native anthropologist loses the ability to effortlesslyblend in. With the video camera around my neck or tak-ing pictures of billboards atop empty buildings on Har-lem’s main thoroughfare, I was marked as an outsider.This feeling of outsiderliness vis-à-vis the unfamiliar Har-lemites I passed on the street (even in the context of as-sumed skin-based similarity) was quite palpable.However, there was a second way of using the videocamera that was also operative throughout my time in thefield, and it is with this version of the visual–native nexusthat I want to close. Following Rouch’s claims about“shared” anthropological movies produced for the peoplesdepicted in them, there is another visual and native eth-nographic instant wherein one is not being summoned tomake an “ethnographic film” for colleagues and a wideraudience (or even, per Nellie Bailey’s request, to copro-duce an activist documentary for political mobilization),but just to document an important social event for thepeople being videotaped. This is a more specifically in-tended audience for those canonical social rituals that an-thropologists often emphasize as important sites of socio-cultural production: baptisms, birthday parties, baby showers,music recitals, and dance rehearsals, and so on. In a worldwhere the televisual is an imperative mode for capturing,disseminating, consuming, and mediating all kinds of cul-tural fare, an informant’s appeal for assistance in record-ing personal events for his or her own private needs is aquite understandable and frequent request. This is not justmaking films that equate subjects with audience members. Itmeans making films intended exclusively for the people inthem. No fancy editing into an anthropological narrativefor professional or popular consumption. Just documenta-tion—for familial memory’s sake, in service to someoneelse’s attempt at self-archivization.How many times have I been asked to do just this?Many more times than I can count, with no “ethnographicfilm” as the final endpoint, just a giving back (through thevisual), an obligated reciprocation. I awkwardly stand, say,in the back pew of a local Baptist church, my Canon XL-1hoisted above my shoulder, while a congregant’s son (andone of my informants) is warmly welcomed into the spiri-tual fold. Because an invested grandmother is unable to at-tend, this anthropologist’s shaky footage will be as close asshe comes to witnessing the event. I get the request twodays before. “Of course,” I say. “It would be my pleasure.”And so I shoot, trying to stay out of the way of peripateticushers and deacons, and mothers shuttling crying babiesback and forth to the lobby. His grandmother wants thesermon, too, so they get permission for me to shoot thatas well. The next day, I transfer the footage to VHS, place alaser-printed label on its spine, and drop it off to the newcongregant.8This is a gift with all due Maussian intonations (Mauss1990), cementing social bonds, redefining and reproduc-ing the limits and contours of community, insisting onreciprocity and interdependence. After all, the first giftwas their willingness to trust me with their thoughts andpersonal stories. “What imposes obligation in the presentreceived and exchanged,” Mauss writes, “is the fact thatthe thing received is not inactive. Even when it has beenabandoned by the giver, it still possesses something ofhim” (1990:11–12). In this case, the video also “possessessomething of” the gift’s receivers, capturing, at the veryleast, their physical likenesses and, according to some,their very souls. This presents a very different brand of“total prestation,” one where the totality of reciprocity isnot just a function of the gift’s ability to simultaneouslyJackson • An Ethnographic Filmflam 39implicate all social spheres in the exchange (politics, eco-nomics, kinship, religion, etc.) but also its uncanny capacity“to partake in something of the personality of the giver”(Graeber 2001:154) and (with video) of the receiver, too.Such a video gift may possess the filmmaker’s aura but it isalso literally the receiver’s image.And how vulnerable is such a personal gift given to“the other.” What if they don’t like it? What if they can’tuse it? What if several of the zooms or tilts or pans ortracking shots destroy the cosmological gravity of the bap-tismal moment? Or maybe his grandmother just wantedsomething framed a little differently—to show her friends,to play for her neighbors, to enjoy over the holiday seasonwith family members in from out of town. But in this in-stance at least, I am simply thanked and told that grannywill love it no matter what. This exchange has clear impli-cations for the gift I am getting back in return: a quasifa-milial relationship to my informant, to “granny,” to all ofthem, these people that I study. All anthropologists givegifts (as thanks, incentive, or bribe), and they often feelsuch familiarity and familiality in return. For the nativeanthropologist in particular, gifts are also attempts to ne-gotiate informants’ assumptions about community andnativity with respect and generosity.Of course, that is all even more problematic (mayberendered somewhat disingenuous) when the anthropolo-gist has asked for and received specific permission to showclips or stills of this same personal footage at talks aroundthe country (or to reference them as part of a publishedpaper for a refereed anthropological journal). If this move(to film something for the people being filmed) can besaid to bring me a bit closer (as native) to my own nativity(to mutuality and gifting as a member of an assumed so-cial grouping), my recontextualization of that same mate-rial as part of this article is, indeed, the other side of thisethnographic flimflam. My recontextualization becomesan ethnographic filmflam that we, as anthropologists, hopemight still be ethically sound—if not theoretically helpful.It at least marks what might be imagined (following Marx-ist theoretical formulations) as a transformation of con-sumptive emphasis—from the use-value of video images(captured for the viewing of those being represented) totheir exchange-value—replete with surplus symbolic importparlayed into academic capital or film festival awards. Aswith all gifts, the potential for exploitation is endless.As a teaching tool, film production is especially usefulbecause of this exploitative potential. By that I mean tosay that film is a great tool through which to think aboutthe ethics of participant observation as a methodology—and of ethnographic representation as a discursive and po-litical form. And so it is all the more important for the so-called native anthropologist writing self and other (andthinking self as other) to utilize the technologies of con-temporary film and video production toward democratiz-ing ends.We know that the dichotomy between native and an-thropologist is a fundamentally false one; however, it ob-viously has real productive force. But this is a discursiveand practical productivity that comes not only from per-formances given in front of the camera, not only from cul-tural representations per se but also as a specific functionof the very wielding of video-recording equipment. It is asmuch about the extradiegetic as the diegetic, as muchabout profilmic excesses as the filmed proscenium. Thequestion is not just how others represent themselvesthrough their own indigenous film offerings. It is not evenreducible to an easy anthropological reversal whereby theperennial subjects make filmic subject matter out of theanthropologist’s cultural landscape. Theorizing the con-nections between nativity and visuality requires an en-gagement with the inescapable changes to self and otherwrought by film/video as a process that is photochemi-cal/electromagnetic at one end and discursive/performa-tive at the other. We might begin to rewrite nativity andvisuality at the crossroads where these two aforemen-tioned ends meet. Bea Medicine puts the possibilitiespoignantly in her book on native anthropologizing:I am part of the people of my concern and research inter-ests. Sometimes they teasingly sing Floyd Westerman’ssong “Here Comes the Anthropologist” (1969) when I at-tend Indian Conferences. The ambiguities inherent inthese two roles of being an “anthro” while at the sametime remaining a “Native” need amplification. Theyspeak to the very heart of “being” and “doing” in anthro-pology. My desire to be an anthropologist has been myundoing and my rebirth in a very personal way. [2001:3]The “ambiguities inherent in these two roles of being an‘anthro’ while at the same time remaining ‘Native’ ” canbe interestingly theorized when we use film/video to showus some of how we see—and how others see us seeingthem. It provides ways of rethinking nativity throughvisuality (and vice versa) while at the same time offeringthe beginnings of a conceptual framework for the con-struction of more vulnerable and rigorous reflexivities thatchallenge anthropologists to mobilize their many gifts(third eyes, parallaxing effects, shifting stereoscopies, andinexpensive digital video technologies) to reinvent eth-nography in the 21st century. For Nellie Bailey and I, sucha lofty goal might start quite simply, with a short videoprogram she wants to broadcast on Manhattan Neighbor-hood Network some time soon. “Sure,” I say.” I’d love tohelp.” Win, win? Maybe.JOHN L. JACKSON JR. Department of Cultural Anthropology,Duke University, Durham, NC 27708NOTESAcknowledgments. This article began as a short presentation at theAmerican Studies Association’s annual conference in 2002. Debo-rah Willis, Kellie Jones, and Nicole Fleetwood provided useful com-ments during this early phase. I am also grateful to Ann duCille forinviting me to present a longer version of it at Wesleyan Univer-sity’s Center for African American Studies in November 2002. GreyGundaker and Lynn Weiss allowed me to present another draft atWilliam and Mary in March 2003. In fall 2003, Charlie Thompsonalso invited me to present yet another draft of the piece at Duke40 American Anthropologist • Vol. 106, No. 1 • March 2004University’s Center for Documentary Studies. Deborah Thomas,Karla Slocum, and Lanita Jacobs-Huey each read versions of thispiece and provided critically useful commentary—as did the fouranonymous AA readers (including the two revealed to be FayeGinsburg and Carolyn Rouse).1. Hockings (1995) makes an emic–etic distinction between filmicand written ethnographies, arguing that films are etic and writtenmonographs emic.2. Anthropologists have often mined the humanities for theoreti-cal frames that might offer useful responses to the reification of sci-entific experimentality as the only model for anthropological in-quiry (Benson 1993; Clifford 1986; Friedman 2001; Stewart 1996;Stoller 1999).3. For instance, why do we not think of earlier monographs by thelikes of Max Gluckman and Raymond Firth as native anthropologi-cal engagements with South Africa and New Zealand respectively?(Augilar 1981:15)4. This is some of the reason why attempts to theorize and enactthe possibility of middle-class betrayal become, at heart, decidedlyethnographic endeavors—and with specific resonance for the pro-fessionally trained and labeled native anthropologist. One can readthe works of, say, E. Franklin Frazier (1965), C. L. R. James (Grim-shaw 1992), and bell hooks (2000) as differently pitched attemptsat just such middle-class betrayal.5. Jay Ruby (2000) claims that reflexivity in anthropology pro-vides for greater methodogical rigor—that it makes ethnographicresearch more scientifically sound, even though he thinks that ithas been hijacked by postmodernists.6. Richard Wright, in The Outsider, invokes the notion of “doublevision” explicitly and specifically: “[Blacks] are going to be self-conscious; they are going to be gifted with a double vision, for, be-ing Negroes, they are going to be both inside and outside of ourculture at the same time” (Wright 1953). Also see Okely 1996 on adifferent articulation of the “double vision” inherent in native an-thropologizing.7. Some of these same psychologized attempts at reflexivity canreturn the discussion back to film—specifically, Stan Brakhagianmoments when the profilmic becomes the prefilmic, a way to talkabout the kinds of “seeing” that purportedly come before discourseand culture (James 1989). In the context of a discussion about“new ethnography,” Goodall calls for a “dialogic vulnerability”(2000:14) that retains an explicit invocation of the intersubjectivebases of all ethnographic encounters.8. As another indication of self-conscious visuality in contempo-rary America, many Harlem churches are videotaping their ownservices nowadays—either for sale to congregants or in order to ar-chive sermons for posterity.REFERENCES CITEDAbu-Lughod, Lila1988 Fieldwork of a Dutiful Daughter. InArab Women intheField: Studying Your Own Society. Soraya Altorki and CamilliaFawzi El-Solh, eds. Pp. 139–161. Syracuse: Syracuse UniversityPress.Aguilar, John1981 Insider Research: An Ethnography of a Debate. InAnthro-pologists at Home inNorthAmerica:Methods and Issues in theStudy of One’s Own Society. DonaldA. Messerschmidt, ed. Pp.15–26. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Asad, Talal1973 Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter. London: IthacaPress.Banks, Marcus, and Howard Morphy, eds.1997 Rethinking Visual Anthropology. NewHaven, CT: Yale Uni-versity Press.Barbash, Ilisa, and Lucien TaylorCross-Cultural Filmmaking: A Handbook for Making Documen-tary and EthnographicFilmsand Videos. Berkeley: University ofCaliforniaPress.Barley, Nigel1983 The Innocent Anthropologist: Notes from a Mud Hut. Lon-don: British Museum Publications.Behar, Ruth1996 The Vulnerable Observer: Anthropology That Breaks YourHeart. New York: Beacon Press.Benjamin, Walter1968 The Storyteller. In Illuminations. Walter Benjamin. NewYork: Harcourt, Brace and Jovanovich.Benson, Paul, ed.1993 Anthropology and Literature. Chicago: University of IllinoisPress.Clifford, James1986 Introduction: Partial Truths. InWriting Culture: The Poeticsand Politics of Ethnography. JamesClifford and George Marcus,eds. Pp. 1–26. Berkeley: University of California Press.1988 The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnogra-phy, Literature, and Art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress.Clifford, James, and George Marcus, eds.1986 Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography.Berkeley: University of California Press.Diawara, Manthia1995a Rouch in Reverse. SanFrancisco: California Newsreel.Diawara, Manthia, ed.1995b The Black Public Sphere. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress.DuBois, W. E. B.1994[1903] The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Dover.Fanon, Frantz1967 Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove Press.Feld, Steven, ed.2003 Cine-Ethnography: Jean Rouch. Minneapolis: University ofMinnesota Press.Frazier, E. Franklin1965 Black Bourgeoisie. NewYork: Free Press.Friedman, Jonathan2001 The Iron Cage of Creativity: An Exploration. InLocating Cul-turalCreativity. John Liep, ed. Pp. 46–61. London: Pluto.Ginsburg, Faye1992 Indigenous Media: Faustian Contract or Global Village? InRereading Cultural Anthropology. George Marcus, ed. Durham,NC: Duke University Press.1994 Culture/media: A (Mild) Polemic. Anthropology Today.10(2):5–15.1996 Institutionalizing the Unruly: Charting a Future for VisualAnthropology. Ethnos 63(2):173–196.Ginsburg, Faye, Lila Abu-Lughod, and Brian Larkin, eds.2002 Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain. Berkeley: Uni-versity of California Press.Goodall, H. Lloyd2000 Writing the NewEthnography. New York: AltaMira Press.Graeber, David2001 Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coinof Our OwnDreams. New York: Palgrave.Grimshaw, Anna2001 The Ethnographic Eye. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Grimshaw, Anna, ed.1992 The C. L. R. JamesReader. Cambridge, MA: BlackwellPress.Gwaltney, John1981 Insider Research: An Ethnography of a Debate. InAnthro-pologists at Home inNorthAmerica:Methods and Issues in theStudy of One’s Own Society. DonaldA. Messerschmidt, ed. Pp.46–61. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Haniff, Nesha1985 Toward a Native Anthropology: MethodologicalNoteson aStudy of Successful CaribbeanWomen by an Insider. Anthropol-ogy and Humanism Quarterly10(4):105–113.Harris, Marvin1999 Theoriesof Culture in Postmodern Times. London: AltaMiraPress.Harrison, Faye, ed.1991 Decolonizing Anthropology: Moving Further toward an An-thropology for Liberation. Washington, DC: American Anthro-pologicalAssociation.Headland, Thomas, Kenneth Pike, and Marvin Harris, eds.1990 Emics and Etics: The Insider/Outsider Debate. NewburyPark: Sage.Jackson • An Ethnographic Filmflam 41Himpele, Jeff D.2002 Arrival Scenes: Complicity and MediaEthnography in theBolivian Publish Sphere. InMediaWorlds: Anthropology on NewTerrain. Faye Ginsburg, Lila Abu-Lughod, and BrianLarkin, eds.Pp. 301–316. Berkeley: University of CaliforniaPress.Hockings, Paul, ed.1995 Principles of Visual Anthropology. Berlin: Mouton deGruyter.hooks, bell2000 Where We Stand: Class Matters. New York: Routledge.Jackson, Michael1989 Paths toward a Clearing: Radical Empiricism and Ethno-graphic Inquiry. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.Jacobs-Huey, Lanita2002 The NativesAre Gazing and Talking Back: Reviewing theProblematics of Positionality, Voice, and Accountability among“Native”Anthropologists. AmericanAnthropologist104(3):791–804.James, David E.1989 Stan Brakhage: The Filmmaker asPoet. InAllegoriesof Cin-ema. David E. James, ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Jay, Martin1993 DowncastEyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth Cen-tury French Thought. Berkeley: University of California Press.Jones, Delmos1970 Towards a Native Anthropology. Human Organization29(4):251–259.Lorde, Audre1984 Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. Trumansburg: CrossingPress.MacDougall, David1992 Complicities of Style. InFilm as Ethnography. Peter Craw-ford and David Turnton, eds. Pp. 90–98. Manchester: Universityof Manchester Press.Marks, Dan1995 Ethnographic and EthnographicFilm: From Flaherty toAschand After. American Anthropologist97(2):339–347.Mauss, Marcel1990 The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange inArchaicSo-cieties. NewYork: Norton.McFeely, Eliza2001 Zuni and the American Imagination. New York: Hill andWang.Medicine, Bea2001 Learning tobe an Anthropologist and Remaining “Native”:Selected Writings. Urbana: University of IllinoisPress.Messerschmidt, Donald, ed.1981 Anthropologists at Home inNorth America: Methods and Is-sues in the Study of One’s Own Society. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Michaels, Eric1982 How toLook at Us Looking at the YanomamiLooking at Us.InA Crack in the Mirror: Reflexive Perspectives in Anthropology.Jay Ruby, ed. Pp. 133–146. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylva-niaPress.Mitchell, W. J. T.2002 Showing Seeing: A Critique of VisualCulture. Journal of Vis-ualCulture 1(2):165–182.Morris, Rosalind1994 NewWorlds from Fragments: Film Ethnography and theRepresentation of NorthwestCoastCultures. Boulder: WestviewPress.Myerhoff, Barbara1979 Number Our Days. New York: Dutton.Myerhoff, Barbara, and Lynne Littman1983 Number Our Days. Los Angeles: Direct Cinema Limited.Nader, Laura1972 Up the Anthropologist—PerspectivesGained by StudyingUp. InReinventing Anthropology. Dell Hymes, ed. Pp. 284–311.NewYork: Vintage.Nakhleh, Khalil1979 On Being a Native Anthropologist. InThe Politics of Anthro-pology. GerritHuizer and Bruce Mannheim, eds. Pp. 343–352.Paris: Mouton Publishers.Narayan, Kirin1993 How Native Is a “Native” Anthropologist? American Anthro-pologist 95(2):671–686.Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko1984 “Native”Anthropologists. AmericanEthnologist11(3):584–586.Okely, Judith1996 Ownor Other Culture. London: Routledge.Pattillo-McCoy, Mary, and Reuben A. Buford May2000 Do You See What I See?Examining a Collaborative Ethnogra-phy. Qualitative Inquiry 6(1):65–87.Paul, Benjamin D.1953 Interview Technique and FieldRelations. Anthropology To-day. A. L. Kroeber, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Pratt, Mary Louise1992 Imperial Eyes: TravelWriting and Transculturation. London:Routledge.Prins, Harald, and Jay Ruby2001 NorthAmericanContributions to the History of Visual An-thropology. Visual Anthropology Review 17(2):3–4.Rony, Fatimah Tobing1996 The Third Eye. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Rosenau, Pauline1991 Postmodernismand the Social Sciences: Insights, Inroadsand Intrusions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Ruby, Jay1995 The Moral Burden of Authorship in EthnographicFilm. Vis-ualAnthropology Review 11(2):77–82.2000 Picturing Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.2001 The Professionalization of VisualAnthropology in theUnited States: The 1960s to the 1970s. Visual Anthropology Re-view 17(2):5–12.Ruby, Jay, and Barbara Myerhoff1982 Introduction. InA Crack in the Mirror: Reflexive Perspectivesin Anthropology. Jay Ruby, ed. Pp. 1–35. Philadelphia:Universityof PennsylvaniaPress.Said, Edward1978 Orientalism. NewYork: Pantheon Books.Salzman, Philip Carl2002 On Reflexivity. American Anthropologist104(3):805–813.Sanjek, Roger, ed.1990 Fieldnotes: The Making of Anthropology. Ithaca: CornelUniversity Press.Simmel, Georg1950 The Sociology of Georg Simmel.New York: Free Press.Slocum, Karla2001 Negotiating Identity and Black Feminist Politics in Carib-bean Research. InBlack Feminist Anthropology: Theory, Politics,Praxis and Poetics. Irma McClaurin, ed. Pp. 126–149. New Bruns-wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Stewart, Kathleen1996 A Space on the Side of the Road: Cultural Poetics in an“Other” America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Stoller, Paul1992 The CinematicGriot: The Ethnography of Jean Rouch. Chi-cago: University of Chicago Press.1999 Jaguar: A Story of Africans in America. Chicago: University ofChicago Press.Turner, Terrance1992 Defiant Images: The Kayapo Appropriation of Video. Anthro-pology Today 8(6):5–16.Warnke, Georgia1993 Ocularcentrismand Social Criticism. InModernity and theHegemony of Vision. DavidMichaelLevin, ed. Pp. 287–308.Berkeley: University of California Press.Williams, Brackette F.1996 Skinfolk, Not Kinfolk: Comparative Reflections on the Iden-tity of Participant-Observation in TwoField Situations. InFemi-nist Dilemmas inFieldwork. Diane Wolf, ed. Pp. 72–95. NewYork: Westview Press.Winston, Brian1993 The Documentary Film as Scientific Inscription. InTheoriz-ing Documentary Film. Michael Renov, ed. Pp. 37–57. New York:Routledge.Wright, Richard1965 The Outsider. New York: Harper and Row.42 American Anthropologist • Vol. 106, No. 1 • March 2004