ABSTRACT: 
Out of more than two thousand bike messengers in New York City, a few hundred participate in alleycats—illegal races held in open traffic. Surrounding this racing scene is a vibrant messenger community. Messengers who race in or attend alleycats carry their messenger identity into all aspects of their lives. Through direct participant observation, this article proposes that alleycats function as Durkheimian rituals for these messengers. Alleycats express the central values of the social world. Lost in collective effervescence, the individual confronts these values as objectified truths, which allow messengers to form stable identities. Further, bicycles, messenger bags, and other objects become sacred symbols within this ritualization process. The ability of messengers to construct such nonreflexive identities is juxtaposed with theories about the self in postmodernity. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article focuses on one example of such a meaning-generating religious rituals for these teleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteleteletele 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Symbolic Interaction , Vol. 29, Issue 3, pp. 349–371, ISSN 0195-6086, electronic ISSN 1533-8665. © 2006 by the Society for the Study of Symbolic Interaction. All rights reserved. Please direct all re-quests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of CaliforniaPress’s Rights and Permissions website, at http://www.ucpress.edu/journals/rights.htm. Direct all correspondence to Jeffrey L. Kidder, Department of Sociology, 9500 Gilman Dr., University ofCalifornia, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0533; e-mail : jkidder@ucsd.edu. Bike Messengers and the Really Real: Effervescence, Reflexivity, and Postmodern Identity Jeffrey L. Kidder University of California, San Diego Out of more than two thousand bike messengers in New York City, a fewhundred participate in alleycats—illegal races held in open traffic. Sur-rounding this racing scene is a vibrant messenger community. Messengerswho race in or attend alleycats carry their messenger identity into allaspects of their lives. Through direct participant observation, this articleproposes that alleycats function as Durkheimian rituals for these messen-gers. Alleycats express the central values of the social world. Lost in collec-tive effervescence, the individual confronts these values as objectifiedtruths, which allow messengers to form stable identities. Further, bicycles,messenger bags, and other objects become sacred symbols within this ritu-alization process. The ability of messengers to construct such nonreflexiveidentities is juxtaposed with theories about the self in postmodernity. In The Meaning of Culture , Allan (1998) claims that reality construction is predicatedon affect-meaning—the felt reality of culture. This stance comes from the applicationof Durkheim’s theory of the role of rituals in producing meaning. Although theecstatic religious rituals that interested Durkheim may be less evident in our time,any number of secular rituals exist that are similarly essential for creating meaning.Rituals in the Durkheimian sense are not static and archaic ceremonies. Accordingto Collins’s (2004) reading of Durkheim, a ritual is “a mechanism of mutuallyfocused emotion and attention producing a momentarily shared reality” (p. 7). Thepresent article focuses on one example of such a meaning-generating secular ritualamong bicycle messengers—“alleycats,” or illegal races held in open traffic. Whilethere are over two thousand messengers in New York City, only a few hundred par-ticipate in alleycats. Surrounding this racing scene is a vibrant messenger community.Bike messengers who race in or attend alleycats strongly identify with what can beconceptualized as a messenger lifestyle. That is to say, these individuals do not simply 350 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 work as messengers but carry their messenger identity into all aspects of their lives.Following Allan’s (1998) and Collins’s (2004) applications of Durkheimian theory,I argue that alleycats serve an essential social function. Like Geertz’s (1973b)deep play, alleycats express the central values of the social world. Lost in collectiveeffervescence, the individual confronts these values as objectified truths. Further,bicycles, messenger bags, and other objects become sacred symbols within thisritualization process. BACKGROUND At least since the appearance of Berger and Luckmann’s Social Construction ofReality (1966), sociologists have shown a persistent interest in how individualsinteract to produce society. According to Berger and Luckmann, reality is notinherent in the physical properties of the natural universe but is, in their well-known phrasing, socially constructed. Separated from obdurate facts, humans mustconstruct a meaningful cosmos. In this way, reality is filled with infinite potential.Conversely, this potentiality results in a nomos that is continually threatened andmust be actively maintained through social interactions. The contingencies of humanreality are the focus of Garfinkel’s (1967) ethnomethodological work. While Bergerand Luckmann discuss dereification, their work presumes a stable world. Once created,institutions—re-created through language—provide a meaningful reality thatshelters the individual from existential terror.Since the 1970s, social theory has become increasingly concerned with the insta-bility of reality (Lemert 1992). This postmodern perspective arises from a critiqueof knowledge (see Lyotard [1979] 1984). For Giddens (1991), global capitalism, sup-ported by scientific reason, is predicated on reflexivity. “The reflexivity of modernityhas to be distinguished from the reflexive monitoring of action intrinsic to allhuman activity. Modernity’s reflexivity refers to the susceptibility of most aspects ofsocial activity, and material relations with nature, to chronic revision in the light ofnew information or knowledge” (p. 20). While not a postmodernist, Giddens high-lights the consequences of late modernity for the individual. In Giddens’s modernity,nothing is permanent, and everything is only true until further notice. For post-modernists, the hyperreflexive nature of the Enlightenment has created irreparabledamage to the nomos . Or, as some postmodernists would prefer: irreparable damagehas occurred to the concept of a nomos because meaning construction was never asbenign a process as Berger and Luckmann assumed. For Lyotard ([1979] 1984), language provides the social bond between individuals,but this bond is heterogeneous. That is, for postmodernists, knowledge is derivedfrom nothing more than competing language games. Beliefs (e.g., religion, science)have turned into belief systems with no external point of reference in which to claimhigher validity. This is compounded by Derrida’s separation of the sign and thesignifier. For Derrida ([1967] 1976), not only is language a game, communicationitself is a never-ending process of textual reconstructions. True intentions, and ulti- Bike Messengers and the Really Real 351 mately true meanings, can, therefore, not be ascertained. All beliefs are understoodas temporal reformations of disjunctured readings. The reflexive nature of moder-nity has thus turned inward and brought its own validity into question. As Marxsaid, “All that is solid melts into air” (Marx and Engels [1848] 1964:63). The met-anarrative of science—progression toward an enlightened future—has been sub-sumed by an institutionalization of doubt (Harvey 1989). “The social subject itselfseems to dissolve in this dissemination of language games” (Lyotard [1979]1984:40). With the dissolution of the metanarrative, the individual—like the sign—is free-floating. The agent becomes the nexus for competing language games(Gergen 1971). As such, the self cannot maintain a coherent narrative, but insteadis faced with endless multiplicities. The self is thus reduced to a Goffmanian actor—a faceless agent constantly applying masks (Dowd 1991). Reality has been replacedby simulacra (Baudrillard [1981] 1974)—the image of the image of reality via themass media—and the self, in turn, has been reduced to the consumption of variousstyles and merely reflects these mediated images.Allan (1998) has proposed an interesting reformulation of the postmodern critique.Accepting the conditions of postmodernity and its ramifications on self-identity, Allanargues that contemporary theories overemphasize the role of cognitive reason inreality construction. Gubrium and Holstein (2000), for example, equally challengepostmodernist claims about the dissolution of the self. However, in Gubrium andHolstein’s conception, the self remains salient through increasing discourseabout identity in everyday life. While on the surface this emphasis on “groundingthe postmodern self” (Gubrium and Holstein 1994) is similar to the argumentpresented here, their focus on language represents a vastly different approach tothe topic.Building from Durkheim, both Allan (1998) and Collins (2004) contend that,ultimately, reality is emotional (see also Giddens 1991). In other words, for realityto be “really real” (Geertz 1973a) it must be felt. As Durkheim ([1912] 1995) states,“The force of the collectivity is not wholly external; it does not move us entirelyfrom outside. Indeed, because society can exist only in and by means of individualminds, it must enter into us and become organized within us” (211). Affect-meaningis therefore the true foundation of world building. The importance of affect-meaningmay be glimpsed in the internalized second nature of Bourdieu’s ([1979] 1984)habitus, Denzin’s (1989) focus on emic ethnography, Flyvbjerg’s (2001) contextualsociology, and Geertz’s (1973a) description of religious performances.The locus of affect-meaning is—as Durkheim emphasized—collective gatherings.“The very act of congregating is an exceptionally powerful stimulant. Once the indi-viduals are gathered together, a sort of electricity is generated by their closenessand quickly launches them to an extraordinary height of exaltation” (Durkheim[1912] 1995:217). Through collective rituals, the self is overcome by effervescence,and symbols become charged with meaning. As Durkheim states, “It is in theseeffervescent social milieux, and indeed from that very effervescence, that the religiousidea seems to have been born” (p. 220). Further, the objects and ideas used in ritu- 352 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 als become consecrated symbols. “The symbol thus takes the place of the thing,and the emotions aroused are transferred to the symbol” (p. 221). In speaking ofnational identity, Durkheim notes, “The flag itself is treated as if it was that reality[i.e. the nation itself]” (p. 222). For Allan, the principal function of rituals is the dampening of reflexivity. As theworks of Lyotard and Derrida illustrate, it is the highly reflexive nature of postmod-ernism that produces pervasive doubt. In this sense, culture pulls itself apart(Gergen 1971; Harvey 1989; Jameson 1984). The death of the metanarrative and theproliferation of competing pluralities have resulted in ambivalence (Bauman 1991).For Allan, the blasé attitude first described by Simmel ([1903] 1971) and laterrevived by Bauman is countered through reduced reflexivity. By reducing reflexivityand at the same time designating symbols as sacred (i.e., beyond doubt), culture isable to stabilize itself. This is to say, in a world saturated with competing symbols,rituals “turn off” the reflexive process. By dampening reflexivity, the individualfeels no need to question whether the symbols chosen are the right symbols; realityis thus rescued from pervasive doubt. For Allan, this is the heart of Durkheim’sexploration of elementary religious life. “When a belief is shared unanimously by apeople, to touch it—that is, to deny or question it—is forbidden” (Durkheim[1912] 1995:215). Further, “In light of Durkheim’s model of rituals, we can takerituals as the missing link between group structure and group ideas. Rituals are thenodes of social structure, and it is in rituals that a group creates its symbols”(Collins 2004:26). While Allan has proposed the most comprehensive work on affect-meaning,other theorists have come to similar conclusions. Csikszentmihalyi’s (1990) notionof flow, while individualistic and not social, is similarly interested in the state ofreduced reflexivity where the individual feels actions as instincts. According toCsikszentmihalyi, the flow experience is integral to happiness. Moreover, forCsikszentmihalyi the malaise of contemporary life results from a disconnectionfrom the optimal experiences found in flow. It is to combat this disconnection thatmotivates mountaineers to attempt their difficult climbs. For Mitchell (1983), mountainclimbing offers a release from the alienation and anomie of modern life. Like Mitchell’sconclusion about mountaineers in flow, Lyng (1990) sees edgework as a response toalienated labor. Edgework is the X games of flow: what skydivers, test pilots, pillpoppers, and others like them experience. In both flow and edgework, the individualtests his or her physical abilities. Engrossed in activity, Mead’s ([1934] 1962) “I” (thespontaneous, inner-directed self) comes to the fore, while the “me” (the routinizedbehavior acquired in taking social roles) recedes. The very nature of the “I” inhibitsreflexive thoughts. Actions in such a state appear unquestioningly natural.While pointing to the importance of reflexivity in human action, the analysisof Csikszentmihalyi, Lyng, and Mitchell fails to connect reducing reflexivity toDurkheimian rituals. Lyng and Mitchell both locate such action within a context ofmeaning construction in a disjointed world, but the ability for such action to objectifyreality is not explored. Mitchell explores the objectification of various aspects of Bike Messengers and the Really Real 353 mountaineer style and behavior, but does not link the objectification of styles andactions within the flow experience. As such, a crucial theoretical connection remainsunexplored. Taking the work of Allan, I propose to make such a connection.Through analyzing bike messenger street races as Durkheimian rituals, I trace thecreation of affect-meaning. More specifically, I connect reduced reflexivity (i.e., thespontaneity of the “I”) with the consecration of objects and ideas as symbolic totemsof messenger values. These symbols, in turn, allow for the power of the ritual to betransported beyond the ritual event, the alleycat, and thus reinforce a messengeridentity in everyday life. Ultimately, this emphasis on rituals and affect-meaninghighlights a serious flaw in current postmodern theories, which focus solely on therelationships between signs in the construction of meaning. METHODS AND DATA I conducted research for this article in New York City between the summer of 2002and the summer of 2003. For approximately one year, I was employed as a bikemessenger. More important than the work hours themselves for this research wasthe nonwork time I spent with messengers. It is during social gatherings and othernonwork events that messengers discuss, contest, and represent the meanings andsymbols of their world. I hung out with messengers after work in parks and bars.I went to messenger parties. I raced in alleycats. I went on group rides with othermessengers. In other words, I was as integrated as a sociologist could be in the“messenger community.” I was not viewed as an outsider, and, more important,because of my lifelong interest in bicycles, I did not feel like an outsider. I was, how-ever, viewed as a rookie by other couriers, and such a distinction was no small matter.While I was accepted as a legitimate messenger, I had not earned the rights andstatus of a veteran messenger. This is both a pro and a con. As a rookie, I was onlyable to interact with other messengers as such. I could not step outside that role,and therefore, I know very little about how veteran messengers talk among them-selves. For example, seasoned messengers put on a facade of indifference towardpoor weather around both rookies and outsiders, but they appear to have no prob-lems bemoaning cold and wet conditions with other veterans (see also Donnellyand Young 1988). Conversely, as a rookie I was exposed to the socialization processby which rookies become veteran insiders. Mitchell’s (2002) analysis of survivalistshas demonstrated the utility of this approach. For Mitchell (1993), it is not a lack ofdata that results in failed fieldwork, but an imbalance of affective attributes andcognitive reason. In other words, the researcher can hear what the respondent issaying, but cannot feel what the respondent truly means. It is this emotionality andshared experience that is the basis for authentic understanding (Denzin 1989).During my fieldwork, most of the messengers with whom I interacted wereunaware of my research. In an average day, a New York messenger comes into contactwith hundreds of other riders. Working amid people engaged within a particularsocial world requires the sociologist to move as seamlessly as possible within that 354 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 social world. As such, the numerous individuals who indirectly helped me with thisresearch could not all be expected to give “informed consent.” Messengers withwhom I had recurring contact were informed of my sociological interest, and allwere supportive of the undertaking. Becker (1951), Mitchell (2002), Ouellet (1994),and many other sociologists have also conducted such semicovert research. To ensurethe privacy and protection of the individuals discussed in this research, I usepseudonyms, except for messengers quoted in other sources. I collected datathrough informal interviews conducted throughout the workday and at races, parties,and other social gatherings. In nearly every social situation, couriers freely discussedvarious aspects of messenger life. As such, I found engaging couriers about theirsocial world remarkably easy and unobtrusive. I jotted down responses in privateand compiled them in my field notes during the evening. For this research, I didnot conduct formal interviews, relying instead on the ordinary interactions of dailymessenger life. Using Strauss and Corbin’s (1990) approach to grounded theory,I analyzed and coded my field notes for recurring themes and trends.In addition to participant observation and the informal interviews arising fromparticipation, I supplement traditional ethnographic work with historical and con-temporary documentation. During my research, I read as much of the literatureproduced by the bike messenger social world as I could find. The most notable ofthis literature is the New York Bike Messenger Association’s ten issues of UrbanDeath Maze , a desktop-published magazine produced from 1998 to 2001. Equallyimportant are memoirs by Travis Culley (2002) and Rebecca “Lambchop” Reilly(2000) about their lives as messengers. I also utilized books, articles, and documen-taries produced by outsiders for mainstream audiences. Of these resources, I foundthe New York Times ’s plethora of articles on messengers immensely insightful. RedLight Go (2002) and Pedal (2001), two wonderful documentary films about New YorkCity messengers, were equally useful. The data for this article are primarily derivedfrom direct participant observation; quotations from other sources are used toreinforce my findings.In discussing the validity of the present research, two issues must be raised. First,messengers in every city have unique communities. Of course, there are numeroussimilarities among messengers in the various cities, but there are equally importantdifferences. With this in mind, parts of my research may be generalizable for mes-sengers elsewhere, but I can claim to have knowledge only about New York City.Second, in focusing on emotion, the data used for this article can be consideredinherently problematic. Emotions are much harder to gauge than behaviors. Mitchell(1993) has pointed out that the insiders of a group often guard against expressingtheir true emotions with outsiders. Conversely, the emotions of insiders are assumedto be shared and therefore are not discussed at length. As a researcher, then, theonly possible avenue for understanding the affect-meaning of a social world is toparticipate in it. Smith (1990) has said, “An alternative sociology must preservein it the presence, concerns, and experiences of the sociologist as knower anddiscoverer” (p. 23). As Wolf (1991) asserts, “An ethnographer who removes himself— Bike Messengers and the Really Real 355 the ‘I’—from the ethnography only creates the illusion of objectivity” (p. 27). Further,“Combining participation and observation is the most effective way of achieving anunderstanding of a culture as it is experienced and lived by its participants” (p. 22).This article, therefore, is based on my particular experiences and my particularinterpretations of others’ experiences. To echo Muggelton’s (2000) concerns aboutresearch, I hope that the picture I have constructed here appears accurate for themessengers who read this. At the same time, however, this is a work of sociology,and it has necessarily subjected messenger meanings to “an interpretive gloss” (p. 7).Since leaving New York, I have fallen out of touch with my key informants. However,on the few occasions when I have had opportunities to communicate with myinformants, I have kept them informed of the status of the research and wherethey (or their pseudonym) have entered the work. MESSING: THE JOB AND THE LIFESTYLE The modern bike messenger appeared in large American cities in the early 1970s.As the speed of business and the congestion of urban areas increased together(see Sassen 2001), bicycles provided the fastest means to transport documents andpackages across town. By the 1980s the bike messenger had become a cultural icon.Loved and hated, messengers were urban outlaws cherished yet berated within thepopular media. “They live the life you may have dreamed of but never had thecourage or foolish disregard to try. . . . The life of the bicycle courier. . . . You have aprimal dream about it. . . . You go to the parties the straights have never heardabout. . . . You have the kind of sex they would give their fortune for. And you don’twear a tie, either” (Cheney 1993). Conversely, a regular columnist for the WashingtonPost captured the other half of public sentiment about bike messengers: “In mygentler moments, I’ve called them law-flouting, obscenity-spewing, bath-needing,wild-riding, pedestrian-smashing madmen” (Levy 1989). It is estimated that there are over two thousand bicycle messengers working inNew York City. In 1975 there were approximately five hundred bike messengers, butby 1985 there were between four and seven thousand messengers (McKillop 1985).Because specific records are not kept and because so many courier companiesoperate off the books, no one knows exact numbers, and estimates vary widely.In the 1990s, fax machines and the Internet had cut deeply into the messengerbusiness (Tommasson 1991). The number of courier companies shrank, and pricecompetition among the remaining companies grew. However, despite the deathknell rung by many pundits, the occupation of bike courier has persisted into thenew millennium. For items that cannot be digitally transferred (e.g., model portfolios,legal documents, garment bags), bicycle messengers provide the best business solution.Bikes are often faster than motor vehicles in congested urban environments, can beparked virtually anywhere, and are more easily maneuvered amid cars, pedestrians,and other obstacles. 356 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 Like other wheeled vehicles, bicycles are subject to traffic laws; enforcement ofthese laws, however, is inconsistent and minimal. Bicycles are fined just like cars(except that the tickets do not affect one’s insurance), and the cost of tickets canquickly add up. Taken at face value, one citation for running a red light ($100) costsmore than many messengers make in a day. For people already making a low wage,losing a day’s pay is no small matter. But not running red lights is not a profitableoption. Many messengers, therefore, simply outrun the police. As one messengertold me, “They can’t catch me. I just ride by them giving them the middle finger.”Messengers also learn to avoid intersections where police might be waiting. On sev-eral occasions, couriers warned me about intersections where bike cops—the policeofficers usually responsible for bicycle citations—could be found. Some messengersprovide faulty information to police to prevent the fine from being attached to theirrecord. Additionally, many messengers do not have driver’s licenses, so traffic finesare of little concern. As another messenger informed me, “In five years I have neverpaid a single ticket.” Of course, in addition to these avoidance strategies, it must bemade clear that, obviously, many messengers simply pay their fines.The work is dangerous. One study shows that messengers have an injury ratethree times higher than meatpackers (Dennerlein and Meeker 2003). A journalistworking as a messenger for a week reported, “I’m scared. . . . The odds are against me”(Cuerdon 1990:84). During my fieldwork, most of the messengers I knew had atleast one minor (and some not so minor) collision with automobiles or pedestrians.Messengers also work in all weather conditions. As one Boston messengercommented, “It is dangerous enough in dry, warm weather, but on days like this[February snowstorm], it’s a whole different story” (James, quoted in Grant 1994:29).One positive aspect of working in bad weather is minimal police enforcement; bikecops do not ride in the cold or the rain. As Chuck, a veteran messenger, told me inthe early spring, “We are going to have to start worrying about the cops soon. Theselast few months [during an unusually cold winter] I swear we could have gottenaway with murder.” Or, as Micky exclaimed one rainy afternoon, “I love these days.You don’t have to worry about bike cops or anything.”Messengers in New York are predominately black or Hispanic, and many arerecent immigrants. The occupation is also almost exclusively male. Many messengersare culled from the lumpen proletariat; they are individuals with few options forgenerating an income. For these messengers, being a bike courier is usually “justa job.” They may identify with the occupation to some degree, but being a bicyclemessenger does not directly influence their lifestyle. For a few hundred of New York’smessengers, however, there is more to the job than simply a paycheck. Among thisgroup, being a messenger does not stop and start with the workday—it is a wayof life. “It’s an addiction. . . . It’s part of my life” (Pit 1998b:23). Whites and femalesare overrepresented among lifestyle messengers. The majority of female messengersobserved on the job participated in the lifestyle. Whites, while a minority withinthe occupation, are a majority in the lifestyle. For these messengers, working asa courier offers autonomy and excitement. As one messenger said, “It is the Bike Messengers and the Really Real 357 greatest job in the world. I hope I am doing it until I’m 50. The only other thing I’dreally like to be is a stuntman” (unnamed messenger, quoted in Duvall 1991:22). Oras Tony, a messenger of two years, told me, “I’ve done every sort of job, and being amessenger is the only job I like.” Among “lifestyle messengers,” races are major social occasions. Gertrude, amessenger of several years, proclaimed, “I live for these things! It is all I want to do.”Races vary in size. Smaller alleycats attract local and regional riders. Largerchampionship races draw couriers from across the world. I participated in sevenraces during my year as a messenger: four in New York, two in Boston, and the 2003North American Cycle Courier Championships (NAC3) in Washington, D.C.An item particularly important to all messengers is, not surprisingly, their bicycle.The three most common are mountain, road, and track bikes. The first two needno introduction. A track bike, on the other hand, is a more exotic piece of equip-ment. Also known as a fixed gear, fix, fixie, and fixed, a track bike is specificallydesigned for riding on a velodrome (an oval race track with banked corners). Trackbikes have no brakes, and a rigid geometry (good for speed and quick handling, butharder on the rider’s body). A fixed gear means that the bicycle does not have afreewheel (i.e., if the rear wheel is spinning, so are the pedals). With fixes there canbe no coasting. The rider controls the bike’s speed with the pedals, and with a certaindegree of skill the bike can be made to skid to a stop. This should not be confusedwith coaster brakes found on children’s bikes. While only a minority of messengers actually ride track bikes, most, nonetheless,consider fixes the bike of choice among messengers. There are many reasons for thetrack bike’s popularity. First, there is very little to steal from it. Second, being ableto control the bike’s speed through the pedals offers a huge degree of control intraffic and on wet or snowy roads. Third, unencumbered by additional components,fixes are exceptionally light. Fourth, there is very little that can break or needs to betuned up. Fifth, fixed-gear bikes are just plain fun to ride. It is hard to explain tosomeone who has never ridden one, but as one messenger said about the benefits oflearning to ride fixed, “It will be absolutely amazing” (Pit 1998a:6). Joan, a messengerof two years, claimed that a fixed bicycle “is like an extension of your body.” Sixth,tying in with point five, there is a mystique about riding a track bike, since it has nobrakes and does not allow you to coast. This helps separate the initiated from thenoninitiated. Track bikes are considered something that only a true “pro” can ride.As Rick explained, “People on track bikes know what they are doing. On a mountainbike, you can get away with a lot more.” ALLEYCATS: WHAT THEY ARE A messenger’s workday consists of making pickups and deliveries at various loca-tions throughout the city. At each delivery, a manifest must be signed by the receiver.Alleycats mimic this basic structure. Race organizers give racers a manifest with alist of checkpoints. Some races require a specific order, and other races allow the 358 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 courier to determine the best possible route. During the workday, messengers cangenerally determine the order of their pickups and the routes they take. However,this is not always the case. Some deliveries require certain priorities. Races vary,then, just like actual work. At each checkpoint, the racer must have his or her man-ifest signed. Some alleycats require messengers to perform certain tasks (e.g., likepuncturing a tire and replacing the tube, or doing push-ups) before their manifestswill be signed. During a workday delivery, any number of things may go wrong:mechanical difficulties, mislabeled packages, clients who are unavailable, trouble withsecurity guards, etc. In many ways, the best couriers are not the fastest on the roadbut the fastest at solving problems. Again, the tasks some races require help furtherreplicate work. Alleycats are held in open traffic—just like during work. Racersswarm into the streets speeding through red lights, swerving around cars, screamingat pedestrians. Larger races, like the world and national championships, however,are held on closed courses (i.e., not in the street).Championship races held on closed courses are controversial. As Matt told meabout the 2000 Cycle Messenger World Championships (CMWC) held in Philadelphia,“I wasn’t too impressed with it. It is a closed track. There are checkpoints, but itis an all-out race. And, you have these ringers there who wouldn’t be there if itwasn’t a closed track. They are bike racers and maybe they work a few days amonth. They are like [in funny European accent], ‘What, race in the street?’” Or,as Jonathan, a veteran rider from New York, commented about the 2003 NAC3,“It has nothing to do with the skills of being a messenger.” Conversely, for Henry,Metropoloco, a weeklong messenger event held in New York before the 2000CMWC, was a “ real messenger race.” Metropoloco was a real messenger racebecause it was held in city traffic and involved checkpoints that more accuratelyreplicated actual messenger work. Likewise, at the 2003 NAC3 there was an informallytitled “anti-NAC3” alleycat held after the championship. Again, the point was thatreal messengers race in traffic. Despite these pejorative comments, the readershould not assume that most messengers have only negative feelings toward thechampionship races. This is obviously not true, since messengers themselves orga-nize the championships. Further, both Henry and Jonathan are actively involved inchampionship events. While some messengers do not participate in championshipraces because they are not “real” enough, many other messengers do. World andnational champions are also held in high regard. For example, a group of messengerswho regularly trained for races proudly informed me that they had been riding withlast year’s winner of the NAC3. Regardless of where the race is held, a messenger race is no ordinary bicyclerace. There are very few rules. Or as several people have said, “There are no rules.”Hardly any racer will be wearing spandex or even helmets. Baggy shorts or pantscut off above the ankle are much more common, and almost everyone will be wearinga huge messenger bag slung across their shoulders. The bicycles are not carbon fiberor titanium racing bikes with sixteen-spoke wheels. They are solid bikes used andabused every day at work. For couriers, there is a major distinction between a Bike Messengers and the Really Real 359 messenger’s bike and the bicycle a “yuppie” uses to do laps around Central Park.For example, after work one day a group of us was hanging out in Central Park.A man with a titanium Litespeed (i.e., a very expensive road bike) approachedus and asked which courier company would be the best to work for. A few of themessengers disinterestedly rambled off some company names. After he left, Mike, arookie messenger, laughingly snipped, “Yeah, I’d like to see him work on that bike!”New York messenger bikes are dinged and scratched, covered in stickers. The scenesurrounding a race looks like “a collision between the Tour de France field and thecast of Mad Max” (Wood 1994:2). Races are always concluded (and often started) with a party. Drinking and otherintoxicants are a major component of the race environment. As one messengerwrote, “I jetted after the beer ran out and before the fights broke out. I was sodrunk I crashed into the sides of the bridge on my way home and then puked myguts into my toilet bowl.” (“Messenger Mass Ride” 1999:3). It is worth mentioningthat heavy drinking and binge drug use is common within the messenger world. Iattended a planning meeting for an upcoming race, and among the issues discussedwas whether drug dealers should be formally invited, since “real drug dealers willknow to be there anyway.” At this same meeting, Henry asked another messengerwhat had happened to him the previous night. His reply was, “I don’t remember. AllI know is I woke up with bloody sheets and a wobbly front wheel.”In hanging out with messengers, one often overhears that someone has given updrinking (or some other drug). This abstinence is always temporary and usuallydoes not mean avoiding all alcohol, but simply attempting to curb one’s excessiveintake. For example, a former dispatcher proudly explained to me one evening thathe was not drinking anymore. He said this, without the slightest intention of irony,as he nursed a pint of Guinness. For him, not drinking meant simply not drinkinguntil he blacks out. Many messengers attend races and do not even bother to race,choosing to enjoy the partylike atmosphere surrounding the event. As a group ofPhiladelphia messengers said to me after an alleycat in Boston, “We didn’t race, butwe came for the party.”Prizes are awarded for the fastest riders. Some races also have a prize for themessenger who finishes DFL (Dead Fucking Last). Two of the races I participatedin had alternative rides for messengers with less interest in competing and more in-teresting in drinking. This is analogous to Donnelly and Young’s (1985) analysis ofrugby—players must balance the desire to win and the thrill of competition with thecontradictory norms of fraternal bonding and inebriation. ALLEYCATS: WHAT THEY MEANThe Conditions for Reduced Reflexivity Durkheimian rituals require a common focus of attention, common emotional mood,high ecological concentration, and fast interaction pace (Allan 1998; Collins 2004).It is by gathering together and performing the same acts with one’s fellows that 360 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 the bonds of solidarity—and, ultimately, reality itself—are formed. Additionally,network density, past ritual encounters, and anticipation all factor into a successfulritual setting (Allan 1998). Preexisting social bonds, foreknowledge of what to expect,and excitement over the coming ritual facilitate the actions about to take place. AsTurner (1999) states, “In all situations, individuals have expectations about what islikely to occur; and these expectations influence not only their own behavior buttheir reactions to others” (p. 134). As in Collins’s (2004) anecdotes on New Year’sEve celebrations, assumptions about what is acceptable behavior allow certainsocial gatherings to break down walls of decorum and encourage interactions thatfocus attention and synchronize moods. “A theory of interaction ritual . . . is aboveall a theory of situations. It is a theory of momentary encounters among humanbodies charged up with emotions and consciousness because they have gone throughthe chains of previous encounters” (p. 3). Alleycats meet all of the requirementsneeded to “charge up” emotions.Lifestyle messengers have a high network density; they spend most of their after-hour relaxation, parties, and weekends with other messengers. The negative por-trayals in the mass media, coupled with discriminatory and often hostile treatmentby drivers, office workers, and security guards, add to the effects of this networkdensity. Fights with drivers, or at least the potential for fights, are ever present.Reilly (2000) chronicles countless physical confrontations with drivers. Andreas, amessenger of four years, in speaking about his bike lock (a six-pound chain wornaround his waist), said, “Whenever I think about not wearing it I find myself in a sit-uation where I need it [as a weapon].” As Efren, who stopped messengering afterthree years, told me about his confrontations with drivers, “That is one of the rea-sons I stopped being a messenger. I was getting stressed out all the time, fightingeveryone.” Messengers have a sense of struggling against the world—“us againstthem.” One night after work, for example, I recounted a story of a delivery vandriver who had intentionally swerved his vehicle into me. He bumped my rearwheel and passed so close that his side-view mirror smacked me across the back. If Ihad fallen over, the odds of being run over by his vehicle or the car to my left wereexceptionally high. I told Henry that I could not believe that someone could holdanother’s life in such low regard. To my story Henry, with five years of experienceon the road, replied, “Can’t believe it? Why not? This shit happens every day!” ForHenry, the generalized other is a threat to the messenger’s life.Socializing with other messengers is seen as a necessity because they are the onlyother people who can understand what a messenger lives through—Goffman’s(1963) concept of “the own.” A messenger who held an elevator door open for meone day explained that he did not mind waiting for me because “other messengershave always looked out for me.” A “community of messengers” protecting eachother is a common thread in conversations. For Andreas, a well-educated and politi-cally radical messenger, the community aspects of being a messenger were his primaryreasons for continuing to work as a courier. In stressing the bond between couriers,Henry told me about his trip to Budapest with several other New York messengers. Bike Messengers and the Really Real 361 “We rolled up in there didn’t know anything about the city. Didn’t know anyone.We went to this one area where messengers were hanging out and in minutes we hadan apartment key: ‘Stay as long as you like,’ directions, stuff to do.” When messengers hang out, they spend a great deal of time discussing past races.Accidents, amazing feats, and wild behavior are common topics. For example, onseveral occasions the various head injuries of one particularly accident-prone mes-senger were discussed and laughed over. Likewise, messengers who performed insome special (or exceedingly dangerous) way were often brought up. For example,during the final sprint of one race, the second-position rider reached forward andgrabbed the seat post of the leader, pulling him back as he propelled himself to thelead. Similarly, a well-known messenger who always worked on a road bike showedup at a race on a track bike and, much to the dismay of everyone, managed to winthe race. In Henry’s words, “The guy’s just a maniac.” Culley (2002) mentions aChicago messenger who raced an entire alleycat against the flow of traffic and earnedhimself the title of “world’s most dangerous messenger.” Charles, a former Bostonmessenger, recounted a race where people were jumping off ramps on their trackbikes only to crash into the ground. A group of us laughed as he talked about thewild accidents he saw that night. In addition to the race itself, the chaos surroundingthe race receives the most attention. For instance, during a race in Montreal nearlyevery New York messenger dropped out of the race after the second checkpointand rode to a strip club instead. On returning to New York, Henry repeated thisstory often with much glee. These talks keep past ritual encounters active in thememories of messengers. They also lead to anticipation of future races. The positivecomments from Henry, a messenger generally prone to deep cynicism, illustratesthis point: “I know this sounds cheesy, but I love traveling to other towns and racing.It is just so much fun!”During a race, the messengers’ concentration is exceptionally high because theissue is not simply winning but actually staying alive. A bicycle—a simple, light-weight machine propelled on two thin tires—offers no external protection (with theexception of a helmet, which few messengers wear). Racing through city traffic(e.g., running red lights, dodging cars, missing pedestrians, avoiding potholes andother obstacles) requires a complete dedication of the senses. In fact, urban cyclinghas less to do with leg power and much more to do with the ability to predict thebehavior of traffic and calculate one’s own trajectory within that traffic. In thissense, a racer’s mind should always be at peak performance. Because bicycles are somuch smaller than cars, drivers are often unaware of cyclists on the road. Insertedinto the mix of heavy, fast-moving cars, trucks, and buses, bikers must navigate motorvehicles erratically changing lanes, accelerating, and stopping. Additionally, theroadway is lined with parked vehicles. Their doors can open unexpectedly, sendingthe biker headfirst to the pavement. At every intersection, pedestrians are poised torun across the road if they see a break in the traffic; with eyes glued on the cars, theyoften do not even notice a bicycle speeding toward them. The cyclist’s line of travel,therefore, is in continual revision. As Jay wrote in a poem about messenger work, 362 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 “I calculate angles and make my move” (Moglia 2000:10). Or as Joe explainedabout his seemingly kamikaze behavior in traffic, “If I see a line, I go for it.” The mood of an alleycat is festive competition. Many racers have no intentionsof winning. An alleycat is more about having fun with fellow messengers and dem-onstrating your skills in urban cycling. Prizes occupy an interesting space in races.The value of the awards provides a definite motivating factor in personal justifica-tions for racing. The $500 cash prize for the “anti-NAC3” alleycat, for instance, pro-vided lively discussion throughout the day of the race. For a team race in Boston, agroup of New Yorkers spent several weeks training because they wanted the firstprize—a $400 set of wheels for each rider on the team. After the race, there werehard feelings when the team did not take first place. Conversely, prizes are men-tioned far less in recounting past races. As Rob, a veteran messenger and organizerof several prominent races, said, “Winning doesn’t matter. It is about having fun. Noone remembers or cares who wins.” Or as Arnold, a former New York City messenger,exclaimed at the 2002 Halloween alleycat, “I don’t want to win. I just want to getdrunk and hopefully cause some damage to this city.”During my time as a messenger, Vinny, a longtime New York messenger, set upseveral “fun rides.” While technically races, Vinny’s rides specifically stressed funover competition. After one race, there was a dispute about whether a ridershould be disqualified. As one racer screamed at another, Vinny calmly asked,“Did you have fun? Then what are you worried about? The point was to havefun.” Despite the organizer’s claim of a “fun ride,” the grand prize—365 bottles ofbeer—certainly prompted many riders to take the event very seriously. But even“serious” riders have fun, and, with the exception of the one disgruntled racer,there appeared to be no misgivings among the other messengers about not win-ning. In fact, Jonathan—a courier who often places very well in races—commentedafter an alleycat where he finished in the lower percentile, “That was the most funI’ve ever had at a race.”The start and finish of a race are crowded areas littered with messengers, bikes,and bags. People mill about drinking and socializing. During the race the ecologicalconcentration (i.e., the density of ritual participants) is generally low, but oftenracers ride in small packs and work together to force their way through crowded inter-sections. The interaction pace (i.e., the rate at which participants interact) during arace is slow, but before and after the race it is fast. The prerace and postrace events offerbookends to the race itself—anticipation of the race about to start and recountingthe race just finished. Mitchell (1983) illustrates that such socialization allowssubjective experiences to be shared and understood within a group context. AsMitchell stresses, it is not the mountains themselves that fill the climber with aweand the pride of accomplishment; it is the time climbers spend with other mountaineerswhere meanings are truly made. Likewise, it is not the race itself that is important,but the social interactions that accompany it. Moreover, the race itself is a socialinteraction that embodies the values and meanings of the workday. As the debateover open-versus-closed courses and winning-versus-just-racing shows, meaning for Bike Messengers and the Really Real 363 the lifestyle messenger is not fixed. Just as Mitchell’s mountaineers debate thevarious climbing ideologies, new technologies, routes of ascent, and so forth,messengers negotiate a contested field. However, just as mountain climbers—despitetheir different orientations—internalize an idea of what mountain climbing is andwhat being a mountain climber means, so do messengers internalize ideas aboutbike messengering. Dampened Reflexivity and the Weight of Society For Durkheim ([1912] 1995) the function of the ritual was to provide the voice ofGod—to make one’s actions and behaviors appear supranatural and beyond ques-tion. The reflexive nature of ordinary human thought stands as a barrier to thisprocess. According to Allan (1998), reality construction requires the dampening ofreflexive thought. As Collins (2004) states, “Action itself always reduces reflexivity,and induces a belief in the symbols and symbolically frames objects that fill outattention at that moment” (p. 97). The work of Csikszentmihalyi (1990) and Lyng(1990) demonstrates how the intense focus of attention found in events like alley-cats results in reduced reflexivity. Compounding this dampening of reflexivity arethe social interactions in which they are entwined. These actions do not occur in iso-lation but instead take place within the group. As Durkheim ([1912] 1995) notes,“It is by shouting the same cry, saying the same words, and performing the sameaction in regard to the same object that they arrive at and experience agreement”(p. 232). Further, these actions are idealized expressions of messenger work—allthe danger and excitement without dispatchers and clients getting in the way. AsDurkheim commented about religion, “But religion is first and foremost a system ofideas by which individuals imagine the society of which they are members and theobscure yet intimate relations they have with it” (p. 227).Consider, for example, some scenes from Monster Track IV. There are over 120track bikes lying on the ground or against the fences of Tompkins Square Park on achilly Saturday afternoon. Over 120 messengers are standing in a line on the grassabout fifty feet from their bikes. Some people are joking and talking. Others arestaring straight ahead, their expressions lost in anticipation. The race will be startedLe Mans–style with racers sprinting to their bikes. My stomach is in my throat. Thecountdown starts; the messenger who set up the race, standing on a park bench,yells, “Three, two, one, go!” By the count of two, every messenger takes off. Peopleare jumping fences, screaming, tripping, trying madly to reach their bike first. Ontheir bikes, people peel off in different directions. There are four checkpoints forthis race. The riders can go to them in any order. The only rules are your bike mustbe a track bike and you must have your manifest signed at each checkpoint. Barringthose two stipulations, whoever makes it back to the park first wins.I head north up Avenue A. There are about thirty riders in my immediate sight.As we turn left onto 14th Street and then right onto First Avenue, bystanders stopdead in their tracks. We are a swarm of men and women speeding through the city, 364 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 not stopping for a single red light, weaving in and out of cars, screaming at pedes-trians to get out of the way. By the time I hit 80th Street, I’m fatigued. The packhas thinned out, but I still see racers in front of me, and I can hear the churning ofchains beside me. When I get to the first checkpoint, there are bikes thrown acrossthe ground. Racers are crowded around the organizer signing the manifests. Withtheir manifest signed, people jump back onto their bikes and are off again. Threecheckpoints later, I’m racing from the financial district back to Tompkins. I amdelirious. I’ve stopped thinking about anything—save for finishing. A messengerfrom D.C., lost in Manhattan, is riding behind me to find his way through Chinatownand the Lower East Side. I see a messenger from Boston a block ahead of me, andI strain to put more power behind each pedal stroke. Flying up Avenue B, I try mybest to keep my speed as I work my way through red lights. I know I cannot winthis race. There will be no prizes or money for me at the finish line. Still, for thelast hour, I have taken more risks than I would on any given workday. At the finishline there are no cheers. No spectators but the messengers who already havefinished. As the last of the racers comes in, people relax, drink beers, and talkamong themselves. This is deep play—the ordering of meanings within an encompassing structurethat extends beyond instrumental rationalization (Geertz 1973b). For Geertz, theBalinese ideals of “death, masculinity, rage, pride, loss, beneficence, [and] chance”are expressed within the cockfight (p. 443). Alleycats should be read in the samemanner. What it means to be a messenger is displayed and enacted at these events.Edward, in justifying the actions of couriers to outsiders, stated, “You don’t knowabout our life and how we live. . . . This is our life.” These races portray excitementand autonomy. Further, performed within a state of flow, the messenger can feel therace as something outside his or her own creation. Alleycats are not simply subjec-tively meaningful. Created through social interactions, they take on an objectivequality—Berger and Luckmann’s (1966) reification. That is, the messenger partakesin a social world where the thrills and dangers of racing are taken for granted. He orshe shares these experiences with others, and these experiences therefore becomeconcrete. At the same time, this bond is not simply cognitive and rational. To thecontrary, produced in a state of flow, it has a corporeal quality.With regard to the flow experience, Jason (1999) explained, “All extraneousthoughts have left me. My mind is in such a state of absolute clarity that I don’t evenhave to think about my next move. My bike moves by itself perfectly in tune withmy instincts” (p. 9). In other words, actions are reduced to instinct, and thoseinstincts are mobilized by a set of conditions that, because of their social context,seem objectively real. This is the “demon of oratorical inspiration” discussed byDurkheim ([1912] 1995:212). Building from the collective effervescence of thegroup, the individual feels the weight of society. While this weight is the product ofindividual minds, the actor feels the weight as a force located outside himself orherself. “It is then no longer a mere individual who speaks but a group incarnatedand personified” (p. 212). Bike Messengers and the Really Real 365 On a personal level, I experienced both extremes of this process. Enveloped inthe emotions of the group and astounded by the skills of those around me, I found my-self in awe of what we were doing at Monster Track. Like the title of Culley’s (2002)book about his life as a messenger, I felt as if I were part of an “immortal class.”I felt that we all understood a secret about this city. We could travel faster thananyone around us. While others cowered before red lights, we simply flew pastthem. Where others feared the cars roaring beside them, we just swerved beforethem. I experienced the group solidarity that Collins (2004) attributes to ritualparticipation. Conversely, as a sociologist, I was forced to step outside this reality.As outsiders passed through the park, I listened to their comments. They did notsee us as immortals. To them we were strangely dressed men and women playing withchildren’s toys. Our skills were useless to them, and our bravery simply foolhardy.These outsiders were disconnected from our collective effervescence and consequentlydid not share in the reality we created. Designating the Sacred The discrepancy between outsiders and the image messengers hold of themselves—“New York’s craziest,” “New York’s fastest,” “outlaws,” “rebels without brakes”—arises not only from the ritualized solidification of the social world. Equally importantis the ritual’s ability to consecrate objects into sacred symbols. Rituals transmute thecollective effervescence onto the objects of the ritual act. “Religious force is none otherthan the feeling that the collectivity inspires in its members, but projected outside theminds that experience them, and objectified. To be objectified, it fixes on a thing thatthereby becomes sacred; any object can play this role” (Durkheim [1912] 1995:230).Further, we can comprehend this religious force “only in connection with a concreteobject whose reality we feel intensely” (p. 221). As Collins (2004) notes, symbolsact like batteries, carrying the energy of the ritual into everyday life. By recallingfeelings after the assembly is over, symbols keep emotions “perpetually aliveand fresh” (Durkheim [1912] 1995:222). For Geertz (1973a), the ritual’s primaryimportance is its ability to extend beyond the actual performance and influencemundane life.Bicycles, messenger bags, clothing, manifests, and so forth all become totems tothe messenger who races. The fact I rode a track bike caused confusion among peo-ple who would have otherwise (and rightly) labeled me as a rookie. On severaloccasions, messengers did double takes when they discovered I was on a track bike.As one messenger I had been talking to remarked, “You’re a rookie? But, that’syour fixed outside isn’t?” This messenger, a mountain bike rider, had trouble believ-ing a rookie would be riding a track bike. Over the last several years, track bikeshave grown in popularity among nonmessengers. Adam, a messenger of six years,snidely commented one day, “Track bikes are trendy now.” For Adam track bikesare a distinguishing feature of a messenger—they are a “membership symbol”(Collins 2004)—and their use among “civilians” was mildly irritating. As Audrey 366 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 told me, “Every time I see someone on a track bike I feel like I should knowthem.” One evening after work, I was hanging out with a group of messengers atColumbus Circle when a man on a sparkling new track bike rode by. He lookeduncomfortable and unconfident on the bike. Several people in the group laughedas he passed. Mike smirked, “Maybe we should ask him if he wants to ride withsome real messengers.” The sacredness of bicycles can be further illustrated. Eight messengers andI had met in Central Park for a day of riding. On our way up to the Bronx, we rodeto a statue for a picture. We all hung our bikes across the fence surrounding thestatue. The sight of our nine bikes, clinging to the iron fence, dangling over ourheads, resulted in a moment of contemplation from each of us. We crossed thestreet and gazed on the impromptu art. José, one of the younger members of thegroup, remarked, “Beautiful.” We were not simply looking at welded steel, twowheels, and some gears. We were staring at something bigger—our livelihood, ourrecreation, our very lives. Urban Death Maze offers “The Biker’s Creed” (2000):“My bicycle is my best friend. It is my life. . . . Me and my bicycle are defenders ofour freedom. We are the saviors of my life” (p. 11). Bicycles, particularly trackbikes, therefore, are objects set apart from the world of more mundane things.Messengers would not, for example, ride to a statue to hang their T-shirts over it,and if they did, it would certainly not prompt such reverence as the sight of thehanging bicycles. Likewise, the hostility and humor that experienced messengersexude toward neophytes on track bikes is an effort to protect the object from thedesecration of outsiders. As Henry huffed on hearing that several rookies wouldbe traveling to a swap meet at the Trexlertown velodrome, “All these new jacksdoing all this shit.” As with track bikes, I occasionally heard veteran messengers speak negativelyabout rookies who too quickly adopted various symbols of the messenger. For in-stance, one evening Henry jokingly commented that two rookies had arrived at theparty with their bags and radios on. Henry himself was wearing his bag and hisradio, and so was nearly everyone in attendance. In other words, the joke was notabout bags and radios but about undeserving messengers wearing two hallmarks ofmessenger style. In another instance, Henry trained his ire on another rookie:“He’s the guy that wants to look like a messenger: wearing the little hat [i.e., acycling cap], but can’t remember to roll up his pant leg [to keep it from gettingcaught in the bike’s gears]. And he can’t ride a fixed.” This is analogous to Donnellyand Young’s (1988) comments on “overt displays” made by rookies. Neophytesyearn to distinguish themselves as members, but in doing so often only highlighttheir naïveté. More important for the present discussion, such symbolic overstate-ments tarnish the sacredness of the totem. That is, the objects that messengers holddear lose their charms if rookies can easily appropriate the style. The effervescence of the alleycat not only occurs with objects but spills over ontoideas as well. For example, speed and a disregard for traffic laws can be thought ofas a purely economic matter during the workday. Alleycats were created to settle Bike Messengers and the Really Real 367 arguments about who could claim rights as the fastest messenger. As Johnny, anorganizer of the first Monster Track race, states, “This is what we do for a living,you know. . . . in the messenger scene we always talk about who is the fastest guy,you know. So, now, here we determine who is the fastest guy, who is the best on thetrack bike” (quoted in Sutherland 2001). For lifestyle messengers, the behaviorsvalorized in races become values in their own right—the values of excitement andautonomy. As one messenger has explained about alleycats: “I could care less aboutwho’s the best courier. I just want to know who’s the fastest” (Nesbit 2000:20). At arace in Boston, several longtime local messengers disputed the legitimacy of a less-established racer’s claims of being an actual messenger (i.e., that he was working asa messenger). In speaking about this conflict, Joan scoffed, “He’s fast as shit! Whatdoes it matter if he’s a messenger? He’s a fast urban cyclist.” Speed and the abilityto handle traffic are defining aspects of how messengers view themselves. For thelifestyle messenger (at least in New York), these are not simply traits that helpthem earn money; they are traits that exemplify who they really are (see alsoWheaton 2004). This is illustrated by the fact that messengers always break trafficlaws—even when they are not working and are in no particular hurry. For example,when inviting me to hang out one weekend, Stan explained, “We are trying to dostuff on the weekends: races, whatever, trying to keep stuff going. . . . Ride aroundand cause havoc.” Alleycats have become institutionalized. Within this institutionalization, for-merly ethereal ideals have been dramatized into a concrete reality. When a newcourier enters the social world of the lifestyle messenger, he or she enters into anobjectified cosmos (Berger and Luckmann 1966). In this way, the values in the raceare carried back into the workday, and the values of the workday are returned tothe races (see Stewart 2004). Like Geertz’s (1973a) religious performances, they aremodels of and models for reality. This is a dynamic feature. The race, which wasoriginally just a reflection of work, has come to define messenger life. For instance,during the workday Rick, a messenger of three years, would often race informallyagainst one of his foes, an older messenger named Greg. “I never say anything tohim. I hate people that talk like that, but whenever I see him, I race him. I’m sure heused to be fast, but he’s not willing to take the risks I’ll take. His time has passed.”For Rick, taking additional risks during an already dangerous workday is logical.The rationality of the race (“who’s the fastest”) has superseded the rationality ofthe occupation (“who’s the best courier”). The essential point here is that these val-ues are not produced simply through cognition (i.e., language) but also through theemotional charge acted out in alleycats and symbolized through its totems. That is,while riding fast and aggressively has a simply symbolic quality—proving oneself asa skilled messenger—there is also an affective component. Riding like one is racing(when not actually racing) brings the effervescence of the race into mundane life.Speeding through streets, messengers reaffirm to themselves that they are part ofthe group. Just as Christians reading the Bible in isolation recall the power of thecongregation, messengers swerving between cars insert these actions into the 368 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006 schema of their social world. Produced collectively, and reaffirmed individually,messengers can thus feel confident that their actions have meaning that is in noneed of conscious introspection. CONCLUSION Of New York City’s two thousand messengers, a few hundred have developed aunique social world comprising a distinctive messenger lifestyle. For this smaller setof messengers, races serve as rituals that reflect and shape messenger values. Moreimportant, these races produce affect-meaning, allowing messenger values to beinternalized as objectively real. Alleycats induce in the participants a state of flow.Although flow is an intrinsically enjoyable experience, the analysis must go furtherthan that. The spontaneity of the “I” produces a sense of hyperreality—separateand more intimate than normal reflexive thought (Lyng 1990). Social interactionsin this state are equally unquestioned. The actions of the group are perceived asinstinctual reactions. The behavior of the group is seen not as arbitrary but as neces-sary: its members are behaving in the only meaningful way possible. The “way we do things” becomes the “way things are .” As Edward stated, “This is how we live.”For Edward, there is no need to elaborate, and not even the shattering of his ownfemur from a collision with a car can bring his actions into question. This process is compounded by the designation of sacred symbols. These sym-bols serve a dual purpose. They transfer the affect-meaning of the ritual into nonri-tual life. The bicycle, for instance, becomes a symbol of autonomy and excitement.The racer comes to associate the bike with races. This is an essential point of Allan(1998), Collins (2004), and Durkheim ([1912] 1995). “It is, in fact, a well-known lawthat the feelings a thing arouses in us are spontaneously transmitted to the symbolthat represents it” (Durkheim [1912] 1995:221). The reality of the races can, there-fore, be recalled through the image of the bike. Symbols in turn heighten the ritualexperience. Bicycles gathered at a race site increase anticipation and focus atten-tion. This is seen in the contemplation of the bicycles dangling from the statue andthe adaptation of the U.S. Marines’ rifle creed to bikes.In focusing on affect-meaning, I have sought to highlight an often-overlookedaspect of reality production. The postmodern critique has exposed inherent problemswith the formation of stable identities and meanings. However, despite such theori-zation of fragmentation and multiplication, in real life people do continue to func-tion. At the social world level, I proposed with Allan that meaning constructionshould be understood as not simply cognitive: it is a function of reduced reflexivityand the emotional charge given to actions, objects, and ideas within this state. Bikemessengers provide one example, among countless other social worlds, where indi-viduals maintain stable identities. Through alleycats, couriers develop affectivebonds to not only each other but the beliefs and values of the messenger lifestyle.This nonreflexive acceptance of the group’s norms anchored in emotionality promotesthe maintenance of firm identities. In analyzing culture in this way, we can understandhow people in the postmodern world still manage to forge meaningful lives. Bike Messengers and the Really Real 369 Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Jim Dowd, Nicole Pallotta, Patrick Wil-liams, and the anonymous reviewers for Symbolic Interaction for their insightfulcomments. An earlier version of this article was presented at the annual meeting ofthe Southern Sociological Society, Atlanta, GA, April 2004. REFERENCES Allan, Kenneth. 1998. The Meaning of Culture: Mo v ing the Postmodern Critique Forward . Westport,CT: Praeger.Baudrillard, Jean. [1981] 1994. Simulacra and Simulation , translated by S. Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor,MI: University of Michigan Press.Bauman, Zygmunt. 1991. Modernity and Ambi v alence . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.Becker, Howard S. 1951. “The Professional Dance Musician and His Audience.” American Journalof Sociology 57:136–44.Berger, Peter and Thomas Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in theSociology of Knowledge . New York: Doubleday.“The Biker’s Creed.” 2000. Urban Death Maze , May, p. 11.Bourdieu, Pierre. [1979] 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste , translatedby R. Nice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Cheney, Peter. 1993. “Bicycle Couriers in Love with Life on Mean Streets.” Toronto Star ,March 27.Collins, Randall. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harperand Row.Cuerdon, Don. 1990. “I Was a New York City Bike Messenger: Five Days as a Rough Rider in theBig Apple’s Hard Corps.” Bicycle Magazine , March, pp. 74–84.Culley, Travis Hugh. 2002. The Immortal Class: Bike Messengers and the Cult of Human Power .New York: Villard. Dennerlein, Jack Tigh and John D. Meeker. 2003. “Occupational Injuries among Boston BicycleMessengers.” American Journal of Industrial Medicine 42:519–25.Denzin, Norman K. 1989. Interpreti v e Interactionism . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Derrida, Jacques. [1967] 1976. Of Grammatology , translated by G. C. Spivak. Baltimore, MD:Johns Hopkins University Press.Donnelly, Peter and Kevin Young. 1985. “Reproduction and Transformation of Cultural Forms inSport: A Contextual Analysis of Rugby.” International Re v iew for the Sociology of Sport 20(1–2):19–38.______. 1988. “The Construction and Confirmation of Identities in Sport Subcultures.” Sociologyof Sport Journal 5:223–40.Dowd, James J. 1991. “Social Psychology in a Postmodern Age: A Discipline without a Subject.” American Sociologist 22 (3–4):188–209.Durkheim, Émile. [1912] 1995. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, translated by K. E. Fields.New York: Free Press.Duvall, William H., III. 1991. “Pedestrians May Swear at Bicycle Messengers, but CompaniesSwear by Them.” Chicago Tribune, November 3.Flyvbjerg, Bent. 2001. Making Social Science Matter: Why Social Inquiry Fails and How It CanSucceed Again, translated by S. Sampson. New York: Cambridge University Press.Garfinkel, Harold. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.Geertz, Clifford. 1973a. “Religion as a Cultural System.” Pp. 87–125 in Interpretations of Culture:Selected Essays. New York: Basic Boo ks. ______. 1973b. “Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight.” Pp. 412–53 in Interpretations ofCulture: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books. Gergen, Kenneth J. 1971. The Concept of Self. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.370 Symbolic Interaction Volume 29, Number 3, 2006Giddens, Anthony. 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age.Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs,NJ: Prentice-Hall. Grant, Traci. 1994. “Snowstorms Pile Risk on Bike Couriers’ Path; Messengers Weather Obstaclesto Delivery.” Boston Globe, February 11.Gubrium, Jaber F. and James A. Holstein. 1994. “Grounding the Postmodern Self.” SociologicalQuarterly 35:685–703.______. 2000. “The Self in a World of Going Concerns.” Symbolic Interaction 23:95–115.Harvey, David. 1989. The Conditions of Postmodernity: An Inquiry into the Origins of CulturalChange. Oxford: Blackwell. Jameson, Fredric. 1984. “Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.” New LeftReview 146(July–August):30–72.Jason. 1999. “The Line.” Urban Death Maze, February, p. 9.Lemert, Charles. 1992. “General Social Theory, Irony, and Postmodernism.” Pp. 17–46 in Post-modernism and Social Theory: The Debate over General Theory, edited by S. Seidman andD. G. Wagner. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.Levy, Bob. 1989. “Hope Amid the Spokes and Wheels.” Washington Post, February 17.Lyng, Stephen G. 1990. “Edgework: A Social Psychological Analysis of Voluntary Risk Taking.”American Journal of Sociology 95:851–86.Lyotard, Jean-François. [1979] 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, trans-lated by G. Bennington and B. Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. [1848] 1964. The Communist Manifesto, translated by S. Moore.New York: Washington Square.McKillop, Peter. 1985. “The Uneasiest Riders: Manhattan’s Streets Are a Swarm with ‘Bikers’ aDeath Defying New Breed of Urban Messenger.” Newsweek, November 25, p. 28.Mead, George Herbert. [1934] 1962. Mind, Self, and Society, edited by C. W. Morris. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.“Messenger Mass Ride.” 1999. Urban Death Maze, September, p. 3.Mitchell, Richard G., Jr. 1983. Mountain Experience: The Psychology and Sociology of Adventure.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ______. 1993. Secrecy in Fieldwork. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.______. 2002. Dancing at Armageddon: Survivalism and Chaos in Modern Times. Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press.Moglia, Jay. 2000. “The Dome: To Chickenwing.” P. 10 in Messengers Style, by Philippe Bialobos.New York: Assouline.Muggleton, David. 2000. Inside Subculture: The Postmodern Meaning of Style. New York: Berg.Nesbit, Damien. 2000. “Motherfuckin’ Monstertrack Race Report.” Urban Death Maze, May,pp. 19–21.Ouellet, Lawrence J. 1994. Pedal to the Metal: The Work Lives of Truckers. Philadelphia: TempleUniversity Press.Pedal. 2001. Directed by Peter Sutherland. US: Fractured Media.Pit. 1998a. “Fixed with Fenders.” Urban Death Maze, December, p. 6.______. 1998b. “Messengers on Board.” Urban Death Maze, December, p. 23.Red Light Go. 2002. Directed by Ben Barraud, Toby Barraud, and Manny Kivowitz. New York:KSK Studios.Reilly, Rebecca “Lambchop.” 2000. Nerves of Steel: Bicycle Messengers in the United States. Buffalo:Spoke and Word.Sassen, Saskia. 2001. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.Simmel, Georg. [1903] 1971. “The Metropolis and Mental Life.” Pp. 324–39 in On Individualityand Social Forms: Selected Writings, edited by D. N. Levine. Chicago: University ofChicago Press.Bike Messengers and the Really Real 371Smith, Dorothy E. 1990. The Conceptual Practices of Power: A Feminist Sociology of Knowledge.Boston: Northeastern University Press.Stewart, Benjamin. 2004. “Bicycle Messengers and the Dialectics of Speed.” Pp. 150–90 inFighting for Time: Shifting Boundaries of Work and Social Life, edited by C. F. Epstein andA. L. Kalleberg. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.Strauss, Anselm L. and Juliet Corbin. 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded TheoryProcedures and Techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Tommasson, Robert E. 1991. “Fax Displacing Manhattan Bike Couriers.” New York Times, March 19.Turner, Jonathan H. 1999. “Towards a General Sociological Theory of Emotion.” Journal of SocialBehavior 29(2):133–62.Wheaton, Belinda. 2004. “Introduction: Mapping the Lifestyle Sport-scape.” Pp. 1–28 in Under-standing Lifestyle Sports: Consumption, Identity, and Difference, edited by B. Wheaton.New York: Routledge.Wolf, Daniel R. 1991. The Rebels: A Brotherhood of Outlaw Bikers. Toronto: University ofToronto Press.Wood, Michael. 1994. “My Brilliant Courier: Scarred Knees, Bloody Palms.” Independent (London),August 16.