ABSTRACT: 
In sub-Saharan Africa, young women ages 15-24 have more than twice the risk of acquiring HIV as their male counterparts. A growing body of epidemiological evidence suggests that the practice of "transactional sex" may contribute to this disparity. Over the last 15 years, the social sciences have contributed significantly to understanding the meaning of and motivations for this practice. The findings from these studies are rich, but varied, rendering lessons difficult to navigate for intervention and further research. We therefore contribute a historically-grounded, comprehensive literature review on the nature and motivations for women's participation in transactional sex in sub-Saharan Africa. Drawing from over 300 studies (through 2014), we distill three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. "Sex for basic needs," the first paradigm, positions women as victims in transactional sexual relationships, with implications for interventions that protect girls from exploitation. In contrast, the "sex for improved social status" paradigm positions women as sexual agents who engage in transactional sex toward attaining a middle-class status and lifestyle. Finally, a third paradigm, "sex and material expressions of love," draws attention to the connections between love and money, and the central role of men as providers in relationships. We find important commonalities in the structural factors that shape the three paradigms of transactional sex including gender inequality and processes of economic change. We suggest that there are three continua stretching across these paradigms: deprivation, agency, and instrumentality. This review proposes a definition of transactional sex and discusses implications for research and interventions aiming to reduce young women's risk of HIV through such relationships. We consider the consequences of drawing from too narrow an understanding of the practice, and highlight the benefits of a broader conceptualization. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper examines the meaning and motivations for women’s participation in transactional sex in sub-Saharan Africa. Drawing from over 300 studies ( through 2014) we extract three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We describe three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we review toward presenting a unified conceptualization of the practice. We suggest that there are three continuastretching across these paradigms: deprivation, agency, and instrumentality. This review proposes a definition of transactional sex and discusses implications for research and interventions aimed to reduce young women's risk of HIV through such relationships. We consider the consequences of drawing from too narrow an understanding of the practice, and highlight the benefits of a broader conceptualization. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Stoebenau, K; Heise, L; Wamoyi, J; Bobrova, N (2016) Revisitingthe understanding of &quot;transactional sex&quot; in sub-SaharanAfrica: A review and synthesis of the literature. Social science &medicine (1982), 168. pp. 186-197. ISSN 0277-9536 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.09.023Downloaded from: http://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/2933147/DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.09.023Usage GuidelinesPlease refer to usage guidelines at http://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/policies.html or alterna-tively contact researchonline@lshtm.ac.uk.Available under license: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.5/Review articleRevisiting the understanding of “transactional sex” in sub-SaharanAfrica: A review and synthesis of the literatureKirsten Stoebenau a, e, *, Lori Heise b, Joyce Wamoyi c, Natalia Bobrova da Center on Health, Risk and Society, Department of Sociology, American University, 4400 Massachusetts Avenue, Washington, D.C., 20016, USAb Faculty of Public Health and Policy, Department of Global Health and Development, The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 15-17 TavistockPlace, London, WC1H 9SH, UKc Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health, National Institute for Medical Research, P.O Box 1462, Mwanza, Tanzaniad Faculty of Public Health and Policy, The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 15-17 Tavistock Place, London, WC1H 9SH, UKe International Center for Research on Women, 1120 20th, Street NW, Washington, D.C., 20036, USAa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 9 February 2016Received in revised form11 September 2016Accepted 14 September 2016Available online 15 September 2016Keywords:Transactional sexsub-Saharan AfricaYoung womenHIV/AIDSPreventionStructural driversa b s t r a c tIn sub-Saharan Africa, young women ages 15e24 have more than twice the risk of acquiring HIV as theirmale counterparts. A growing body of epidemiological evidence suggests that the practice of “trans-actional sex” may contribute to this disparity. Over the last 15 years, the social sciences have contributedsigniﬁcantly to understanding the meaning of and motivations for this practice. The ﬁndings from thesestudies are rich, but varied, rendering lessons difﬁcult to navigate for intervention and further research.We therefore contribute a historically-grounded, comprehensive literature review on the nature andmotivations for women's participation in transactional sex in sub-Saharan Africa. Drawing from over 300studies (through 2014), we distill three prominent paradigms observed in the literature that we reviewtoward presenting a uniﬁed conceptualization of the practice. “Sex for basic needs,” the ﬁrst paradigm,positions women as victims in transactional sexual relationships, with implications for interventions thatprotect girls from exploitation. In contrast, the “sex for improved social status” paradigm positionswomen as sexual agents who engage in transactional sex toward attaining a middle-class status andlifestyle. Finally, a third paradigm, “sex and material expressions of love,” draws attention to the con-nections between love and money, and the central role of men as providers in relationships. We ﬁndimportant commonalities in the structural factors that shape the three paradigms of transactional sexincluding gender inequality and processes of economic change. We suggest that there are three continuastretching across these paradigms: deprivation, agency, and instrumentality. This review proposes adeﬁnition of transactional sex and discusses implications for research and interventions aiming to reduceyoung women's risk of HIV through such relationships. We consider the consequences of drawing fromtoo narrow an understanding of the practice, and highlight the beneﬁts of a broader conceptualization.© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).1. IntroductionGlobally, 15% of women living with HIV are between the ages of15 and 24, and of these, 80% live in sub-Saharan Africa (UNAIDS,2014). Young women aged 15e24 are three times more likely tobe infected with HIV than their male peers (UNAIDS, 2014), andcomprise 31% of all new infections in sub-Saharan Africa (UNAIDS,2014). Alongside research highlighting the importance of biologicalsusceptibility, gender inequality and poor access to healthcare, agrowing body of evidence suggests that informal sexual exchangeor “transactional sex” (TS) may be key to understanding the genderdisparity in HIV among young people (UNAIDS, 2010, 2013).Depending on how its deﬁned, TS is a relatively prevalent practi-cedone four-country study found between 36% and 80% of sexuallyactive adolescent girls ages 12e19 reported ever having had TS(Moore et al., 2007). Epidemiological studies have demonstrated asigniﬁcant association between TS and HIV (Wamoyi et al., 2016). Inaddition, TS is associated with a number of HIV risk factors or be-haviors including alcohol use (Choudhry et al., 2014; Dunkle et al.,* Corresponding author. Center on Health, Risk and Society, Department of So-ciology, American University, 4400 Massachusetts Avenue, Washington, D.C., 20016,USA.E-mail addresses: stoebena@american.edu (K. Stoebenau), lori.heise@lshtm.ac.uk (L. Heise), jwamoyi@gmail.com (J. Wamoyi), Natalia.Bobrova@lshtm.ac.uk(N. Bobrova).Contents lists available at ScienceDirectSocial Science & Medicinejournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/socscimedhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.09.0230277-9536/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e1972004a; Norris et al., 2009; Okigbo et al., 2014; Shannon et al., 2012;Singh et al., 2012;Weiser et al., 2007); sexual or physical violence orabuse (Adudans et al., 2011; Choudhry et al., 2014; Cluver et al.,2011; Jewkes, 2006; Kalichman and Simbayi, 2004; Okigbo et al.,2014; Zembe et al., 2015); inconsistent condom use (Luke, 2005a;Luke et al., 2011) and multiple partners (Moore et al., 2007;Okigbo et al., 2014; Phillips-Howard et al., 2015; Steffenson et al.,2011). Alongside these epidemiological ﬁndings, a now vast socialscience literature describes the motivations and constraints thatstructure the practice across a number of settings.But, what do we actually mean by “transactional sex”? Theﬁndings from the social sciences are rich, but offer a wide range ofperspectives and meanings, rendering lessons difﬁcult to navigatefor intervention and further research. We focus this paper onreviewing this now extensive literature at a time when renewedenergy is being directed toward reducing young women's vulner-ability to HIV. While TS takes place in many contexts, we focus ourattention on sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) given both the pronouncedepidemiological relevance for this region, and that the over-whelming concentration of literature on the topic is situated in SSA.The latter point is not a matter of coincidence. The use of the term“transactional sex” arose from critical analysis of how sexual ex-change relationships were being described in SSA early in the HIVpandemic. In the 1990s, dominant biomedical discourse in HIV/AIDS prevention labeled prostitutes or commercial sex workers as a“reservoir of infection” in SSA (Plummer et al., 1991; Simonsenet al., 1990). Social scientists began to criticize what they saw as acareless use of the labels “prostitution” or “commercial sex work”in reference to all forms of sexual exchange (Day, 1988; deZalduondo, 1991; Seidel, 1993; Standing, 1992). As Hilary Standingexplained in 1992:The overarching problem arises from the tendency to label ‘risk’populations using… ‘prostitute’ without either questioning theappropriateness … or providing any deﬁnition of the term. Itshould be noted … that much sexual exchange in Africa has amonetary component but it would be quite inappropriate… todeﬁne it as prostitution … and … that simply labelling cate-gories … without contextualising the behavior … contributesnothing to an understanding of the social phenomenon lyingbehind the label (Standing, 1992, p. 477).Standing's critique drew on earlier anthropological work thatdetailed sexual relationship and union formation and the role ofexchange in relationships from the pre-colonial period onwards(e.g., Schoepf, 1988; White, 1990). A number of in-depth studieshave since contributed to “contextualising the behavior”ddemonstrating that most forms of sexual exchange are notequated with commercial sex by participants or the broader com-munity. Studies also drew attention to how gendered social andeconomic inequalities structured sexual exchange rather than any“African sexuality” (e.g., Ankomah, 1992; Schoepf, 1988).Yet, as research on this subject rapidly expanded in the last 15years, there has been a “drift” in the understanding of the practice,such that TS is now sometimes conﬂated with “sex work” or“prostitution” in meaning and measurement (e.g., Ferguson andMorris, 2007; Fitzgerald-Husek et al., 2011; Graham et al., 2014;Robinson and Yeh, 2011). This conﬂation has extended to someagenda-setting organizations and it belies the history of theconcept, confounds efforts to track and understand the role that TSrelationships may play in HIV risk, and stymies effective interven-tion efforts.The aims of this paper are to review the meaning and motiva-tions for women's involvement in transactional sex, develop auniﬁed conceptualization and deﬁnition of the practice; anddiscuss implications for interventions with young women. Weargue in this paper that TS should be deﬁned as noncommercial,non-marital sexual relationships motivated by the implicit assumptionthat sex will be exchanged for material support or other beneﬁts. Thisconceptual paper is part of a broader effort to review the body ofknowledge on TS in SSA (a companion paper reviews the associa-tion between TS and HIV (Wamoyi et al., 2016)), and provides afoundation for efforts to improve measurement, and thereforeunderstanding, of the role that TS plays in HIV risk.Our analysis of the literature revealed three ideal-type para-digms of the determinants and nature of women's practice of TS:sex for basic needs; sex for improved social status; and sex andmaterial expressions of love. The “ideal type” is a sociologicalconstruct that serves to build meaning by depicting “pure” repre-sentations of social categories or actions. Importantly, ideal typesare not meant to be taken as realistic portrayals; they are explicitlyreductionist in order to facilitate comparison (Weber, 1978). Mostoriginal social science research portrays a reality that draws from atleast two of the paradigms we describe; however, there is a ten-dency among donors and civil society groups to emphasize oneparadigm at the expense of others. By delineating ideal-type par-adigms of TS, we highlight what is left asidewhen each is examinedalone. This exercise generates multiple narratives, and helps toexplain why deﬁning TS has proven so challenging. It also serves asthe basis for considering implications for intervention effortsaiming to reduce women's HIV risk; and highlights the conse-quences of drawing from too narrow an understanding of thepractice.2. Methodological approachWe conducted a comprehensive review of the literature on TS inSSA through 2014. The review was designed to address multipleaspects of TS including its conceptualization, measurement, andassociations with HIV and related risk behaviors. We used thefollowing databases to identify peer-reviewed articles and mono-graphs: PubMed, EMBASE, Global Health, POPline, Web of Science,ADOLEC, Scopus, and Anthropology plus. Grey literature and na-tional reports were searched through a number of websites: GoogleScholar, UNAIDS, UNFPA, WHO, the World Bank, FHI, PopulationCouncil, PSI, USAID, CIDA, DFID, PEPFAR, OSI, HIV/AIDS Alliance,Guttmacher Institute, African Population and Health ResearchCenter, and Population Reference Bureau. Experts' suggestionswere used to identify relevant monographs, peer-reviewed articles,and grey literature papers and reports. Additionally, the followingjournals were hand searched: African Journal of ReproductiveHealth, African Health Sciences, African Journal of AIDS Research,East African Journal of Public Health, East African Medical Journal,African Affairs, Culture Health and Sexuality, Archives of SexualBehavior, Gender and Development, Exchange on HIV/AIDS, Sexu-ality and Gender.The search terms included: [“transactional sex” or “survival sex”or “consumption sex” or “intergenerational sex” or “commodiﬁedsex” or “cross-generational sex” or “informal sex”, or “sex* ex-change”, or “sex* trade” or “sugar daddy*”, or “globalization andsex*” or “modernity and sex*” and Africa]. Both quantitative andqualitative studies were included. No types of publication or timerestrictions were applied to the search. Only studies in English wereincluded.Following the removal of duplicates, we identiﬁed just over3000 titles. In title and abstract review, themajority were found notrelevant to TS. In total, 739 studies were retrieved for full text re-view. Of these, 339met our inclusion and exclusion criteria (locatedin SSA; concerned transactional sex, not sex work; did not focus onK. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197 187special populations [e.g., drug-users, prisoners]) and were extrac-ted and included in the analysis. See full reference list online.Relevant studies were summarized in an extraction table thatrecorded detailed information on the study setting, sample size,research objectives, analytic approach, measurement of TS, andmain ﬁndings, as well as information on the deﬁnition and theo-retical framing of TS. In addition, we took notes on books includedin the analysis. Two co-authors carefully reviewed the extractiontables and identiﬁed the main themes emerging from theconceptualization, determinants or motivations for TS as describedin the studies.These themes then served as the basis for content analysis of thearticles, imported into the qualitative software program Atlas/ti(version 7, Scientiﬁc Software Development, Berlin, Germany). Wecoded the articles using “parent” codes to capture text corre-sponding to the themes. We used an auto-coding feature of Atlas/tito selectively code chunks of text after verifying that the text rep-resented the theme. For example, the code “masculinity” was usedto capture an emphasis on the meaning of manhood and relatedgendered roles in relationships, and was attached to text thatdescribed this theme and included the following associated keywords or phrases: male provider, provider role, men as providers,masculinity, masculinities.3. Findings3.1. Overview of the literatureThe earliest study that used the term “transaction” or “trans-actional” sex was published in 1989 (Caldwell et al., 1989). Sincethen there has been a nearly exponential rise in the publicationsexamining TS in SSA from an average of about eight publicationseach year between 2000 and 2003, to 31 each year between 2010and 2013. We identiﬁed studies from every region of SSA; yet thereis a higher concentration of studies from southern and easternAfrica, with 75 of the studies included in this review from SouthAfrica, speciﬁcally. Although we note this range of settings, we didnot set out to explore contextual distinctions; rather, our aimwas toconsolidate and assess different conceptualizations of TS.Studies described both age-disparate (termed “intergenera-tional” if age gap is large) and age-concordant relationships.Transactional sex is sometimes inaccurately assumed to be syn-onymous with age-disparate sex, with sugar-daddies or “adultmales who exchange large amounts of money or gifts for sexualfavors from much younger women” (often operationalized as a 10-plus-year age difference) (Luke, 2005b, p. 6). Many of the studiesincluded in this review are focused exclusively on TS in age-disparate partnerships (e.g., Bajaj, 2009; Cockcroft et al., 2010;Gbalajobi, 2010; Hope, 2007; Kuate-Defo, 2004; Leclerc-Madlala,2008; Luke, 2003, 2005a; Potgieter et al., 2012). However, TS alsotakes place in relationships with similar-age partners (Jewkes et al.,2012a; Kaufman and Stavrou, 2004; Luke, 2005a; Luke et al., 2011;Nyanzi et al., 2001) and sugar-daddy relationships constitute asmaller proportion of exchange relationships than often assumed(Luke, 2005a; Wyrod et al., 2011). Evidence further suggests thatthe ﬂow of resources is not unidirectionaldyoung women alsooffer gifts and material support (though typically of lower value) totheir partners (Luke et al., 2011). In addition, while not nearly ascommon, there are sugar-mommy relationships (Darabi et al.,2008; Gukurume, 2011; Kuate-Defo, 2004; Meekers and Calves,1997; Mojola, 2014b; Morojele et al., 2006; Nyanzi et al., 2004). Asmost studies focus on themore signiﬁcant male to female provisionof resources in exchange for sex, we do as well, particularly in lightof young women's disproportionate risk of HIV.4. Paradigms of transactional sexA number of key themes emerged in our review of the literature.These included agency, consumption, gender inequality, global-ization, income inequality, love, masculinity, poverty, survival, andvictimization or helplessness. We also noted an emphasis onintergenerational sex as well as the role of peers in motivatingyoung people, in particular, to practice TS. Some of these themescaptured broader forces, structuring TS more generally, while otherthemes were highly interrelated and together represented one ofthree paradigms referenced in the literature and described in detailbelow. For each paradigm, we begin with a stylized portrayal,discuss its origins and use, and then describemore nuanced aspectsof each perspective.4.1. The vulnerable victim and sex for basic needsThe “sex for basic needs” paradigm portrays women and girls asvulnerable victims who have little choice but to exchange sex formoney, food, or other material support as a result of their genderedeconomic and social marginalization. This paradigm extends from abroader discourse that frames women as vulnerable victims withinthe HIV epidemic (Higgins et al., 2010). The emphasis on structuralinequalities also helped to dismantle assertions that “Africansexuality” explained the rapidly increasing rate of HIV prevalencein SSA. Attention was drawn instead to gender inequality and thegendered impacts of economic change. While academic social sci-entists contributed to earlier studies emphasizing this perspective,we found that recent research drawing more exclusively from thisparadigm tended to come from publications authored by NGOs orwritten for agenda-setting donors (e.g., Hope, 2007; Leach et al.,2003; Lungu and Husken, 2010; Neema et al., 2007; UnitedNations Secretary-General's Task Force on Women, 2004). Excep-tions to this were studies focused on particularly marginalizedgroups of women or girls, e.g., street children (Dube, 1997; Cluveret al., 2011; Evans, 2002) and refugees (Muhwezi et al., 2011), orstudies that sought to examine linkages between TS and violence orcoercion (Dunkle et al., 2004b; Mosavel et al., 2012; Petersen et al.,2005; Williams et al., 2012).4.1.1. Economic dependenceA key feature of this paradigm is poverty, with speciﬁc emphasison women's economic dependence on men (Albertyn, 2003; Jumaet al., 2013a; Kim et al., 2008; McCleary-Sills et al., 2013; Williamset al., 2012; Wojcicki, 2002b). In addition, the paradigm drawsattention to gendered labor markets: women's disproportionaterepresentation in low-skilled jobs, seasonal work, work in theinformal economy (Hunter, 2010; Romero-Daza, 1994; Stark, 2013);economic desperation in the face of male labor migration (Hunter,2002; Romero-Daza, 1994); or increasingly, young women's ownmigration for economic opportunity, e.g., (Camlin et al., 2013;Hunter, 2010; Singh et al., 2012). Several studies describe thegendered impact of macro-level economic policy changes andwomen's acutely unequal access to economic capital as forcingwomen to rely on TS and multiple sexual partnerships to accesscash in increasingly monetized economies (Bajaj, 2009; M. Hunter,2002; Mill and Anarﬁ, 2002; Schoepf, 1988, 1993). Women's eco-nomic dependence on men is expressed at the household level in astudy from northern Mozambique (Bandali, 2011), as follows:Unmarried women with children who do not receive ﬁnancialsupport from the father become the sole providers for theirchildren. With minimal education or income opportunities …K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197188his absence means that women often resort to using sex to gainresources… (p. 579).There is also some quantitative evidence that household-levelpoverty (Hallman, 2004) or speciﬁcally, food insecurity, is associ-ated with TS (Cluver et al., 2011; Pascoe et al., 2015; Weiser et al.,2007) or inﬂuences TS (Bryceson and Fonseca, 2006; McCoy et al.,2014). In addition, women's unequal position in certain industriessometimes requires them to practice TS: one example that hasreceived a lot of attention is “ﬁsh-for-sex” within the ﬁsh trade inthe Great Lakes region (Bene andMerten, 2008; Camlin et al., 2013;Kher, 2008; Kwena et al., 2012; Lungu and Husken, 2010;MacPherson et al., 2012; Merten and Haller, 2007; Mojola, 2011;Nagoli et al., 2010). Finally, in some contexts household povertycan lead parents to directly or indirectly encourage their daughters'participation in TS relationships (Barnett et al., 2011; Komba-Malekela and Liljestrom, 1994; Mac Domhnaill et al., 2011; Remeset al., 2010; Wamoyi and Wight, 2014).4.1.2. The vulnerable victimThe “sex for basic needs” paradigm also places an emphasis onwomen's powerlessness within heterosexual relationships. In somecases, women are described as victims who have been coerced,exploited or abused. In the case of age-disparate relationships, thelanguage is sometimes strengthened by referring to adolescentgirls as ‘children’ with whom sexual relationships are by deﬁnitionsexual exploitation (e.g., Petersen et al., 2005; Williams et al.,2012); and older men are described as preying on young girls(Jones and Norton, 2007; McCleary-Sills et al., 2013; Njue et al.,2011; United Nations Secretary-General's Task Force on Women,2004). This understanding of TS is evident in the following excerpttaken from a report from Uganda:A rural, out-of-school 17-year-old female related how theﬁnancial dependency that she had on her partner, who was 15years older than she, trapped her in a physically dangerous andemotionally damaging relationship. … Money encouraged theyoung woman to take greater risks in the sexual relationshipand fosters a cycle of ﬁnancial dependency … (Neema et al.,2007, p. 47).Terminology such as “trapped” strongly implies that this girl hasno alternatives or capacity to resist. A subset of this literature fo-cuses on the “sex for grades” phenomenon as a speciﬁc manifes-tation of intergenerational, coerced sex within the school setting(see: Bajaj, 2009; Dahn, 2008; Hope, 2007; Leach et al., 2003;Morley, 2011).A number of studies, themajority from South Africa, have drawnon work on “masculinities” to explain the gendered basis forwomen's position in TS (Casale et al., 2011; Dunkle et al., 2007;Gilbert and Selikow, 2011; Jewkes and Morrell, 2012; Jewkeset al., 2012b; Morrell et al., 2012; Muparamoto, 2012; Selikowet al., 2002). A few have drawn from Connell's concept of “hege-monic masculinity” (and corresponding “emphasized femininity”),speciﬁcally. Hegemonic masculinity is the dominant form of mas-culinity practiced in a given context that serves to reproducegender inequality and suppress other ways of being a man (Connell,1987).In studies from marginalized communities in South Africa,women's vulnerability in TS is exacerbated by a hegemonic mas-culinity that is associated with “proving heterosexual success withwomen (gaining the ‘best’ and most female partners) and assertingcontrol over women” (Dunkle et al., 2007, p.8) through “unequaland often violent relationships” (Jewkes andMorrell, 2012, p. 1729).Providing material goods and money could be considered “a keystrategy to secure female partners that canwell be understoodwiththe broader context of this idea of masculinity” (Dunkle et al., 2007,p. 8e9). Emphasized femininity is complicit in upholding hege-monic masculinity. When there are few alternative means to accesssocial or economic capital, it may be advantageous to express anemphasized femininity, but in doing so, women reproduce unequalgender dynamics (Bhana and Pattman, 2011; Hunter, 2010; Jewkesand Morrell, 2012).Overall, the sex for basic needs paradigm stresses the impor-tance of gendered poverty as constraining women's options andforcing many to rely on TS for their survival (thus “survival sex”).This paradigm emphasizes women's lack of power in intimate,heterosexual relationships and describes women as victims ofmen's privileged status. When viewed from this perspective, effortsto prevent HIV contracted through TS would involve both economicempowerment to reduce women's economic dependency on men,as well as mechanisms to protect women and girls from sexualexploitation and coercion.4.2. The powerful agent and sex for improved social statusThe “sex for improved social status” paradigm took hold in theearly 2000s following studies that began to question the unidi-mensional portrayal of TS from the vulnerability paradigm (see,especially: Silberschmidt and Rasch, 2001; Leclerc-Madlala, 2003).The critiques expanded the paradigm beyond the “basic needs”portrayal in several ways: To begin, they noted that TS is not limitedto the destitute and the substance of exchange often extendsbeyond basic needs. They also maintained that most women haveat least some degree of agency in these relationships and shouldnot be viewed only as passive victims. And ﬁnally, they providedevidence that TS may be a means through which participants gainnot just economic but also social capital.4.2.1. Relative deprivation, social capital and transactional sexThe sex for improved social status paradigm suggests that themotivations for engaging in TS are not always borne out ofdesperation, but can also result from relative deprivationwithin thecontext of rising economic inequality and the increasing socialvalue of consumer goods. The experience of relative deprivation isdescribed as being fueled by economic processes of globalization,namely the introduction of neoliberal economic policies (privati-zation, liberalization of markets) that saw a few beneﬁt while manydid not (Fox, 2012; Groes-Green, 2013; Hawkins et al., 2009;Stoebenau et al., 2013). These policies also opened markets and ledto increased importation and visibility of consumer goods, spurringa “consumer culture.” Studies drawing on this paradigm describeimmense peer pressure felt by young people, in particular, whocannot afford to maintain the lifestyle of their wealthier friends orpeers (Baba-Djara et al., 2013; Leclerc-Madlala, 2003; Zembe et al.,2013). This peer pressure can extend to engaging in risky sexualpractices that are associated with a modern lifestyle (Groes-Green,2013; Longﬁeld et al., 2004; Stoebenau et al., 2013) includingmaintaining one or multiple transactional relationships (Jewkesand Morrell, 2012; Wamoyi et al., 2011).Transactional sex is described as a practice throughwhich youngwomen, especially, can access material goods associated with amodern life to improve their social status. The stuff of exchange isnot restricted to basic goods but rather extends to “commodities ofmodernity” (Leclerc-Madlala, 2003), i.e., goods that associate theirowner with cosmopolitan youth culture:K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197 189In poverty-stricken township contexts, fashion is hotly pursuedby many young people identifying with the allure of the middleclass, differentiating themselves as they do from the poverty ofthe township but also from poorer rural-based counterparts.(Bhana and Pattman, 2011, p. 965).Therefore, as the above quote from South Africa suggests, TSallows young women to differentiate themselves from poorerpeers, or maintain lifestyles otherwise unaffordable in order toassociate with desired peer networks. Studies that describe TSpracticed for such aspirational motivations often focus on pop-ulations expected to be able to uphold or deﬁne the parameters ofmodern youth culture in various settings, such as female universitystudents (e.g., Amo-Adjei et al., 2014; Gukurume, 2011; Hoeffnagel,2012; Masvawure, 2010, 2011; Shefer et al., 2012).Women are shamed and blamed under this paradigm: researchhas emphasized how community members hold women whopractice TS for the consumption of modern goods at least in partresponsible for generalized moral decline, viewing them as bothsuperﬁcial and dangerous (Fielding-Miller et al., 2016b; Stoebenauet al., 2011). Yet, there are alternative explanations for suchwomen's actions as well as the community's response. For example,some have highlighted how women use modern goods to accessnew social networks for social mobility, thereby creating new formsof social power (Cole, 2004; Hawkins et al., 2009; Hunter, 2010).Thus, underlying the blame may be unease with social change andwomen's increased access to economic and social capital (Cornwall,2002; Smith, 2014; Stoebenau et al., 2011).There is also a compelling argument that women's pursuit ofconsumer goods is fueled in part by economic constraints on men.Mark Hunter details changes in marriage systems, speciﬁcally de-clines in marriage in South Africa as a result of social and economicchange, including many men no longer being able to afford bridewealth. Therefore, rather than expressing desire and commitmentthrough bride wealth and establishing a home, men provide com-modities. Where women used to fashion their homes as brides,they now fashion themselves as girlfriends (Hunter, 2010). SanyuMojola, in turn, provides a strong case for how the advertising in-dustry, alongside the march of global capital, has produced the“woman consumer” and manufactured this “need” in women, inparticular (Mojola, 2014a).4.2.2. Women's sexual agency and its limitsThe sex for improved social status paradigm also differs signif-icantly from that of the vulnerable victim in emphasizing women'sroles as active, sometimes powerful, agents in transactional re-lationships (Bell, 2012; Bhana and Pattman, 2011; Groes-Green,2013; Hawkins et al., 2009; Hoeffnagel, 2012; Hunter, 2002;Leclerc-Madlala, 2003; Luke, 2003; Silberschmidt and Rasch, 2001;Stoebenau et al., 2011;Wamoyi et al., 2011; Zembe et al., 2013). Thatwomenmay be engaging in TS to access modern goods implies thatthey are doing so as a result of deliberate action. In fact, expressionsdocumented in different sites capture how women describe theirability to extract resources from their male partners including, forexample: “milking the cow,” (Mozambique: Hawkins et al., 2009);“skinning the goat” (Tanzania: Maganja et al., 2007); “de-toothing”(Uganda: Bell, 2012; Bohmer and Kirumbira, 2000); or “tearingopen the pocket” (Madagascar: Stoebenau et al., 2011). As oneyoung woman outside of Johannesburg, explained:He is called a chicken because all you want to do with him is gethim to give you whatever you want. We say uyamcutha[plucking the chicken] (Selikow et al., 2002, p. 26).Therefore, within the context of a TS relationship, women ex-press power and agencydthey understand, and can thus manipu-late, traditional gendered assumptions in relationships. They utilizetheir “erotic power” (Groes-Green, 2013) to charm wealthy men,and access social and economic power in return. Yet, such manip-ulations are not without risk. For example, women in Uganda whoattempt to “de-tooth” men by extracting resources withoutproviding sex in return face the threat of sexual violence (Bell,2012; Bohmer and Kirumbira, 2000; Nyanzi et al., 2001). Morebroadly, women's power may not be consistent across and withinrelationships over time, and, importantly, is structured by broadergender-unequal systems. Researchers have emphasized importantlimits to women's agency in TS relationships, especially with regardto sexual decision-making (Albertyn, 2003; Jewkes and Morrell,2012; Luke, 2003; Stoebenau et al., 2011). While women mayhold power with respect to partner choice, ﬁndings have indicatedthat “once the choice was made, their power was greatly circum-scribed …” (Jewkes and Morrell, 2012, p.1732), particularly withrespect to when sex takes place and whether condoms are used,carrying implications for women's vulnerability to HIV. Importantalso are the broader structures that constrain women to havingerotic power as opposed to alternative forms of power. That said,Groes-Green argues that women's possession of erotic power in-dicates that “even within societies that appear heavily patriarchalwemight ﬁnd spaces for female assertiveness” (Groes-Green, 2013,p.103).In summary, the sex for improved social status paradigm sug-gests that growing economic inequality and the increasing impor-tance placed on the ownership of material goods for social mobilitymotivate women's engagement in TS. From this perspective, HIVprevention efforts would need to acknowledge women's perceivedagency in relationships andworkwithwomen to critically assess itslimits. While not inconsistent with all economic empowermentapproaches, small micro-loans or similar poverty alleviation effortsmay not provide adequate capital to meet consumer needs.4.3. Sex and material expressions of loveThe previous paradigms fail to adequately address the extent towhich transactions occur within emotionally intimate relationships(Bhana and Pattman, 2011; Groes-Green, 2013; Mojola, 2014a;Moore et al., 2007; Nyanzi et al., 2001; Poulin, 2007). While earlywork on TS discussed the emotionality of these relationships(Ankomah, 1992; Calves and Meekers, 1997; Meekers and Calves,1997; Orubuloye et al., 1992), attention then shifted to theheightened sexual risk this practice posed within the dominantbiomedical discourse on HIV transmission. More recently, led bycritical social science, there has been a resurgence of attention tolove and desire (Clark et al., 2010; Higgins et al., 2010; Padilla et al.,2008), including in accounts of TS (Bhana and Pattman, 2011; Coleand Thomas, 2009; Hunter, 2010; Mojola, 2014a). Some of this workfollows from broader analyses of the changing meaning of “mod-ern” relationships across different contexts in SSA. Globalizedideals and images of modern relationships have increasingly cometo emphasize romantic “companionate” relationships marked bydeep emotional bonds between individually chosen partners (Coleand Thomas, 2009; J. Ferguson, 1999; Hirsch et al., 2009).The “sex and material expressions of love” paradigm drawsattention to the centrality of gift exchange in romantic relation-ships, and emphasizes the expectation of a gendered ﬂow of re-sources from men to women. This paradigm adds to theunderstanding of TS in two important ways. First, it introduces thenotion that love and money are inextricably linked in romanticrelationships, including transactional relationships. Second, itK. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197190emphasizes the importance of widely held gender beliefs regardingthe role of men as providers of material support, and women ofreproductive labor, within heterosexual relationships.4.3.1. The intimacy of love and moneyStudies throughout the region emphasize the degree to whichlove and money are tightly intertwined in relationships (Mains,2013; Ethiopia; Mojola, 2014a; Kenya; Groes-Green, 2013;Mozambique; Bhana and Pattman, 2011; Hunter, 2010; South Af-rica; Maganja et al., 2007; Tanzania; Poulin, 2007; Malawi;Ankomah, 1992; Ghana). One university student in Kampala sum-marized this culturally obvious fact by asking: “How would I knowhe likes me if he does not buyme nice things?” (Hoeffnagel, 2012, p.35). In drawing on the work of economic sociologist Viviana Zelizer,Sanyu Mojola has argued this conﬂation also exists in theWest; thedifference, however, is in the West the relationship is activelydenieddmoney pollutes “pure love” (but buys it anyway) (Sanyu A.Mojola, 2014a). By contrast, in many contexts across SSAmoney is alanguage of love. In a paper from Tanzania the authors describehow the strongest indication of a committed partnerdafter will-ingness to visit her familydis that he offers gifts and materialsupport.The best way to show your love is to give presents. The biggerthe presents, the more the love (Female, FGD participant,Maganja et al., 2007, p. 978).The connection between love and money also exists in thoserelationships sometimes depicted as more instrumental orexploitative, such as intergenerational relationships. While someolder partners were described by women as “sugar-daddies” withwhom the only objective was to “eat their money,” economic andemotional support from older male partners was seen as nurturingin other relationships (Brouard and Crewe, 2012; Longﬁeld et al.,2004; Shefer and Strebel, 2012; Zembe et al., 2013).4.3.2. The importance of gendered provisionAcross most settings in SSA, women and men enter relation-ships with a set of “cultural prescriptions” that women are toprovide sex if men live up to their expected role as providers(Leclerc-Madlala, 2009). Under this paradigm, TS is an extension ofthis set of assumptions:In romantic relationships between men and women in much ofAfrica … each partner is expected to conform to a speciﬁcgender role that is deﬁned partially in terms of exchange. Theman provides material support, and the woman offers sex anddomestic services. (Mains, 2013, p. 343)Being a provider is central to dominant constructions of mas-culinitydthe real man is one who can provide for his loved ones,including, and perhaps especially, a girlfriend or spouse (Baba-Djara et al., 2013; Bandali, 2011; Bhana and Pattman, 2011;Hunter, 2005; Jewkes and Morrell, 2012; Morrell et al., 2012;Poulin, 2007; Stark, 2013; Swidler and Watkins, 2007). This pro-vision has been explained within the context of broader patron-client relations (Swidler and Watkins, 2007), and is also central toexpectations in young people's sexual relationships (Maticka-Tyndale et al., 2005; Nobelius et al., 2010; Orubuloye et al., 1992),regardless of the woman's own earning potential or income(Cornwall, 2002; Wamoyi et al., 2011).Economic re-structuring, however, has made it increasinglydifﬁcult for men to live up to provider role expectations (Hunter,2007; Muparamoto, 2012; Stark, 2013). Within contexts of bothincreased reliance on the market economy and rising economicuncertainty, there is an undercurrent of mutual suspicion betweenpartners. Men express uncertainty about whether women areinterested in them, or just their money (Boileau et al., 2008;Komba-Malekela and Liljestrom, 1994; McLean, 1995; Nnko andPool, 1997); they likewise admit that they sometimes makepromises they cannot keep in order to access sex (Dilger, 2003;Maganja et al., 2007; Maticka-Tyndale et al., 2005). Women, inturn, arewary of men's empty promises, and sometimes do attemptto extract as much as they can, “plucking their chickens” (Selikowet al., 2002; Nyanzi et al., 2001). Women and men furtheracknowledge that a woman may have to seek additional partners ifany one partner cannot adequately provide for her (Stark, 2013;Mojola, 2014a).The “sex and material expressions of love” paradigm empha-sizes how TS is rooted in the gendered expectation that men pro-vide material and ﬁnancial support. In addition, such provision isseen as being associated with, and/or deepening, emotional in-timacy. TS is thus an extension of expected exchange in intimaterelationships. While relevant to the other paradigms, this paradigmpoints toward the importance of addressing fundamental genderedbelief systems, especially those that position women as sexuallysubordinate to men who provide material support.5. Discussion and conclusion5.1. A framework for conceptualizing transactional sexThe “ideal-type” paradigms of TS can serve as a basis fordeveloping a uniﬁed conceptualization of TS, which in turn carriesimplications for deﬁnition and intervention efforts. Any one para-digm taken alone provides an incomplete view of the practice. Thisis particularly important to highlight given the dominance of thevulnerable victim perspective among programs and donors (Beneand Merten, 2008; Hawkins et al., 2009; Higgins et al., 2010;Tawﬁk and Watkins, 2007). We offer a conceptual framework thatuniﬁes these paradigms by highlighting a common set of broadstructural forces that shape each of them, and by introducing aseries of continua that stretch across them (see Fig. 1). Character-istics associated with each paradigm appear in boxes, positionedfrom more distal to more proximate. Three continua are shown asarrows that traverse the paradigms.The structural forces that shape TS include economic and socio-cultural processes of globalization and systems of genderinequality. Different aspects of globalization shape each of theseparadigms. Structural adjustment policies led to higher rates ofpoverty, and often gendered poverty, structuring “sex for basicneeds.” The liberalization of markets and increased exposure to andinﬂuence of Western ideals, particularly emergent youth cultureand corresponding lifestyles and identities attached to consumergoods, created new symbols of success, structuring “sex forimproved social status.” Finally, ongoing emphasis on male provi-sion both within and outside of marital relationships shapes “sexand material expressions of love.”Social dimensions of gender inequality stretch from the distal toproximate level, and apply to all paradigms, hence relevant char-acteristics are positionedwhere the paradigms overlap on Fig.1.Weemphasize that gender is a “multilevel system of difference andinequality … [that] involves cultural beliefs and distributions ofresources at the macro-level, patterns of behavior and organiza-tional practices at the interactional level, and selves and identitiesat the individual level” (Ridgeway and Correll, 2004, p. 510e511).On Fig. 1, at the distal level, gender inequality structures women'seconomic opportunities and constraints, and social norms aboutmale provision. Gender inequality is manifested at the moreK. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197 191proximate level through relationship power dynamics and indi-vidual attitudes and beliefs corresponding to the expression ofdifferent forms of masculinity and femininity.5.1.1. ContinuaThe nuance and complexity of transactional sexual relationshipsand the myriad motivations for its practice may be better repre-sented as continuadof Deprivation, Agency and Instrumentali-tydrather than discrete paradigms. Continua better convey thetremendous ambiguity noted in the meaning and motivation forexchange across contexts (Dilger, 2003; Luke, 2005b; Nyanzi et al.,2004; Nyanzi et al., 2001; Ranganathan, 2015).At the distal level is a continuum of deprivation that describesthe context withinwhich TS takes place or the extent to which TS isstructured by poverty (absolute deprivation) as compared to eco-nomic inequality (relative deprivation). Efforts to examine therelationship between socio-economic status and TS have hadmixed results (Chatterji et al., 2005; Hallman, 2004; Juma et al.,2013b; Moore et al., 2007), perhaps in part because the subjectiveexperience of deprivation may matter more than whether or not itis structured by absolute poverty. A deprivation continuum drawsattention to the fact that TS takes place across a range of socio-economic statuses, while also acknowledging that the rural poorare not isolated from the modern material world and its entice-ments (Wamoyi et al., 2011).The most recognized continuum within the literature on TS isthe degree of power or agency that women exhibit. This has beendescribed at times as a dichotomy between victim and agent, butalso as a “continuum of volition” (Weissman et al., 2006). Moststudies suggest women's position varies over time and betweenrelationships from the extremes of vulnerable victim to powerfulagent. While there is often an important connection between levelof deprivation and agency (Underwood et al., 2011), even in con-texts of rural poverty, women may demonstrate constrained or“thin” agency in their relationships (Bell, 2012) including partnerselection, the timing of ﬁrst sex, or relationship termination (Wightet al., 2006). Likewise, women's position and agency can varywithin a given relationship both over time and by area of decision-making, and signiﬁcantly, seems most compromised with respectto sexual decision-making (Jewkes and Morrell, 2012; Luke, 2003).Finally, girls' cognitive development trajectories must also beconsidereddgirls’ ability to make and act on informed choicestransforms with their biological age (Lansdown, 2005).The last continuum is instrumentality, or the extent to which arelationship is motivated by ﬁnancial or status motivations. Thiscontinuum is orthogonal to the others: the degree to which arelationship is motivated by instrumentality can vary indepen-dently of women's agency or the economic context in which therelationship takes place. TS occupies the middle space on a con-tinuum of instrumentality where the relationship ranges from be-ing minimally to mostly motivated by ﬁnancial or status gains.Crucially, in TS, instrumentality is often connected to emotionalintimacydas male provision is tied to love. That said, equatingprovision with love in all relationships would belie the ﬁndingsfrom many studies. As is the case with agency, it's important toacknowledge the extent to which both instrumentality andemotionality may vary by relationship and over time.This conceptual framework can be used to direct research. Itdemonstrates that TS can take place across socio-economic con-texts, for a range of reasons. Rather than address whether TS isFig. 1. Conceptualizing transactional sex in sub-Saharan Africa.K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197192inﬂuenced by wealth or education, it may be more important toconsider how TS can lead to risk in different contexts. The frame-work raises the importance of addressing the social dimensions ofgender inequality in TS including the dynamics of women's agencyin these relationships and associated male-provision norms, andindividual gendered attitudes. Continua direct operationalization ofcomposite measures to capture nuance in agency, motivation, andhow these intersect with context. Together, these measures cancapture multi-level inﬂuences on HIV risk through TS.5.1.2. Fuzzy boundariesThe conceptual framework provides needed nuance, but in do-ing so introduces a number of questions regarding the boundariesof TS, including: “Where is sex work?” and “What about marriage?”Unlike TS, sex work does not follow from expectations of maleprovision in romantic relationships; rather, it is a representation of“commodity exchange” (Luke, 2005b). Sex work (SW) can beimagined outside Fig. 1 extending from the top of the instrumen-tality continuum. In sex work, exchange is explicit and sex imme-diately remunerated. In TS, provision may precede or follow sex byan undeﬁned period of time; and is not necessarily tied directly tosex (Gilbert and Selikow, 2011). Sex workers self-identify as such,and deﬁne their partners as clients, at least initially; while in TSrelationships, partners are generally described as boyfriends/girl-friends or lovers (Hunter, 2002).The boundary between TS and SW is fuzzy, however. Some veryshort-term exchange relationships, such as those forged in bars,occupy that messy space between SW and TS (Lees et al., 2009;Wojcicki, 2002a). Women who practice TS motivated almostexclusively by material gain walk a ﬁne line; if they fail to managetheir identity, rely too heavily for too long on such relationships, ordo not marry by an appropriate age, they may transition into SW(Cole, 2004; Fielding-Miller et al., 2016a). Such transitions arerarely discussed in the social science TS literature, however, whichinstead tends to emphasize the extent to which exchangeembedded in relationships is constructed outside of SW.We would not deny that TS and marriage share many similar-ities: the exchange relationships we describe extend from expec-tations tied to union formation (bride wealth payments, wives andhusband's respective roles including provision); however, we donot conceptualize TS as inclusive of marriage. “Marriage,” be itcustomary or civil, is a formally recognized social institution in-clusive of expectations of life-long commitment between spouses,often involving (or serving to facilitate) childbearing and rearing.And despite shifts toward more “companionate” marriage in SSA,marriage continues to signify a union of (and corresponding com-mitments to) kin groups (J. Ferguson,1999; Parikh, 2009; D.J. Smith,2009). While in both marriage and TS there is a connection be-tween love and money, in TS, the terms and products of exchangeare more often controlled by the individual members of a couple;therefore, in TS, if expectations are not met, relationships may bemore easily terminated. We would argue that the duration andnature of socially-regulated commitment distinguishes marriagefrom transactional sex; and, importantly, does not necessitate thatthese relationships differ by levels of emotionality.Finally, and most challenging, is differentiating TS from all othernon-marital, noncommercial relationships. While love and moneyare entwined, in most TS studies participants suggest some of theirrelationships aremore stronglymotivated by exchange than others.To suggest that TS equates to any relationship that includes ex-change may cast too wide a net and render operationalizationunhelpful for understanding how TS increases HIV risk. Therefore,in order to distinguish TS from all other non-marital romantic/sexual relationships, we suggest that TS relationships are those thatare not just characterized by exchange, butmotivated by it. Together,these boundary-establishing criteria result in the following oper-ational deﬁnition of TS: noncommercial, non-marital sexual re-lationships motivated by the implicit assumption that sex will beexchanged for material support or other beneﬁts. Such a deﬁnitiondoes not, in any way, deny the importance of emotionality intransactional sex, it does, however, emphasize the presence ofinstrumentality.5.2. Implications for interventionWhile it is out of the scope of this paper to present a formalreview of interventions that have addressed TS, it is important toconsider the implications of the conceptual framework for inter-vention efforts concerned with HIV risk through TS for youngwomen. To date, the framing of young women's risk of HIV hasremained ﬁrmly planted in the vulnerability paradigm, and thisextends to TS. An example of this is captured in the followingexcerpt providing programming recommendations for adolescentgirls from the UNAIDS Taskforce for Southern Africa:Create awareness campaigns on the inappropriate, abusive andoften illegal character of relationships between older men andteenage girls, promoting the shaming of ‘sugar daddies’ whileprotecting the identities of the girls and reafﬁrmingmenwho donot engage in such practices … (United Nations Secretary-General's Task Force on Women, 2004, p. 28).Interventions that shame men who have sexual relationshipswith younger women have been pursued in a number of contextsacross southern and eastern Africa (Brouard and Crewe, 2012;Fleshman, 2004; Hope, 2007; M. Kaufman et al., 2013; M.Kaufman et al., 2016; van der Heijden and Swartz, 2014). Yet, somehave suggested that strategies that stigmatize either male or femaleparticipants in TS may do more harm than good (Brouard andCrewe, 2012; van der Heijden and Swartz, 2014; Weissman et al.,2006). Our review questions whether women and men see them-selves in the “characters” portrayed by these strategies (Brouardand Crewe, 2012; Longﬁeld et al., 2004; Zembe et al., 2013). Theliterature highlights how young women may pursue older men,rather than the reverse, and suggests that these relationships donot always reﬂect a perpetrator-victim dynamic (Potgieter et al.,2012; Shefer and Strebel, 2012). While age-disparate relationshipscan be coercive and violent, they can also, alternatively, benurturing and caring (Meekers and Calves,1997; Shefer and Strebel,2012; Zembe et al., 2013). Likewise, older partners are arguablymore marriageable; better able to support the girl and any childrenthat might result from the relationship (Luke, 2003), and thewealthiest of these partners may be more likely to use protection(Luke, 2008). Therefore, stigmatizing all such relationships may becounterproductive to efforts to improve young women's lives.Similarly, our review suggests that by overlooking agency, as-pirations, and love within the context of TS, interventions to reducerisk of HIV through TS may fall short. For young women, bothperceived agency and aspirations for social mobility through thepursuit of “commodities of modernity” must be seriouslyacknowledged (Leclerc-Madlala, 2008). Our review suggests it maybe important to recognize young women's understanding of theirposition in these relationships. In addition, it may be important toencourage young women to then critically assess their agency, inparticular when and how it may give way to unwanted actions oroutcomes (van der Heijden and Swartz, 2014).In contexts where TS is highly aspirational, taking youngwomenand men through a critical assessment of global marketing,consumerism, and the “costs” of using TS as a peer approval orK. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197 193social mobility strategy may be valuable additions to interventionapproaches. With rising aspirations increasingly benchmarked tothe global-middle class, small microﬁnance loans (e.g., Dunbaret al., 2014) or modest cash transfer programs (e.g., Pettifor, 2015)addressing poverty alleviation may not be effective in reducing therisk of HIV through TS for women in less impoverished contexts.Gender expectations concerning male provision were central toall of the paradigms. The reproduction and reiﬁcation of these ex-pectations stands to hurt both women, who may then be less likelyto seek ﬁnancial independence, andmen, who increasingly struggleto meet such expectations. Interventions that aim for genderequitable relationships are an important starting point, especiallythose that include men (Dworkin et al., 2013; Jewkes et al., 2006;Kyegombe et al., 2014). Interventions addressing TS, speciﬁcally,should critically address, among both young women and men,gendered expectations of male provision and what it “buys” men inreturn. Programs that take on both gender beliefs and expectationsalongside economic opportunities for women may be promising(Dunbar et al., 2014; Jewkes and Morrell, 2012), especially ifappropriately tailored to the socio-economic context and partici-pants' level of human capital.Finally, the linkages between provision and love may increasewomen's (and men's) risk as condom use is affected by notions ofintimacy and trust (Clark et al., 2010; Luke et al., 2011; Manuel,2005; Stoebenau et al., 2009). However, interventions may beable to draw on emotionality in TS relationships to encourageemotional support and caring (including for a partner's health, e.g.,through HIV testing) in addition to material support.In conclusion, in this review we draw attention to the multiple,overlapping contexts and motivations for TS and argue that thesenot be oversimpliﬁed into a unidimensional portrayal. Womenshould not be reduced to helpless victims, nor to immoral socialclimbers. Understanding the range of inﬂuences that shape TSwithin overarching systems of gendered social and economic in-equalities can ensure that research toward understanding whenand how TS imparts risk, and efforts to intervene on that pathway,will conceptualize TS accurately and with adequate complexity.AcknowledgementsThe study was made possible by support from the STRIVEresearch consortium program, funded by UKAid from the Depart-ment of International Development (DFID). However, the viewsexpressed do not necessarily reﬂect the department's ofﬁcial pol-icies. The authors would like to thank Kirsty Sievwright for herskillful research assistance in coding textual data; and SanyuMojola as well as fellow colleagues within the STRIVE WorkingGroup on Transactional Sex and HIV for their insights and fruitfuldiscussions on earlier drafts of this work. We would also like tothank the members of the STRIVE research consortium, the UNAIDSPrevention Division, and the Center on Health, Risk and Society atAmerican University for constructive feedback on earlier pre-sentations of this material. We thank Jane Shepherd and AnnieHolmes for their expertise in the rendering of Fig. 1. Finally, wemust extend an extremely heartfelt thanks to the incrediblythoughtful anonymous reviewers of this manuscript whoseconstructive criticism strengthened this paper in numerous ways.Appendix A. Supplementary dataSupplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.09.023.ReferencesAdudans, M.K., Montandon, M., Kwena, Z., Bukusi, E.A., Cohen, C.R., 2011. Prevalenceof forced sex and associated factors among women and men in Kisumu, Kenya.Afr. J. Reprod. Health 15, 87.Albertyn, C., 2003. Contesting democracy: HIV/AIDS and the achievement of genderequality in South Africa. Fem. Stud. 29, 595e615.Amo-Adjei, J., Kumi-Kyereme, A., Anamaale Tuoyire, D., 2014. Transactional sexamong female university students in Ghana: implications for HIV education.Health Educ. 114, 473e486.Ankomah, A., 1992. Premarital sexual relationships in Ghana in the era of AIDS.Health Policy Plan. 7, 135e143.Baba-Djara, M., Brennan, A., Corneliess, C., Agyarko-Poku, T., Akuoko, K.,Opoku, K.B., et al., 2013. “Using what You Have to Get what You Want”:Vulnerability to HIV and Prevention Needs of Female Post-secondary StudentsEngaged in Transactional Sex in Kumasi, Ghana a Qualitative Study. MARP -Orientated New Innovations for Research (MONITOR) Program - USAID, Boston.Bajaj, M., 2009. Sugar daddies and the danger of sugar: cross-generational re-lationships, HIV/AIDS, and secondary schooling in Zambia. Int. Perspect. Educ.Soc. 10, 123e143.Bandali, S., 2011. Exchange of sex for resources: HIV risk and gender norms in CaboDelgado, Mozambique. Cult. Health & Sex. 13, 575e588.Barnett, J.P., Maticka-Tyndale, E., the HP4RY team, 2011. The gift of agency: sexualexchange scripts among Nigerian youth. J. Sex Res. 48, 349e359.Bell, S.A., 2012. Young people and sexual agency in rural Uganda. Cult. Health & Sex.14, 283e296.Bene, C., Merten, S., 2008. Women and ﬁsh-for-sex: transactional sex, HIV/AIDS andgender in African ﬁsheries. World Dev. 36, 875e899.Bhana, D., Pattman, R., 2011. Girls want money, boys want virgins: the materiality oflove amongst South African township youth in the context of HIV and AIDS.Cult. Health & Sex. 1.Bohmer, L., Kirumbira, E., 2000. Socio-economic context and the sexual behaviourof Ugandan out of school youth. Cult. Health & Sex. 2, 269e285.Boileau, C., Vissandjee, B., Nguyen, V.K., Rashed, S., Sylla, M., Zunzunegui, M.V.,2008. Gender dynamics and sexual norms among youth in Mali in the contextof HIV/AIDS prevention. Afr. J. Reprod. Health 12.Brouard, P., Crewe, M., 2012. Sweetening the deal? Sugar daddies, sugar mummies,sugar babies and HIV in contemporary South Africa. Agenda 26, 48e56.Bryceson, D.F., Fonseca, J., 2006. Risking death for survival: peasant responses tohunger and HIV/AIDS in Malawi. World Dev. 34, 1654e1666.Caldwell, J.C., Caldwell, P., Quiggan, P., 1989. The social context of AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa. Popul. Dev. Rev. 15, 185e234.Calves, A.E., Meekers, D., 1997. Gender Differentials in Premarital Sex Condom Useand Abortion: a Case Study of Yaounde Cameroon (Washington DC).Camlin, C.S., Kwena, Z.A., Dworkin, S.L., 2013. Jaboya vs. jakambi: status, negotia-tion, and HIV risks among female migrants in the 'sex for ﬁsh' economy inNyanza Province, Kenya. AIDS Educ. Prev. Off. Publ. Int. Soc. AIDS Educ. 25, 216.Casale, M., Rogan, M., Hynie, M., Flicker, S., Nixon, S., Rubincam, C., 2011. Genderedperceptions of HIV risk among young women and men in a high-HIV-prevalence setting. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 10, 301e310.Chatterji, M., Murray, N., London, D., Anglewicz, P., 2005. The factors inﬂuencingtransactional sex among young men and women in 12 sub-Saharan Africancountries. Biodemogr. Soc. Biol. 52, 56e72.Choudhry, V., Agardh, A., Stafstrom, M., Ostergren, P.O., 2014. Patterns of alcoholconsumption and risky sexual behavior: a cross-sectional study among Ugan-dan university students. BMC Public Health 14, 128.Clark, S., Kabiru, C., Mathur, R., 2010. Relationship transitions among youth in urbanKenya. J. Marriage Fam. 72, 73e88.Cluver, L., Orkin, M., Boyes, M., Gardner, F., Meinck, F., 2011. Transactional sexamongst AIDS-orphaned and AIDS-affected adolescents predicted by abuse andextreme poverty. J. Acquir. Immune Deﬁc. Syndr. 58, 336e343.Cockcroft, A., Kunda, J.L., Kgakole, L., Masisi, M., Laetsang, D., Ho-Foster, A., et al.,2010. Community views of inter-generational sex: ﬁndings from focus groups inBotswana, Namibia and Swaziland. Psychol. Health & Med. 15, 507e514.Cole, J., 2004. Fresh contact in Tamatave, Madagascar: sex, money, and intergen-erational transformation. Am. Ethnol. 31, 573e588.Cole, J., Thomas, L.M., 2009. Love in Africa. University of Chicago Press.Connell, R., 1987. Gender and Power. Polity Press.Cornwall, A., 2002. Spending power: love, money, and the reconﬁguration of genderrelations in Ado-Odo, southwestern Nigeria. Am. Ethnol. 29, 963e980.Dahn, K., 2008. Sex and bribery for better grades: academic dishonesty in Liberia.J. Philos. Hist. Educ. 58, 46.Darabi, L., Bankole, A., Serumaga, S., Neema, S., Kibombo, R., 2008. Protecting theNext Generation in Uganda: New Evidence on Adolescent Sexual and Repro-ductive Health Needs (New York).Day, S., 1988. Prostitute women and AIDS: anthropology. AIDS 2, 421e428.de Zalduondo, B., 1991. Prostitution viewed cross-culturally: toward recontextual-izing sex work in AIDS intervention research. J. Sex Res. 28, 223e248.Dilger, H., 2003. Sexuality, AIDS, and the lures of modernity: reﬂexivity and moralityamong young people in Rural Tanzania. Med. Anthropol. Cross Cult. Stud.Health Illn. 22, 23e52.Dube, L., 1997. AIDS-risk patterns and knowledge of the disease among streetchildren in Harare, Zimbabwe. J. Soc. Dev. Afr. 12, 61e73.Dunbar, M.S., Dufour, M.-S.K., Lambdin, B., Mudekunye-Mahaka, I., Nhamo, D.,K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197194Padian, N.S., 2014. The SHAZ! project: results from a pilot randomized trial of astructural intervention to prevent HIV among adolescent women in Zimbabwe.PLoS One 9, e113621.Dunkle, K.L., Jewkes, R., Nduna, M., Jama, N., Levin, J., Sikweyiya, Y., et al., 2007.Transactional sex with casual and main partners among young South Africanmen in the rural Eastern Cape: prevalence, predictors, and associations withgender-based violence. Soc. Sci. Med. 65, 1235e1248.Dunkle, K.L., Jewkes, R.K., Brown, H.C., Gray, G.E., McIntryre, J.A., Harlow, S.D.,2004a. Transactional sex among women in Soweto, South Africa: prevalence,risk factors and association with HIV infection. Soc. Sci. Med. 59, 1581e1592.Dunkle, K.L., Jewkes, R.K., Brown, H.C., Gray, G.E., McIntyre, J.A., Harlow, S.D., 2004b.Gender-based violence, relationship power, and risk of HIV infection in womenattending antenatal clinics in South Africa. Lancet 363, 1415e1421.Dworkin, S.L., Treves-Kagan, S., Lippman, S.A., 2013. Gender-transformative in-terventions to reduce HIV risks and violence with heterosexually-active men: areview of the global evidence. AIDS Behav. 17, 2845e2863.Evans, R., 2002. Poverty, HIV, and barriers to education: street children's experi-ences in Tanzania. Gend. Dev. 10, 51e62.Ferguson, A.G., Morris, C.N., 2007. Mapping transactional sex on the NorthernCorridor highway in Kenya. Health & Place 13, 504e519.Ferguson, J., 1999. Expectations of Modernity: Myths and Meanings of Urban Life onthe Zambian Copperbelt. Univ of California Press.Fielding-Miller, R., Dunkle, K.L., Cooper, H.L., Windle, M., Hadley, C., 2016a. Culturalconsensus modeling to measure transactional sex in Swaziland: scale buildingand validation. Soc. Sci. Med. 148, 25e33.Fielding-Miller, R., Dunkle, K.L., Jama-Shai, N., Windle, M., Hadley, C., Cooper, H.L.,2016b. The feminine ideal and transactional sex: navigating respectability andrisk in Swaziland. Soc. Sci. Med. 158, 24e33.Fitzgerald-Husek, A., Martiniuk, A.L., Hinchcliff, R., Aochamus, C.E., Lee, R.B., 2011. “Ido what I have to do to survive”: an investigation into the perceptions, expe-riences and economic considerations of women engaged in sex work inNorthern Namibia. BMC Women's Health 11.Fleshman, M., 2004. Women: the face of AIDS in Africa. More action Needed AgainstHigh. Female Infect. Rates. Afr. Renew. 18, 6.Fox, A.M., 2012. The HIVpoverty thesis re-examined: poverty, wealth or inequalityas a social determinant of hiv infection in sub-Saharan Africa? J. Biosoc. Sci. 44,459e480.Gbalajobi, T., 2010. Constructing Sexual Identities within “sugar Daddy” Relation-ships: a Case Study of Sexuality Constructs Among Students at the University ofthe Witwatersrand. University of the Witwatersrand, Dept. of Anthropology,Johannesburg.Gilbert, L., Selikow, T.-A., 2011. 'The epidemic in this country has the face of awoman': gender and HIV/AIDS in South Africa. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 10, 325e334.Graham, S.M., Raboud, J., Jaoko, W., Mandaliya, K., McClelland, R.S., Bayoumi, A.M.,2014. Changes in sexual risk behavior in the Mombasa cohort: 1993-2007. PlosOne 9.Groes-Green, C., 2013. “To put men in a bottle”: eroticism, kinship, female power,and transactional sex in Maputo, Mozambique. Am. Ethnol. 40, 102e117.Gukurume, S., 2011. Transactional sex and politics of the belly at tertiary educa-tional institutions in the era of HIV and AIDS: a case study of Great ZimbabweUniversity and Masvingo Polytechnical College. J. Sustain. Dev. Afr. 13.Hallman, K., 2004. Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Unsafe Sexual BehaviorsAmong Young Women and Men in South Africa. Policy Research Division, NewYork.Hawkins, K., Price, N., Mussa, F., 2009. Milking the cow: young women's con-struction of identity and risk in age-disparate transactional sexual relationshipsin Maputo, Mozambique. Glob. Public Health 4, 169e182.Higgins, J.A., Hoffman, S., Dworkin, S.L., 2010. Rethinking gender, heterosexual men,and women's vulnerability to HIV/AIDS. Am. J. Public Health 100, 435.Hirsch, J.S., Wardlow, H., Smith, D.J., Phinney, H., Parikh, S., Nathanson, C.A., 2009.The Secret: Love, Marriage, and HIV. vanderbilt university Press, Nashville.Hoeffnagel, L.M., 2012. Something for Something: Understanding Transactional SexAmong Campus Girls in Kampala. Utrecht University, Dept. of CulturalAnthropology.Hope, R., 2007. Addressing Cross-generational Sex: a Desk Review of Research andPrograms (Washington, DC).Hunter, M., 2002. The Materiality of everyday sex: thinking beyond 'prostitution'.Afr. Stud. 61, 99e120.Hunter, M., 2005. Cultural politics and masculinities: multiple-partners in historicalperspective in KwaZulu-Natal. Cult. Health Sex. 7, 209e223.Hunter, M., 2007. The changing political economy of sex in South Africa: the sig-niﬁcance of unemployment and inequalities to the scale of the AIDS pandemic.Soc. Sci. Med. 64, 689e700.Hunter, M., 2010. Love in the Time of AIDS: Inequality, Gender, and Rights in SouthAfrica. Indiana University Press.Jewkes, R., Dunkle, K.L., Nduna, M., Shai, N.J., 2012a. Transactional Sex and HIVincidence in a cohort of young women in the stepping stones trial. J. AIDS Clin.Res. 3 (5).Jewkes, R., Morrell, R., 2012. Sexuality and the limits of agency among South Africanteenage women: theorising femininities and their connections to HIV riskpractises. Soc. Sci. Med. 74, 1729e1737.Jewkes, R., Morrell, R., Sikweyiya, Y., Dunkle, K., Penn-Kekana, L., 2012b. Men,prostitution and the provider role: understanding the intersections of economicexchange, sex, crime and violence in South Africa. PLoS One 7, e40821.Jewkes, R., Nduna, M., Levin, J., Jama, N., Dunkle, K., Khuzwayo, N., et al., 2006.A cluster randomized-controlled trial to determine the effectiveness of Step-ping Stones in preventing HIV infections and promoting safer sexual behaviouramongst youth in the rural Eastern Cape, South Africa: trial design, methodsand baseline ﬁndings. Trop. Med. Int. Health 11, 3e16.Jewkes, R.K., 2006. Factors associated with HIV Sero-status in young rural SouthAfrican Women: connections between intimate partner violence and HIV. Int. J.Epidemiol. 35 (6), 1461e1468.Jones, S., Norton, B., 2007. On the limits of sexual health literacy: insights fromUgandan schoolgirls. Diaspora, Indig. Minor. Educ. 1, 285e305.Juma, M., Alaii, J., Bartholomew, L.K., Askew, I., Van den Born, B., 2013a. Under-standing orphan and non-orphan adolescents' sexual risks in the context ofpoverty: a qualitative study in Nyanza Province, Kenya. BMC Int. Health Hum.Rights 13, 32.Juma, M., Alaii, J., Bartholomew, L.K., Askew, I., van den Borne, B., 2013b. Riskysexual behavior among orphan and non-orphan adolescents in Nyanza Prov-ince, western Kenya. AIDS Behav. 17, 951e960.Kalichman, S.C., Simbayi, L.C., 2004. Sexual assault history and risks for sexuallytransmitted infections among women in an African township in Cape Town,South Africa. AIDS Care 16, 681e689.Kaufman, C.E., Stavrou, S.E., 2004. 'Bus fare please': the economics of sex and giftsamong young people in urban South Africa. Cult. Health & Sex. 6, 377e391.Kaufman, M.R., Mooney, A., Kamala, B., Modarres, N., Karam, R., Ng’wanansabi, D.,2013. Effects of the Fataki campaign: addressing cross-generational sex inTanzania by mobilizing communities to intervene. AIDS Behav. 17, 2053e2062.Kaufman, M.R., Tsang, S.W., Mooney, A., McCartney-Melstad, A., Mushi, A.K.,Kamala, B., 2016. “Protect your loved ones from fataki” Discouraging cross-generational sex in Tanzania. Qual. Health Res. 26 (7), 994e1004.Kher, A., 2008. Review of Social Science Literature on Risk and Vulnerability to HIV/AIDS Among Fishing Communities in Sub-Saharan Africa (Penang, Malaysia).Kim, J.C., Pronyk, P., Barnett, T., Watts, C., 2008. Exploring the role of economicempowerment in HIV prevention. AIDS 22, S57eS71.Komba-Malekela, B., Liljestrom, R., 1994. Looking for men. In: Tumbo-Masabo, Lil-jestrom (Eds.), Chelewa, Chelewa: the Dilemma of Teenage Girls. The Scandi-navian Institute of African Studies, Sweden, pp. 133e149.Kuate-Defo, B., 2004. Young people's relationships with sugar daddies and sugarmummies: what do we know and what do we need to know? Afr. J. Reprod.Health 8, 13e37.Kwena, Z.A., Bukusi, E., Omondi, E., Ng'ayo, M., Holmes, K.K., 2012. Transactional sexin the ﬁshing communities along Lake Victoria, Kenya: a catalyst for the spreadof HIV. Ajar-African J. Aids Res. 11, 9e15.Kyegombe, N., Starmann, E., Devries, K.M., Michau, L., Nakuti, J., Musuya, T., et al.,2014. SASA! is the medicine that treats violence”. Qualitative ﬁndings on how acommunity mobilisation intervention to prevent violence against womencreated change in Kampala, Uganda. Glob. Health Action 7.Lansdown, G., 2005. The Evolving Capacities of the Child. UNICEF Innocenti,Florence.Leach, F., Fiscian, V., Kadzamira, E., Lemani, E., Machakanja, P., 2003. An Investiga-tive Study of the Abuse of Girls in African Schools (London).Leclerc-Madlala, S., 2003. Transactional sex and the pursuit of modernity. Soc.Dynamics A J. Centre Afr. Stud. Univ. Cape Town 29, 213e233.Leclerc-Madlala, S., 2008. Age-disparate and intergenerational sex in southern Af-rica: the dynamics of hypervulnerability. AIDS 22, S17eS25.Leclerc-Madlala, S., 2009. Cultural scripts for multiple and concurrent partnershipsin southern Africa: why HIV prevention needs anthropology. Sex. Health 6,103e110.Lees, S., Desmond, N., Allen, C., Bugeke, G., Vallely, A., Ross, D., 2009. Sexual riskbehaviour for women working in recreational venues in Mwanza, Tanzania:considerations for the acceptability and use of vaginal microbicide gels. Cult.Health & Sex. 11, 581e595.Longﬁeld, K., Glick, A., Waithaka, M., Berman, J., 2004. Relationships between oldermen and younger women: implications for STIs/HIV in Kenya. Stud. Fam. Plan.35, 125e134.Luke, N., 2003. Age and economic asymmetries in the sexual relationships ofadolescent girls in Sub-Saharan Africa. Stud. Fam. Plan. 34, 67e86.Luke, N., 2005a. Confronting the 'sugar daddy' stereotype: age and economicasymmetries and risky sexual behavior in urban Kenya. Int. Fam. Plan. Perspect.31, 6e14.Luke, N., 2005b. Investigating exchange in sexual relationships in sub-Saharan Af-rica using survey data. In: Jejeebhoy, S., Shah, I., Thapa, S. (Eds.), Sex withoutConsent: Young People in Developing Countries. Zed Books, London,pp. 105e124.Luke, N., Goldberg, R.E., Mberu, B.U., Zulu, E.M., 2011. Social exchange and sexualbehavior in young women's premarital relationships in Kenya. J. Marriage Fam.73, 1048e1064.Lungu, A., Husken, S.M.C., 2010. Assessment of Access to Health Services and Vul-nerabilities of Female Fish Traders in the Kafue Flats (Zambia: analysis report.Zambia).Mac Domhnaill, B., Hutchinson, G., Milev, A., Milev, Y., 2011. The social context ofschoolgirl pregnancy in Ghana. Vulnerable Child. Youth Stud. 6, 201e207.MacPherson, E.E., Sadalaki, J., Njoloma, M., Nyongopa, V., Nkhwazi, L., Mwapasa, V.,et al., 2012. Transactional sex and HIV: understanding the gendered structuraldrivers of HIV in ﬁshing communities in Southern Malawi. J. Int. AIDS Soc. 15(Suppl. 1).Maganja, R.K., Maman, S., Groves, A., Mbwambo, J.K., 2007. Skinning the goat andpulling the load: transactional sex among youth in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197 195Aids Care Psychol. Socio Medical Aspects Aids/Hiv 19, 974e981.Mains, D., 2013. Friends and money: Balancing affection and reciprocity amongyoung men in urban Ethiopia. Am. Ethnol. 40, 335e346.Manuel, S., 2005. Obstacles to condom use among secondary school students inMaputo City, Mozambique. Cult. Health Sex. 7, 293e302.Masvawure, T., 2010. “I just need to be ﬂashy on campus”: female students andtransactional sex at a university in Zimbabwe. Cult. Health & Sex. 12, 857e870.Masvawure, T.B., 2011. The role of pimping” in the mediation of transactional sex ata university campus in Zimbabwe. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 10, 165e171.Maticka-Tyndale, E., Gallant, M., BrouillardCoyle, C., Holland, D., Metcalfe, K.,Wildish, J., et al., 2005. The sexual scripts of Kenyan young people and HIVprevention. Cult. Health & Sex. 7, 27e41.McCleary-Sills, J., Douglas, Z., Rwehumbiza, A., Hamisi, A., Mabala, R., 2013.Gendered norms, sexual exploitation and adolescent pregnancy in ruralTanzania. Reprod. Health Matters 21, 97e105.McCoy, S.I., Ralph, L.J., Njau, P.F., Msolla, M.M., Padian, N.S., 2014. Food insecurity,socioeconomic status, and HIV-related risk behavior among women in farminghouseholds in Tanzania. AIDS Behav. 18, 1224e1236.McLean, P.E., 1995. Sexual behaviors and attitudes of high school students in theKingdom of Swaziland. J. Adolesc. Res. 10, 400e420.Meekers, D., Calves, A.E., 1997. 'Main' girlfriends, girlfriends, marriage, and money:the social context of HIV risk behaviour in Sub-Saharan Africa. Health Transit.Rev. 7, 361e375.Merten, S., Haller, T., 2007. Culture, changing livelihoods, and HIV/AIDS discourse:reframing the institutionalization of ﬁsh-for-sex exchange in the Zambian KafueFlats. Cult. Health & Sex. 9, 69e83.Mill, J.E., Anarﬁ, J.K., 2002. HIV risk environment for Ghanaian women: challengesto prevention. Soc. Sci. Med. 54, 325e337.Mojola, S.A., 2011. Fishing in dangerous waters: ecology, gender and economy inHIV risk. Soc. Sci. Med. 72, 149e156.Mojola, S.A., 2014a. Love, Money, and HIV: Becoming a Modern African Woman inthe Age of AIDS. Univ of California Press.Mojola, S.A., 2014b. Providing women, kept men: doing masculinity in the wake ofthe African HIV/AIDS epidemic. Signs 39, 341.Moore, A.M., Biddlecom, A.E., Zulu, E.M., 2007. Prevalence and meanings of ex-change of money or gifts for sex in unmarried adolescent sexual relationships insub-Saharan Africa: original research article. Afr. J. Reprod. Health 11, 44e61.Morley, L., 2011. Sex, grades and power in higher education in Ghana and Tanzania.Camb. J. Educ. 41, 101e115.Morojele, N.K., Kachieng'a, M.A., Mokoko, E., Nkoko, M.A., Parry, C.D.,Nkowane, A.M., et al., 2006. Alcohol use and sexual behaviour among riskydrinkers and bar and shebeen patrons in Gauteng province, South Africa. Soc.Sci. Med. 62, 217e227.Morrell, R., Jewkes, R., Lindegger, G., 2012. Hegemonic Masculinity/masculinities inSouth Africa: Culture, Power, and Gender Politics. Men and Masculinities.Mosavel, M., Ahmed, R., Simon, C., 2012. Perceptions of gender-based violenceamong South African youth: implications for health promotion interventions.Health Promot. Int. 27, 323e330.Muhwezi, W.W., Kinyanda, E., Mungherera, M., Onyango, P., Ngabirano, E., Muron, J.,et al., 2011. Vulnerability to high risk sexual behaviour (HRSB) followingexposure to war trauma as seen in post-conﬂict communities in easternUganda: a qualitative study. Conﬂ. Health 5, 22.Muparamoto, N., 2012. Trophy-hunting scripts” among male university students inZimbabwe. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 11, 319e326.Nagoli, J., Holvoet, K., Remme, M., 2010. HIV and AIDS vulnerability in ﬁshingcommunities in Mangochi district, Malawi. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 9, 71e80.Neema, S., Moore, A.M., Kibombo, R., 2007. Qualitative Evidence of Adolescents'Sexual and Reproductive Health. Experiences in Uganda, New York.Njue, C., Voeten, H.A.C.M., Remes, P., 2011. Porn video shows, local brew, andtransactional sex: HIV risk among youth in Kisumu, Kenya. Bmc Public Health11.Nnko, S., Pool, R., 1997. Sexual Discourse in the context of AIDS: dominant themeson adolescent sexuality among primary school pupils in Magu District,Tanzania. Health Transit. Rev. 7, 85e90.Nobelius, A.M., Kalina, B., Pool, R., Whitworth, J., Chesters, J., Power, R., 2010.Delaying sexual debut amongst out-of-school youth in rural southwest Uganda.Cult. Health & Sex. 12, 663e676.Norris, A.H., Kitali, A.J., Worby, E., 2009. Alcohol and transactional sex: how risky isthe mix? Soc. Sci. Med. 69, 1167e1176.Nyanzi, S., Nyanzi, B., Kalina, B., Pool, R., 2004. Mobility, sexual networks and ex-change among bodabodamen in southwest Uganda. Cult. Health & Sex. 6,239e254.Nyanzi, S., Pool, R., Kinsman, J., 2001. The negotiation of sexual relationships amongschool pupils in south-western Uganda. AIDS Care 13, 83e98.Okigbo, C.C., McCarraher, D.R., Chen, M., Pack, A., 2014. Risk factors for transactionalsex among young females in post-conﬂict Liberia. Afr. J. Reprod. Health 18,133e141.Orubuloye, I.O., Caldwell, J.C., Caldwell, P., 1992. Diffusion and focus in sexualnetworking: identifying partners and partners' partners. Stud. Fam. Plan. 23,343e351.Padilla, M.B., Hirsch, J.S., Munoz-Laboy, M., Parker, R.G., Sember, R., 2008. Love andGlobalization: Transformations of Intimacy in the Contemporary World. Van-derbilt University Press.Parikh, S., 2009. Going Public: modern wives, men's inﬁdelity and marriage in east-central Uganda. In: Hirsch, J.S., Wardlow, H., Smith, D.J., Phinney, H., Parikh, S.,Nathanson, C.A. (Eds.), The Secret: Love, Marriage, and HIV. Vanderbilt Uni-versity Press, Nashville, pp. 168e196.Pascoe, S.J., Langhaug, L.F., Mavhu, W., Hargreaves, J., Jaffar, S., Hayes, R., et al., 2015.Poverty, food insufﬁciency and HIV infection and sexual behaviour amongyoung rural Zimbabwean women. PloS One 10, e0115290.Petersen, I., Bhana, A., McKay, M., 2005. Sexual violence and youth in South Africa:the need for community-based prevention interventions. Child Abuse Negl. 29,1233e1248.Pettifor, A., 2015. HIV Prevention for Young South African Women: Lessons fromSwa-Koteka. STRIVE Learning Lab webinar. November 30, 2015. http://strive.lshtm.ac.uk/resources/hiv-prevention-young-south-african-women-lessons-swa-koteka-audrey-pettifor.Phillips-Howard, P.A., Otieno, G., Burmen, B., Otieno, F., Odongo, F., Odour, C., et al.,2015. Menstrual needs and associations with sexual and reproductive risks inrural Kenyan females: a cross-sectional behavioral survey linked with HIVprevalence. J. Women's Health 24, 801e811.Plummer, F.A., Nagelkerke, N.J.D., Moses, S., Ndinya-Achola, J.O., Bwayo, J., Ngugi, E.,1991. The importance of core groups in the epidemiology and control of HIV-1infection. AIDS 5 (Suppl. l), 169e176.Potgieter, C., Strebel, A., Shefer, T., Wagner, C., 2012. Taxi “sugar daddies and taxiqueens”: male taxi driver attitudes regarding transactional relationships in theWestern Cape, South Africa. SAHARA-J J. Soc. Aspects HIV/AIDS 9, 192e199.Poulin, M., 2007. Sex, money, and premarital partnerships in southern Malawi. Soc.Sci. Med. 65 (11), 2383e2393.Ranganathan, M., 2015. Transactional Sex Among Young Women in Rural SouthAfrica: Predictors, Motivators and Association with HIV. London School of Hy-giene and Tropical Medicine. London school of Hygiene and tropical Medicine,London.Remes, P., Renju, J., Nyalali, K., Medard, L., Kimaryo, M., Changalucha, J., et al., 2010.Dusty discos and dangerous desires: community perceptions of adolescentsexual and reproductive health risks and vulnerability and the potential role ofparents in rural Mwanza, Tanzania. Cult. Health & Sex. 12, 279e292.Ridgeway, C., Correll, S.J., 2004. Unpacking the gender system: a theoreticalperspective on gender beliefs and social relations. Gend. Soc. 18, 510e531.Robinson, J., Yeh, E., 2011. Transactional sex as a response to risk in Western Kenya.Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 35e64.Romero-Daza, N., 1994. Multiple sexual partners, migrant labor, and the makings foran epidemic: knowledge and beliefs about AIDS among women in highlandLesotho. Hum. Organ. 53, 192e205.Schoepf, B.G., 1988. Women, Aids, and economic-crisis in central-Africa. Can. J. Afr.Stud. Revue Can. des Etudes Afr. 22, 625e644.Schoepf, B.G., 1993. AIDS action-research with women in Kinshasa, Zaire. Soc. Sci.Med. 37, 1401e1413.Seidel, G., 1993. The Competing discourses of HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa:discourses of rights and empowerment vs. discoures of control and exclusion.Soc. Sci. Med. 36, 175e194.Selikow, T.-A., Bheki, Z., Cedras, E., 2002. The ingagara, the regte and the cherry:HIV/AIDS and youth culture in contemporary urban townships. Agenda 53,22e32.Shannon, K., Leiter, K., Phaladze, N., Hlanze, Z., Tsai, A.C., Heisler, M., et al., 2012.Gender inequity norms are associated with increased male-perpetrated rapeand sexual risks for HIV infection in Botswana and Swaziland. Plos One 7.Shefer, T., Clowes, L., Vergnani, T., 2012. Narratives of transactional sex on a uni-versity campus. Cult. Health & Sex. 14, 435e447.Shefer, T., Strebel, A., 2012. Deconstructing the 'sugar daddy': a critical review of theconstructions of men in intergenerational sexual relationships in South Africa.Agenda Empower. Women Gend. Equal. 26, 57e63.Silberschmidt, M., Rasch, V., 2001. Adolescent girls, illegal abortions and “sugar-daddies” in Dar es Salaam: vulnerable victims and active social agents. Soc. Sci.Med. 52, 1815e1826.Simonsen, J., Plummer, F.A., Ngugi, E., Black, C., Kreiss, J.K., Gakinya, M.N., et al.,1990. HIV infection among lower socioeconomic strata prostitutes in Nairobi.AIDS 4, 139e144.Singh, K., Buckner, B., Tate, J., Ndubani, P., Kamwanga, J., 2012. Age, poverty andalcohol use as HIV risk factors for women in Mongu, Zambia. Afr. Health Sci. 11.Smith, D.J., 2009. Gender inequality, inﬁdelity, and the social risks of modernmarriage in Nigeria. In: Hirsch, J.S., Wardlow, H., Smith, D.J., Phinney, H.,Parikh, S., Nathanson, C.A. (Eds.), The Secret: Love, Marriage, and HIV. Van-derbilt University Press, Nashville, pp. 84e107.Smith, D.J., 2014. AIDS Doesn't Show its Face: Inequality, Morality, and SocialChange in Nigeria. University of Chicago Press.Standing, H., 1992. AIDS: conceptual and methodological issues in researchingsexual behaviour in sub-Saharan Africa. Soc. Sci. Med. 34, 475e483.Stark, L., 2013. Transactional sex and mobile phone in a Tanzanian slum. Suom.Antropol. J. Finn. Anthropol. Soc. 38, 12e36.Steffenson, A.E., Pettifor, A.E., Seage, G.R., Rees, H.V., Cleary, P.D., 2011. Concurrentsexual partnerships and human immunodeﬁciency virus risk among southAfrican youth. Sex. Transm. Dis. 38, 459e466.Stoebenau, K., Hindin, M.J., Nathanson, C.A., Rakotoarison, P.G., Razaﬁntsalama, V.,2009. “… but then he became my sipa”: the implications of relationship ﬂuidityfor condom use among women sex workers in Antananarivo, Madagascar. Am.J. Public Health 99, 811e819.Stoebenau, K., Nair, R.C., Rambeloson, V., Rakotoarison, P.G., Razaﬁntsalama, V.,Labonte, R., 2013. Consuming sex: the association between modern goods,lifestyles and sexual behaviour among youth in Madagascar. Glob. Health 9, 13.K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197196Stoebenau, K., Nixon, S.A., Rubincam, C., Willan, S., Zembe, Y.Z.N., Tsikoane, T., et al.,2011. More than just talk: the framing of transactional sex and its implicationsfor vulnerability to HIV in Lesotho, Madagascar and South Africa. Glob. Health 7.Swidler, A., Watkins, S., 2007. Ties of dependence: AIDS and transactional sex inrural Malawi. Stud. Fam. Plan. 38, 147e162.Tawﬁk, L., Watkins, S.C., 2007. Sex in Geneva, sex in Lilongwe, and sex in Balaka. Soc.Sci. Med. 64, 1090e1101.UNAIDS, 2010. Global Report: Sub-Saharan Africa Fact Sheet (Geneva, Switzerland).UNAIDS, 2013. Global Report: UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic 2013.UNAIDS.UNAIDS, 2014. UNAIDS Gap Report 2014. UNAIDS, Geneva.Underwood, C., Skinner, J., Osman, N., Schwandt, H., 2011. Structural determinantsof adolescent girls' vulnerability to HIV: views from community members inBotswana, Malawi, and Mozambique. Soc. Sci. Med. 73, 343e350.United Nations Secretary-General's Task Force on Women, G.a.H.A.i.S.A, 2004.Facing the Future Together: Report of the United Nations Secretary-general'sTask Force on Women,Girls and HIV/AIDS in Southern Africa (New York, NY),pp. 1e55.van der Heijden, I., Swartz, S., 2014. ‘Something for something’: the importance oftalking about transactional sex with youth in South Africa using a resilience-based approach. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 13, 53e63.Wamoyi, J., Fenwick, A., Urassa, M., Zaba, B., Stones, W., 2011. “Women's bodies areshops”: beliefs about transactional sex and implications for understandinggender power and HIV prevention in Tanzania. Arch. Sex. Behav. 40, 5e15.Wamoyi, J., Wight, D., 2014. “Mum never loved me”: how structural factors inﬂu-ence adolescent sexual and reproductive health through parentchildconnectedness: a qualitative study in rural Tanzania. Afr. J. AIDS Res. 13,169e178.Wamoyi, J.S., Stoebenau, K., Abramsky, T., Bobrova, N., Watts, C., 2016. TransactionalSex and Risk for HIV Infection in Sub-Saharan Africa: a Systematic Review andMeta-analysis, under Review.Weber, M., 1978. Selections in translation. In: WG Runciman, Translated by EricMatthews. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Weiser, S.D., Leiter, K., Bangsberg, D.R., 2007. Food insufﬁciency is associated withhigh-risk sexual behavior among women in Botswana and Swaziland. PLoSMed. 4, 1589e1598.Weissman, A., Cocker, J., Sherburne, L., Powers, M.B., Lovich, R., Mukaka, M., 2006.Cross-generational relationships: using a 'continuum of volition' in HIV pre-vention work among young people. Gend. Dev. 14, 81e94.White, L., 1990. The Comforts of Home: Prostitution in Colonial Nairobi. The Uni-versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.Wight, D., Plummer, M.L., Mshana, G., Wamoyi, J., Shigongo, Z.S., Ross, D., 2006.Contradictory sexual norms and expectations for young people in ruralNorthern Tanzania. Soc. Sci. Med. 62, 987e997.Williams, T.P., Binagwaho, A., Betancourt, T.S., 2012. Transactional sex as a form ofchild sexual exploitation and abuse in Rwanda: implications for child securityand protection. Child Abuse Negl. 36, 354e361.Wojcicki, J.M., 2002a. Commercial sex work or ukuphanda? Sex-for-money ex-change in Soweto and Hammanskraal area, South Africa. Cult. Med. Psychiatry26, 339e370.Wojcicki, J.M., 2002b. “She drank his money”: survival sex and the problem ofviolence in taverns in Gauteng Province, South Africa. Med. Anthropol. Q. 16,267e293.Wyrod, R., Fritz, K., Woelk, G., Jain, S., Kellogg, T., Chirowodza, A., et al., 2011. Beyondsugar daddies: intergenerational sex and AIDS in urban Zimbabwe. AIDS Behav.15, 1275e1282.Zembe, Y.Z., Townsend, L., Thorson, A., Ekstrom, A.M., 2013. 'Money talks, bullshitwalks' interrogating notions of consumption and survival sex among youngwomen engaging in transactional sex in post-apartheid South Africa: a quali-tative enquiry. Glob. Health 9, 28.Zembe, Y.Z., Townsend, L., Thorson, A., Silberschmidt, M., Ekstrom, A.M., 2015.Intimate partner violence, relationship power inequity and the role of sexualand social risk factors in the production of violence among young women whohave multiple sexual partners in a peri-urban setting in South Africa. Plos One10, e0139430.K. Stoebenau et al. / Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016) 186e197 197