ABSTRACT: 
Our research interest focuses on the political dimension of democratic transition. We believe that the emergence of political parties and how they interact will count in the further development of the country. The object of our research is limited in time and space - we consider the time between the violent removal of the totalitarian regimes, in December 1989, and the first peaceful alternation in power, in 1996, to be defining for the political and social future of the country. We analyze the dynamics of the party system in post-communist Romania, and in particular, the uniqueness of the political party called the Democratic Convention (CDR). We want to show that CDR functioned as a social and political myth, as defined by Georges Sorel (Sorel, 1961:50), in terms of the logic of political action. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article examines the dynamics of the party system in post-communist Romania, and in particular, the uniqueness of the political party called the Democratic Convention (CDR). We consider the time between the violent removal of the totalitarian regimes, in December 1989, and the first peaceful alternation in power, in 1996, to be defining for the political and social future of the country. Using the concepts proposed by Dahrendorf, i.e. constitutional and normal policy, the temporal interval dominated by the elements belonging to constitutional policy: legalization of a multiparty system, holding of the first democratic elections and the institutionalization of political opposition. We aim to show that CDR functioned as a social and political myth, as defined by Georges Sorel (Sorel, 1961:50), in terms of the logic of political action. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Peer-review under the responsibility of the West University of Timisoara. Keywords: democratic transition; party-system; political myth, Democratic Convention; Romania After the dramatic events at the end of 1989, Romanian political life has seen an exceptional dynamics, characterized by what Dahrendorf (Dahrendorf 1993:31-32) calls "constitutional politics", different even if not clearly identified by another reality, that of "normal politics ". The British political scientist uses these two concepts to analyze political regime changes in Central and Eastern Europe, calling the revolutions of 1989 as the period of constitutional politics. This represents the new social order, the social contract and its institutional forms. The normal policy refers to the behavior of political actors motivated by different interests and preferences, expressed within the constitutional framework. The constitutional policy issues can be discussed in two ways - open society and closed society - while the normal policy provides many options. * E-mail address: i_oanabude@yahoo.com © 2015 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Peer review under the responsibility of the West University of Timisoara. 54 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 For the group of Central and Eastern European countries that underwent regime changes at the end of the twentieth century, Romania is a different case. According to Linz and Stepan (Linz,Stepan, 1996:233), Romania has experienced a sultanistic regime type, which is why his removal was done by violent means, and the transition to democracy has seen a different trajectory compared to other post-communist countries. The regime change is often initiated through the negotiation process between the reforming voices of the old regime and those representing the opposition. Both sides must prior express availability for negotiation. The representatives of the old regime and of the opposition should have autonomy, and political support to start and complete the process of negotiations. According to the two researchers, in the case of sultanistic political regimes, we cannot apply the model of negotiation because the actors involved have not the ability and / or willingness to support this process. The proximity to the central figure of the sultan indicates the importance and power of political actors who would otherwise be deprived of any legitimacy. As regards the civil society, if there is one in Romania, it is completely fragmented, without an organized structure and no power to initiate a sustained action to challenge the political decision. In discussing the democratic transition of a sultanistic regimes, we should not disregard the legacy of the old system and the difficulty to remove it. This includes in particular the personalization, taken to the extreme of political power and the fusion between the public and private spheres. The main targets of democratic transition are the rule of law and the emergence of a civil society as free entity, and capable to become a partner in dialogue and negotiation with the political power. Any form of opposition, organized or not, is removed and suppressed by using the political police, and the forms of total control of public and private life of citizens have canceled the possibility of developing a civil society body. Party Propaganda and the high level of violence directed against individuals with contestable potential were tools that have abolished the role and power of civil society, negating any possibility to reform the regime by negotiation. There is no political, social or cultural pluralism. Total control is exercised from the top down, from the leader in his political camarilla, at the officials of the state apparatus, at the private and public spheres of all citizens, who are considered the property of the sultan, not its source of legitimacy. The social and political context does not allow the emergence of a "parallel culture", as it happened in the case of Czechoslovakia, nor the emergence of a dissidence able to negotiate reform and take leadership in order to democratize – Trade union Solidarity in Poland. Romania`s uniqueness during Ceausescu, compared to other signatory states of the Warsaw Pact, is the effect of the totalitarian regime she experienced. Linz and Stepan (Linz, Stepan, 1996:244-250) points out that Romania is the only country in Eastern Europe that had not any publication, previously to 1990, of opposition against regime abuses. In other states, individuals who opposed the system and condemned his deviations, knew a minimal organization and enjoyed visibility among citizens. Romanian society, atomized and without previous civil structures able to turn into a political party, was unprepared for the explosion of pluralism. This can be considered inevitable for states that have just removed the single party rule and tyranny. Our research interest focuses on the political dimension of democratic transition. We believe that the emergence of political parties and how they interact will count in the further development of the country. The object of our research is limited in time and space. We analyze the dynamics of the party system in post-communist Romania, and in particular, the uniqueness of the political party called the Democratic Convention (CDR). We consider the time between the violent removal of the totalitarian regimes, in December 1989, and the first peaceful alternation in power, in 1996, to be defining for the political and social future of the country. Using the concepts proposed by Dahrendorf, i.e. constitutional and normal policy, the temporal interval named above is dominated by the elements belonging to constitutional policy: legalization of a multiparty system, holding of the first democratic elections and the institutionalization of political opposition. We want to show that CDR functioned as a social and political myth, as defined by Georges Sorel (Sorel, 1961:50), in terms of the logic of political action. Associated with the Marxist tradition and syndicalist movement at the early twentieth century, Georges Sorel can be considered a prominent figure in modern research of political mythology. Unlike utopia, social and political myth, as it appears the concept is developed in the work of Georges Sorel, is an expression of the decision to act, not a simple description of things. Social and political myths determines individuals to act, to change the situation which they consider undesirable. Political myth is not defined by truth, but by credibility and it becomes strong if it corresponds to a group`s beliefs. 55 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 Huntington (Huntington, 1968: 407) shows that extended periods of suppression of the party generates forces that burst out with explosive energy when authoritarian rule ends. This applies in particular to parties in a state of "submersion" taking centre stage, but since the end of the regime is unexpected, the political participation is more extensive and varied. In many Eastern European countries, mass movements preceding multiparty systems have emerged as Forums in Hungary, East Germany and Czechoslovakia, or Front in Romania (the German Democratic Front - FDG, the National Salvation Front - FSN). Whatever the name, their fundamental intention was to bring together people with diverse political and spiritual concepts, in order to achieve a broad coalition against totalitarian systems for peaceful transformation of dictatorships into a democratic and pluralistic civil society. In Romania, IRSOP surveys have shown that, one month before the elections of May 1990, 8% of voters were registered in a party, 12% wanted to, and 59% did not want to enroll in any political party, while the undecided persons having a 21% (Dătculescu, 1991:19, 22). The first post-revolutionary elections in the history of Romania, organized in May 1990 under the Decree-Law no. 92 of 14 March 1990 concerning the election of the parliamentarians and of the President of Romania, restored the electoral system of proportional representation from the interwar period, without reactivating and the premium election as well. The elections for the House of Representatives and the Senate was organized on the basis of proportional representation, with blocked lists in multi-member constituencies, using the electoral coefficient and redistribution of the largest scrap, without imposing an electoral threshold. The electoral system of proportional representation was used in most post-communist states to create an equal start, at least formally, in political competition. In the elections of May 20th, 1990, 71 of the 80 political parties registered at the Bucharest Court of Justice submitted their lists of candidates. A significant number of them were devoid of identity, doctrinal and organizational skills, which is why they will be politically disqualified at the next elections (Voicu, 1998:214). Following the Romanian case, the classification of political parties proposed by Maurice Duverger (Duverger, 1963:63), we distinguish between mass parties and cadres in terms of party structure, operation and organization. This differentiation is important for the structural analysis of the entire party system and political alliances post and pre - election. FSN and all other parties that have continued the vision (FDSN and PDSR), belong to the category of mass parties, while "historical parties", e.g. Christian Democrats and Liberals, behave like cadres party. The Multiparty system in 1990 is ideologically under "pressure tendency to rebalance the political system, but also under fear of the extreme, left wing particularly. All formations defined themselves as political parties (and) the center "(Radu A. et al., 1995:53). Despite these shortcomings, voter participation was over 80%, unquestionable evidence of the desire for change expressed by citizens. The results of the poll showed a large imbalance regarding the share of electoral support for political parties who were able to obtain parliamentary representation (15 parties, three minority parties, an independent and 9 minority organizations that have received a mandate in office, the Senate was made up of 7 parties): first position was represented by FSN, who had won about 67% of the seats, on the second and third places there were classified UDMR with 7.2% and PNL with an average of 6.7%. The other parties have failed to achieve even 3% of the seats, and 8 of them entered the Parliament with a subunit percentage. In this context the political system appears to be "a party and half" without strong opposition (Voicu, 1998:215). The elections of May 20th, 1990, is the first step towards democracy in Romania. The period of time that followed was characterized by social conflicts between different professional categories - miners against intellectuals and students, as well as disagreements among key officials of state, the President and the Prime Minister - Ion Iliescu and Petre Roman. Contrary to the dominant party position, FSN has proved sensitive to social pressures, so the arrived in Bucharest of the miners, (September 1991), had in response the resignation of Romanian government. The dissensions between the two leaders have split the FSN and culminates with the appearance of another political party, the Democratic National Salvation Front (FDSN). Under this title, the party would appear in the legislative elections in September 1992, subsequently changing its name to the Social Democracy Party of Romania (PDSR). In the camp of opposition parties significant changes are also took place: in December 1990, on the initiative of the Christian Democrats leader, Corneliu Coposu, there arises the National Convention for Democracy, combining the PNL, PDSR, UDMR and PER. A year later, the Convention would form, together with civic organizations - 56 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 Antitotalitarian Democratic Forum (FAD) and Democratic Convention of Romania (CDR), a political alliance that seeks a common strategy for local and general elections of 1992 (Preda, Soare, 2008:151). The legislative elections of September 27 th, 1992, were held under the patronage of Law no. 68 of 15 July 1992 for the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. There remains in force the proportional representation system, but appears as new the introduction of the electoral threshold 3% and the change in rule of representation. The purpose of this changes was to limit multipartism effects and to exclude the parties with subunit results in parliamentary election. For Romania, the introduction of this technical element of electoral mechanism was overappreciated. It was a necessary, but not sufficient action to strengthen the parliamentary party system and governmental stability. The proportional representation system predispose for the realization of a simple majority and to build government coalitions. In this condition, the risk of political instability is higher in transition societies. The Pluralist party system had two competitors poles: FDSN and CDR (Pavel, 2010:63). The multipartism resulting from the 1992 legislative elections, according to George Voicu (Voicu, 1998:225- 226), presented a "defect": the two political parties that obtained at least 20% of the votes (the main condition for a "pure" multiparty system), are the National Salvation Democratic Front (FDSN, descendant party from FSN) and the Democratic Convention of Romania (CDR). The latter is not a party but an alliance of parties and civic organizations with an electoral purposes, so the only large party that has registered more than 15% of the vote is FDSN. The component parties of the Convention have formed their own parliamentary groups and did not act together, there were parties that have separated from it. The weakness of Romanian multipartism was both CDR, and also the short-term strategy of alliances built by PDSR (a new name for the old FDSN). With a relative majority, PDSR has concluded several alliances with high costs, such as governmental reshuffling, changes in senior positions of executive staff and administration of the territory. The legislative elections of November 3th, 1996, were conducted according to the electoral law of 1992: the system of proportional representation and blocked lists electoral threshold of 3%. This election is very important for the Romanian democratic regime, marking the first peaceful alternation in power. Also for the first time in Romanian politics, the candidate who wins the presidential election (Emil Constantinescu) is designated in the second round and is part of the legislative victorious political party, the CDR. Only six political parties and one representative for each national minority gained seats in the Chamber of Deputies. CDR has a relative majority 1/3 of the seats and will form the government. The “defect" was removed from previous elections: two political parties obtained a minimum of 20% of the votes, the PDSR and main coalition party, the Christian Democrats (PNTCD). We can categorize the multipartidism system as a “pure” one. From an ideological standpoint, the party system is in equilibrium: the center parties - CDR, USD and UDMR are counterbalanced by the political left - PDSR, PRM and PUNR. Furthermor, the only large party, this time in opposition, remains PDSR (Voicu, 1998, 231). The Romanian political experience since 1989 can be described as "a system of alternation accompanied by proportional representation list, where two blocks of parties succeed in government". We may thus distinguish three stages in the evolution of the Romanian political system: December 1989 - May 1990 is the concentration stage (the Council of National Salvation Front, a replica of the Romanian Communist Party, trying to gather around him all political forces in an umbrella organization), the second phase: May 1990 - December 1996 - as the expansion stage (multiplication and the explosion of the parties number), and finally, after the elections of 1996 and 2000, when the contracting phase begins (Morar, 2001:149). Romanian post-revolutionary politics was marked by two major players: FSN (descending parties - FDSN, PDSR) and CDR. The leaders of the two parties have promoted a different political culture and made it impossible to build the new regime on a consensual basis. In the FSN staff there were leaders who composed the second line of the old Communist Party. They shared the values of a specific political culture of communism, even though in the official policy they militated in favor of democratic opening. Their opponents, the leaders of historical parties (PNTCD, PDSR, PNL), legitimized their political discourse on the values of interwar democratic political culture. In this manner they managed to bring on to their side the structures of organized civil society and most of the electorate. CDR is presented as a political "umbrella" under the logo that can be found both civic associations and political parties old and new in the local landscape. Democratic civic organizations, historical parties and other political 57 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 parties, different from the FSN, constructe discourse, identity and political action in opposition to the FSN and the communist past. A very important member of the CDR was the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR). Unlike other political parties, UDMR did not acquires legal status under the Decree-Law No 8 of 31 December 1989, but under the law regarding legal persons from 1924 and Decree 31/1954. Formally, UDMR was not a political party, but a large civil society organization, established on the basis of various criteria, the principal one being ethnicity. The involvement of UDMR in the government process in 1996 and in the composition CDR, reduced very much the ethnic tensions between the Hungarians and Romanians (Pavel, Huiu, 2003:25-26). On the CDR side and in opposition to FSN policies, there were two structures of civil society regarded by citizens as bastions of anti-communist fight: the Group for Social Dialogue and Timisoara Society. The two organizations enjoyed wide popular appreciation, and this was transformed in support for the CDR political coalition whose purpose is shared. The two organizations communicated with the public through two publications: the magazine 22 and the newspaper Timişoara. The topics submitted to readers: pluralism, human rights, separation of powers, culture and its values, indicated the distance between FSN policy and the democratic ideal. Articles and documents written and published in the periodicals (“Statement of formation of the Group for Social Dialogue”, “The Proclamation of Timisoara”), have the purpose to familiarize people with democratic values and principles, developed and encouraged civic initiative to defend and achieve real democracy, and last but not least, organized civil opposition forces to the FSN. The Civil society has became more organized in their struggle to defend democratic values, even if the power has used violent and illegal means to eliminate opponents. We remind readers in this regard the three episodes where the miners were brought to Bucharest to banish peaceful protesters in University Square, the violent confrontation in Targu-Mures against Hungarians ethnics, the monopoly exercised over the public television and radio company, and discretional use of force against private individuals who challenged the power. An important moment in the dynamics of Romanian civil society was the appearance of the Civic Alliance (AC) as a "cooperation structure of all social energies that support the values of faith, humanism and democracy, the only way of gaining prosperity and national identity and dignity"(Romania libera, Nov 7, 1993). Only a few months after winning elections by FSN, by publishing the "Declaration of Civic Alliance" and "The Proclamation of Brasov", AC has accumulated an important political and moral capital, which will then be transferred to CDR (Pavel, Huiu, 2010:71-72) Ghita Ionescu and Isabel de Madariaga (Ionescu, Madariaga, 1992:17) point out that the presence or absence of institutionalized political opposition is a criterion for the classification of societies into dictatorial or liberal, democratic or authoritarian, constitutional or monolithic. In Romania`s case, the need for political opposition forces was officially recognized from the earliest moments of the revolution, but in reality, the parliamentary opposition was more symbolic than real. This situation ended in November 1991, when the historical parties and civil society organizations have decided to adopt a common strategy in local elections. The emerging electoral coalition will be named the Democratic Convention (CDR). As a result of the elections of 9 February 1992, CDR was the second political force in Romania, enjoying the support especially in large urban areas, of young people and the more educated classes. Shortly after this victory, PNL choose to leave the Convention and to maximize results as a singular political actor. The decision is not final, as the party will return to CDR at the presidential elections in September 1992. We remind readers that FSN did not remained the same structure. Due to the disagreements between President Iliescu and the Romanian Prime Minister, the party split into the Democratic National Salvation Front (FDSN) led by Iliescu, and the Democratic Party (PD) whose president was Petre Roman. For the 1992 presidential elections, CDR nominated Emil Constantinescu, and the electoral offer of civic organizations and parties, which formed the coalition, resumed the theme of the fight against communism and insisted on the profound dimension of the crisis in which the country found itself. The authors spoke of a moral, authority and a credibility crisis, as well as of an economic and social crisis. The only way out is considered a symbolic signing of a new social contract based on values like truth, loyalty and trust. Many of the ideas contained in the CDR program document were doomed to remain mere goals: cultivating the love of fellowmen, bringing to justice of those who have established communism 58 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 in Romania, the nation's moral resurrection by returning to the fundamental values of freedom, justice, solidarity and faith, etc. (Romania libera, August 18, 1992). Constant appeal to morality, to human dignity, the values that were strongly altered in old regime, has attracted a huge wave of sympathy for the Convention candidate and for the proposed program. Despite this, however, the result of legislative elections announced as winner FDSN. The Convention was ranked second, and remained the main voice of institutionalized opposition. The established hierarchy in the general and presidential elections is kept for presidential election too: candidate FDSN, Ion Iliescu, wins the most important position in the state with 61.4% of the votes, and the CDR candidate, Emil Constantinescu, lose out the political competition with 38.6%. The Coalition refused any cooperation with the winning party and remained in opposition until the next election in 1996. Holding a significant number of parliamentary seats allowed the Convention to strengthen its position against FDSN and to perform specific actions - interpellations addressed to the Executive, deposition of simple censure motions, so that from the political points of view, the most important activity of the CDR was held in Parliament. At the level of the Chamber of Deputies there were three parliamentary groups drawn from the Convention, but the Christian Democrats often acts as a dominant party who no longer debated within the Convention the decisions that were to be taken. The lack of strategies to promote common interests was particularly evident in times, when deputies registered with the same party or parliamentary group voted law projects differently. Externally, CDR representatives have campaigned to improve the image of the country for integration into Euro-Atlantic structures. In May 1993, the CDR leaders signed a new protocol operation of the Convention. The main lines of action aimed at strengthening each component party, continuing the fight against FDSN and Ion Iliescu, conquest of political power at the next election and the consolidation of the CDR structure (Pavel, Huiu, 2010:187-189). In the background of country`s political and economic precarious situation, the sympathy and confidence of a large part of the voters faithful to Ion Iliescu and his political party turned to CDR. The political power saw the dissatisfaction among the general population with the level of living and quality of life, important sectors of the economy were paralyzed by general strikes, so all hopes for a better future were related to the CDR program for rescuing the country. At the same time, it was created a horizon of expectation, an unprecedented symbolic reference system, linked to this board. In early 1995, the CDR management decides to sign a new protocol operation. The document is not well received by all party members (PAC, PSDR şi PL’93 not sign), but he come into force under the pressure of the following year’s elections. For local and parliamentary elections there was constituted a common list, and the CDR candidate for the country`s presidency was again Emil Constantinescu. Unlike previous elections, Constantinescu appeared before the electorate as president of the CDR, and the image capital which he won in this post would be valorized at its best. The tragic moment of the death of the PNTCD leader, Corneliu Coposu, at November 12th, 1995, has produced a wave of sympathy for CDR which substantially increased their chances of electoral victory. All supporters of the political leader and his opponents have recognized the value and importance of his work, which implicitly legitimized the CDR political project. For the 1996 elections, CDR leaders have resorted to a series of powerful symbolic gestures, that increased the electorate’s sympathy for this party: their campaign for the presidency began in Ruginoasa, Iaşi, A.I.Cuza's native village (it speculated on the similarity between Constantinescu and the first ruler of the United Principalities of Romania) and on the same day, the CDR leaders held a popular assembly at the Blaj Liberty Plain. Both locations are associated in the collective mind with historical events where human dignity and fundamental values of freedom and unity prevailed. The electoral platform was suggestively called "Contract with Romania", and the presidential program, "Now for Romania", while the coalition slogan was "We can only succeed together." All this makes explicit reference to the idea of national unity and common purpose: removal of those who do not share the values of democracy (especially leaders of FDSN), and the restoration of moral principles without which you can not overcome the national crisis (Pavel, Huiu, 2010: 270). The election results confirmed the efficiency of the strategy used by the CDR leaders. At the local level, coalition candidates won most posts of mayors, heads of local and county councils, and what was even more important, the mayor position of the capital city. CDR was also the first position at parliamentary elections of that year, and following the second round, Emil Constantinescu won the country’s presidency by 54.41%. through its candidates, 59 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 CDR represents the great winner of the 1996 elections, and the first political parties which conducted a peaceful alternation in power, after the events of 1989. Romania passed with flying colours the first test of government alternating. This event showed the country’s commitment to the path of democracy (Pavel, Huiu, 2010:281). Our approach would be reductionist if we considered that only these strategies have been enough to win elections. We believe they are necessary, but not sufficient! In the social, political and economic context of 1996, for an electorate that was more excited than familiarized with the rules of democracy, concrete political programs, doubled by symbolic elements, there proved to be a winning combination. We believe that CDR`s electoral strategy to appeal to noble emotions and feelings mobilized voters to support the party. The hypothesis that we wanted to check is if CDR functioned as a social and political myth. CDR is undoubtedly a political civic experiment due to its organizational particularity: The Convention entered the parliamentary and presidential election campaign of 1996 with two forms of organization. One was CDR – a political formation summing six parties, and the other was an expanded Convention, as a civic and political association. Official Candidates were nominated by CDR, a registered political alliance at the Bucharest Court of Justice, but the electoral struggle to mobilize the electorate has been supported by the enlarged Convention. This civic construction that blended the political side with the civic one has increased confidence in the CDR project. We can say that it was a vicious circle in which there were enrolled CDR voters and party leaders: political message symbols were loaded positively due to the trust that the population was showing for the party. There were used values, principles and ideals that produced strong effects on public awareness and mobilized popular expectations for specific policy actions. At this level, CDR acted as a political myth until 1996, when he gained the executive power position and abandoned partnership with civil society. At that time, CDR lost the trust of the population. We believe that our research hypothesis is validated, until the acquisition of executive power, in 1996, CDR was a social and political myth. According to Georges Sorel (Sorel, 1961), people engage in political action not in order to achieve certain rational goals, but because they are mobilized by emotions and strong feelings. The political myths are called into action. As soon as he gained power, the CDR component parties focused on maximizing their own interests at the expense of collective action, both civic and political. Our interests is not to analyze the CDR governance period, of 1996-2000, but we can consider that the electorate sanctioned the component parties of the Convention, precisely because they did not respond to the expectations that they have created, both in their ideological and pragmatic plans. If every political party has three functions - acquiring, exercising and maintaining power - CDR, in practice, mobilized popular expectations only for attaining power. The Convention proposed to voters a draft reform for the moral, political and economic development of the country, it designed in the collective mind the image of a future social and political order of a new social contract, it estabished a social and political myth in the reference system of citizens, without causing the long-awaited change. The concept of "political myth", as it appears in Sorel`s work, may be extrapolated over the political activity of other actors, especially the FSN, and the Romanian political imaginary can be discussed from the perspective of mythological assemblies offered by Raoul Girardet (Girardet, 1968): Conspiracy myth, the Golden age, the Uniqueness and the Savior. They are, however, subject for other research papers. References Dahrendorf, Ralf (1993), Reflectii asupra Revolutiei din Europa. Intr-o scrisoare c ear fi urmat sa fie trimisa unui domn din Varsovia, 1990 (Bucuresti:Humanitas) Dătculescu, Petre (1991) Renaşterea unei democraţii: alegerile din România la 20 mai 1990 (Bucureşti: Editura Coresi) Duverger, Maurice (1966), Political Parties: Their Organization and Activity in the Modern State(Taylor & Francis) Girardet, Raoul (1997), Mituri si mitologii politice, (Iasi: Institutul European) Huntington, Samuel (1968) Political Order in Chainging Societies (New Haven: Yale University Press) Linz, Juan, Stepan Alfred (1996), Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation, South America and Post-Communist Europe (Baltimore, London: The John Hopkins University Press) Morar, Filimon (2001), Democraţia privilegiilor. Alegerile aleşilor în România (Bucureşti: Editura Paideia) Pavel, Dan (1997), „Politica de coaliţie şi potenţialul de şantaj”, Sfera politicii, no 50 / 1997 Pavel, Dan, Huiu, Iulia (2003), Nu putem reuşi decât împreună. O istorie analitică a Convenţiei Democratice, 1989-2000 (Iaşi: Ed Polirom) Pavel, Dan (2010), Democraţia bine temperată. Studii instituţionale (Iaşi: Editura Polirom) 60 Ioana Filip / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 183 ( 2015 ) 53 – 60 Preda, Cristian, Soare, Sorina (2008) Regimul, partidele şi sistemul politic din România, (Bucureşti: Neemira) Radu, Al., Radu, Gh., Porumb, I. (1995), Sistemul politic românesc, un sistem entropic? (Bucureşti: Editura Tehnică) Sorel, Georges (1961), Reflexions sur la Violence (London and New York: Collier Books) Voicu, George (1998) Pluripartidismul. O teorie a democraţiei (Bucureşti: Editura All) Romania libera, August 18, 1992 Romania libera, November 7, 1993 