ABSTRACT: 
Recently many methods for reducing the risk of human extinction have been suggested, including building refuges underground and in space. Here we will discuss the perspective of using military nuclear submarines or their derivatives to ensure the survival of a small portion of humanity who will be able to rebuild human civilization after a large catastrophe. We will show that it is a very cost-effective way to build refuges, and viable solutions exist for various budgets and timeframes. Nuclear submarines are surface independent, and could provide energy, oxygen, fresh water and perhaps even food for their inhabitants for years. They are able to withstand close nuclear explosions and radiation. They are able to maintain isolation from biological attacks and most known weapons. They already exist and need only small adaptation to be used as refuges. But building refuges is only “Plan B” of existential risk preparation; it is better to eliminate such risks than try to survive them. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article explores the perspective of using military submarines or their derivatives to ensure the survival of a small portion of humanity who will be able to rebuild human civilization after a large catastrophe. We will show that it is a very cost-effective way to build refuges, and viable solutions exist for various budgets and timeframes. Nuclear submarines are surface independent, and could provide energy, oxygen, fresh water and perhaps even food for their inhabitants for years. They are able to withstand close nuclear nuclear explosions and radiation. They are able to maintain isolation from biological attacks and most known weapons. They already exist and need only small adaptation to be used as refuges. But building refuges is only “Plan B” of existential risk preparation; it is better to eliminate such risksthan try to survive them. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirectFuturesjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/futuresOriginal research articleAquatic refuges for surviving a global catastropheAlexey Turchina,⁎, Brian Patrick Greenba Science for Life Extension Foundation, Moscowb Santa Clara University, USAA R T I C L E I N F OKeywords:Global catastrophic riskExistential riskRefugesDisaster sheltersSocial collapseHuman extinctionA B S T R A C TRecently many methods for reducing the risk of human extinction have been suggested, includingbuilding refuges underground and in space. Here we will discuss the perspective of using militarynuclear submarines or their derivatives to ensure the survival of a small portion of humanity whowill be able to rebuild human civilization after a large catastrophe. We will show that it is a verycost-eﬀective way to build refuges, and viable solutions exist for various budgets and timeframes.Nuclear submarines are surface independent, and could provide energy, oxygen, fresh water andperhaps even food for their inhabitants for years. They are able to withstand close nuclearexplosions and radiation. They are able to maintain isolation from biological attacks and mostknown weapons. They already exist and need only small adaptation to be used as refuges. Butbuilding refuges is only “Plan B” of existential risk preparation; it is better to eliminate such risksthan try to survive them.1. IntroductionAsimov (1981), Leslie (1996), Rees (2003), Bostrom (2002) and other authors have shown that multiple existential risks threatenhuman survival on Earth. In recent years interest has grown in the possibility of building “universal” refuges to protect from manytypes of global catastrophes, which could wipe out humanity. The most publicly well known of such ideas is Elon Musk’s plan to useMars as a “backup drive” for humanity by moving one million people there in the next several decades. Jebari (2014) analyzedgeneral design features that should be in any such installation. Torres (2016b) addressed the question of space bunkers. Beckstead(2015) provides critical analysis of catastrophes for which refuges may be helpful. But refuge creation always involves trade-oﬀs,which Turchin listed in his “Map of Shelters and Refuges from Global Risks” (2016).Several works of ﬁction have explored the use of submarines as refuges, including Shute (1957), Brin (1990), Brin (2013), Morrow(1995), Pellegrino and Zebrowski (1995), Brooks (2007), and Stephenson (2015).And yet despite these ﬁctional accounts (and no doubt more could be added to the list), a formal investigation to the use ofsubmarines as refuges has hardly begun. In their recent article reviewing the topic Baum, Denkenberger, and Haqq-Misra (2015a)wrote: “Aquatic refuge design has received virtually no attention and could be the subject of a dedicated analysis” (2015). We will tryhere to make the ﬁrst steps in such an analysis.We will concentrate on both the larger perspective of the general use of submarines as refuges, as well as on one practical near-term example: the conversion of an Ohio class submarine into such a refuge. The ﬁrst reason that Ohio class submarines are ideal forthis role is that they are the largest submarines currently in the US Navy (the Russian Typhoon class submarine is twice as large, butare retiring and only one is now in service, compared to 18 Ohio-class). They support a large crew of 155, and can hold thousands oftons of supplies (enough for 5 years, detailed in Section 4.1). Ohio submarines have special hatches for quick replacement of supplieshttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2017.03.010Received 6 December 2016; Received in revised form 21 March 2017; Accepted 28 March 2017⁎ Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: alexeiturchin@gmail.com (A. Turchin), bpgreen@scu.edu (B. Patrick Green).Futures 89 (2017) 26–37Available online 02 April 20170016-3287/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).MARKand their projected time between major overhauls is 15 years.The second reason is that Ohios are strategic ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs), which means that they are designed for long-term lone survival, while attack nuclear submarines typically have less endurance and always have smaller size. They are designed tosurvive a large-scale nuclear war. The US Navy also has a relatively strong safety record and greater experience than other submarineforces.The third reason is that the Ohios will start to decommission and be replaced in 2029, so at that time some of them could berefurbished into refuges for fraction of cost of new submarines. Ohios are among the most sophisticated existing submarines,implementing the best technologies. Ohios can endure 3–6 months underwater, and their reactors can run 15–20 years withoutrefueling (actual performance is secret). The next generation of US SSBNs – the Colombia class – will be even larger, and its reactorwill be able to operate for 40–50 years without refueling, while Ohios require refueling in the middlelife (Lundquist, 2011).We also will look at designs for aquatic refuges which might be implemented in the more remote future. They are not fantasy, asthey could be built with the same money and research as the International Space Station, but they would require decades of work.Consequently, they are too expensive and too remote in the future to act as refuges from current risks. These futuristic designs alsocould become obsolete before they are ready if new global risks appear, and they will have an opportunity cost by attracting preciousmoney and resources from other underfunded projects such as biosafety and the development of safe AI.Such cost-beneﬁt analysis shows that use of existing military submarines as refuges with small changes provide the greatest utilitygain in existential risk prevention, and among available possible options, Ohio class submarines are the best candidates.2. Stages of project realization: near-term and long-termBy utilizing existing military submarines and submarine-building technologies we can radically reduce the cost of building globalcatastrophic refuges. Military submarines are already optimized for most functions of x-risk refuges.The project could be realized on two levels: near-term (realistic) scenarios and long-term (futuristic) scenarios. The ﬁrst levelscould be completed now or in the next 10–15 years with modest investment and based on existing technologies. The later levelswould require larger monetary outlays and will take decades, but are still technically feasible and would be less complex thancreating a base on Mars.Given these factors, it seems rational to realize the early stages, but probably not the later stages, as they will be too expensive andremote. Table 1 lists these stages with their relative costs for easier comparison. These costs and times are just preliminaryassessments based on current submarine building practices.2.1. Near-term, realistic scenarios1. Current level, military submarines. Currently, there are around 130–150 active nuclear powered submarines in the world,about 75 of which are in the US Navy (as of 2014), 45 in the Russian Navy (though many of Russian submarines are not active,because they are awaiting extensive renovation), 13 in the UK’s Navy, 10 in the French Navy, and 10 in China’s Navy (Globalsecurity, 2017, World Nuclear Association, 2016). Of the total, around 38 are large SSBNs and of them 18 are Ohios. In any givenmoment in peace time only a few submarines are on a patrol in the ocean, as they need frequent maintenance in docks. Theinformation about submarines at sea is quickly changing and highly classiﬁed so we can only guess that at any given time only ahalf are at the sea, and US has the highest level of sea presence, so there are 35–70 nuclear submarines in the sea at any givenmoment. The US navy allowed women to serve on submarines in 2010, and in 2016 50 female crewmembers were selected forservice on Ohio class SSBNs (LaGrone, 2015). However, because each submarine has two separate crews, only a few femaleswould be on each, and most of them would not be at sea at any given time, so this level is not enough to permit a sustainablepopulation. More female crewmembers will be allowed in 2020 for Virginia class SSNs. The British Navy also started to addfemales in submarines crew in 2015 (BBC, 2014). So current nuclear submarines could become refuges in the case of a globalcatastrophe, but only incidentally, and not very eﬀectively, if the goal is to rebuild a self-sustaining civilization.Table 1Time and price of various stages of project realization.Current levelmilitarysubmarinesAdditionalmission formilitary subsOne oldsubmarinerebuilt into arefugeA newspeciallydesignsubmarinerefugeA very largegenerationalsubmarine “Ark”A ﬂeet ofaround 10special sub-refugesThe same ﬂeetplus eachsubmarine hasits own portislandFuture high-tech subsTime of surfaceindependence3–4months4months6 months 2 or moreyears10–100 years 2 or more tearsyears50 years Hundreds ofyearsNumber of people ∼1000 ∼1000 100–300 200–500 2000–5000 2000–5000 2000–5000 embryosNumber ofsubmarines10 in the sea 1–10 1 1 1 10 10Price, USD 0 1–100 mln ∼1 bln 2 bln 20 bln 100 bln 200 blnDate, earliestpossibleNow 2020? 2025 2030 2040 2040 2040–2050 After 2050A. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–37272. An additional mission for military submarines. A small upgrade to existing military submarine practices would allow forgreater catastrophic risk preparedness: adding more female crewmembers, educational books, agricultural seeds, and several tonsof additional equipment for survival. If in the next few years half of the crews of most submarines in the world were female, andthe crews will be instructed to prepare for survival after a possible global catastrophe, it would create 20–60 refuges againstexistential risks with relatively minor additional cost. Large numbers of refuges would provide additional protection. But none ofthese submarines would be prepared for long term survival, potentially years. However, they could possibly help each other,though this has its own risks, like biological infection. On these ﬁrst two levels, submarines serve both military and refuge goals.On the next levels submarines work only as refuges, but existing military submarines shipyards and technologies are used to buildthem.3. One old submarine rebuilt into a refuge. Many submarines are going out of service, and some of them may be in good technicalcondition despite military obsolescence. They may be too noisy or not adapted to existing types of weapons. Such submarinesmight be re-commissioned for civilian use, all weapons and secret equipment stripped, and the freed space ﬁlled with food, seeds,and other equipment. This may cost between 100 mln – 1 billion dollars; a substantial savings over building a new submarine. Wesuggest painting it yellow to emphasize its peaceful purposes. It might also constantly send an acoustic or other signal, which willhelp to distinguish it from military subs in case of war (yet it should be able to switch oﬀ this signal, as in some catastrophicsituations it would be preferable to remain concealed). Its operation and crew should be international, originating from the largestrival world powers, and they should be partly scientiﬁc, though it would most likely still need some ex-military oﬃcers forcommand and reactor operation. Perhaps it should sail under the UN ﬂag, which would give it a better chance of independentsurvival. It may coexist with the military submarine refuges described above.2.2. Long-term, futuristic scenarios1. A new specially-designed submarine-refuge: If more money were available, a new submarine speciﬁcally designed for thepurpose could be built. It should have the following characteristics: long independent survivability; a very strong titanium hull fordiving to 1 km or more; large storage space; large crew; food growing and harvesting capabilities; and a second nuclear powerreactor and redundancy of other critical systems. Attachments for submarine drones and a hangar and a ﬂight deck for ﬂyingdrones could also be crucial. Relatedly, as lack of volume is a primary concern for submarine refuges, Brin (2016) has suggesteddividing refuge submarines into two parts: a mobile (normal) submarine and larger moored submersible base. The ﬁrst willprovide energy, transportation and survival in the acute phase of a catastrophe, and the second will provide a larger volume forlong term survival of larger numbers of people, as well as supplies, food, equipment for farming, and so on. The moored portionmight also be unmoored and towed (submerged or surfaced) to other locations as needed. (This idea could work with several ofthe scenarios proposed here).2. A very large generational submarine “Ark". The larger a submarine, the longer its potential independent survival. An arksubmarine would be analogous to the idea of generation starships, which take hundreds of years to reach other stars (see Hein’srecent analysis (2012)). It could be ﬁtted with animals and an even larger crew, perhaps thousands of people, and should be ableto survive independently for decades. Such a vessel would stretch existing shipbuilding technologies, being perhaps 20 timeslarger than the previously built largest Russian subs, and may be vulnerable because of its size, but it seems technically possible.Its price may be as high as 100 billion dollars, more than the price of the most costly aircraft carriers, but cheaper than theinternational space station or a Lunar base (Sabathier, Weppler, & Bander, 2009). Such a vessel might help in a situation where theinitial impact of a catastrophe is not high, but subsequent contamination is very long term. It could also be thought of as like amobile submersible seastead, and if seasteads were ever made, this would become a possible next step.3. Fleet of around 10 specially-designed submarine-refuges. In contrast to one giant ark, a larger number of smaller submarinesmay increase survivability, due to the stochastic nature of some natural catastrophes, whose eﬀect could have unpredictablevariations on the Earth’s surface. This could also provide the opportunity to test several designs, adapted to various types ofcatastrophes. Some small and strong-hulled titanium submarines could survive stronger impacts and tsunami waves, but largersubmarines with thinner hulls could be better adapted to long-term survival in a contaminated world. The ﬂeet will also provide achance to safely renovate some of the submarines or replace crews, without losing their presence in the sea. Such a program willcost around 100 billion dollars and will take decades to realize. It will also provide jobs for shipyards, putting a similar level ofstress on the economy as military programs; this could even be beneﬁcial in Keynesian economy logic.4. The same ﬂeet plus each submarine has its ‘port island’. The next logical upgrade for the program would provide eachsubmarine with a “port island” with docks, stocks, and fertile grounds, as an easier starting point for rebuilding civilization. Suchan island should be non-human populated, and far from civilization. Possible examples of such islands could be some of the PaciﬁcIslands, Alaskan Islands, peri-Antarctic islands like Kerguelen and South Georgia, and so on. The reason for the island port is thatthere are two stages for many types of catastrophe, the impact stage and contamination stage. (There is also the possible stage of“secret contamination” which may apply to some slow bioweapons similar to AIDS.) The requirements of these two stages can bequite diﬀerent. The ﬁrst may require, for example, a strong hull, and the second might require strong decontamination abilityand/or the ability to wait, potentially for many years. In any case, each submarine should have clear instructions on how andwhere it will start to rebuild civilization. The submarine could provide nuclear-powered electricity during initial rebuilding and ashelter if conditions worsen temporarily. It could be used as transportation to other regions, which will be able to connectsurvivors. Island-plus-submarine is likely a more viable solution than submarine alone.5. Future high-tech submarines. In several decades the role of robotics, AI, nanotech, and genetically modiﬁed organisms willA. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3728grow, and these new capabilities could be used to build more sophisticated shelters. This may result in the use of manufacturingrobots and partly self-replicating robots for the construction and population of the sub-refuge. Frozen gametes and embryos, andeven artiﬁcial uteruses, may become possible. Narrow AI could control the process and guide recovery. These emergingtechnologies associated with risk adaptation would themselves have associated risks and ethical problems worthy of consideration(Green 2014, 2016).This temporal and technological progression would hopefully result in cheaper, larger and more durable submarines. Also, thecreation of subs will provide needed expertise in the planning of space bunkers, as suggested by Torres (2016b).3. Advantages of nuclear submarines as refugesNuclear submarines are designed as very robust survivors, and humanity has 60+ years of experience that allows us to buildsubmarine refuges by applying our accumulated knowledge. Nuclear submarines are surface independent, and could provide energy,generate oxygen from water by electrolysis, generate fresh water by desalination, and carry large food supplies for its inhabitants formany years. They are able to withstand close nuclear explosions and radiation. They are isolated from biological attacks and resistantto many weapons. They already exist and need only minor adaptations to be used as refuges. So it seems reasonable to consider usingthem as such.3.1. Technical advantagesThere are two types of advantages, technical and social. First we will discuss technical.Nuclear submarines are designed to survive high pressure, explosions, to be surface independent and produce fresh water, oxygenand power, and to survive long periods without any support from civilization.They are also optimized for hiding. This feature is less important for survival from natural catastrophes, but several risk scenariosare imaginable where secrecy will be useful.Next, unlike other types of refuges, submarines are mobile; they are able to move all over the world’s oceans. As we do not knowthe full range of types of future possible catastrophes, it may be useful to be able to move unobtrusively to various locations wherechances of survival will be higher.Submarines do not have nuclear power heat dissipation problems. The best way to provide long-term power for a refuge is anuclear reactor, but most terrestrial reactors need a cooling system, which contradicts the requirement of surface independence.There are possible solutions for such terrestrial nuclear power plants, like using surface water, ground water, long pipes insurrounding rock or building them in ice. But a submarine exists in a cooling liquid, which is optimal for heat dissipation.The average water temperature in global oceans is around 6C, and the thermal inertia of the oceans is high. If a brief period ofextreme global warming were to happen, the oceans would still be cold enough for survival for many years. The oceans also woulddilute the concentration of any dangerous chemicals and radioactive elements, while providing a source of oxygen and drinkingwater.Submarines eﬀectively can go deeper than underground bunkers. The ocean has median depth of 4 km, and a maximum of 11 km,and, unlike land, is cold even in the deepest places. In comparison, subterranean bunkers suﬀer from a geothermal heat gradient ofapproximately 25C per km (Fridleifsson et al., 2008), and so (depending on depth) could require sophisticated cooling systems. Thismakes bunkers deeper than 1 km extremely diﬃcult (as surrounding rock could be 40C or more), especially surface independentones. In contrast, the Russian titanium-hulled submarine “Komsomolets” could dive to 1250 m and the Russian submarine “Losharik”might be able to dive to 2 km and may be more (Global security, 2016).The importance of submarines’ ability to go deep underwater is shown by the risk from cosmic ray bursts. Dar, Laor, and Shaviv(1997) suggested that the merger of neutron stars could produce intense cosmic ray bursts, which result in extinctions approximatelyevery 100 mln years. Such bursts produce muons, which could yield 100 times the fatal dose of radiation on the Earth’s surface, andmay be able to go up to 3 km underground or underwater before their intensity will diminish to 1 per cent, and approach a leveltolerable to humans. Such bursts might also radiologically activate iodine and other elements, which would aﬀect shadowed regionsof the Earth.Cirković and Vukotića (2016) has suggested that to survive such a burst one would need to construct bunkers 3 km deep. Butbecause of high underground temperatures such bunkers may be possible only in ice (where the pressure problem will exist, as ice isamorphous and moving) or in rock near ice (such as under Antarctic mountains). In contrast, creating a submarine capable ofwithstanding 3 km depth is possible. It also would be able to move to parts of the ocean where the gamma-ray source is in the Earth’sconstant shadow or near the horizon, thus eﬀectively increasing its depth.3.2. Social advantagesSocial advantages include easy construction, usage and participation in global risks prevention.The required technology for building submarines already exists compared to suggested space refuges on space stations, Mars orthe Moon. Existing nuclear submarines could be used as refuges even without interruption of their military duties, with low costupgrades (that is adding female crewmembers, some supplies and training, more below). The construction technologies andproduction yards are proven, and we already have the necessary skilled workers. So construction would have no major technologicalA. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3729surprises.Next, submarines would be less accessible to “hostile survivors” who may try to break into the refuge after the start of acatastrophe and bring dangerous viruses or contamination within, or otherwise cause harm.Because refuge submarines will be ﬁlled with dedicated humans, knowledge, and supplies, they could become “centers ofcrystallization” for future human civilization, and the seed of the rebuilding process. Even if thousands of people survive acatastrophe, they will be scattered over the Earth surface. Unprepared, isolated, and injured, they may be doomed to extinction. Yetin this situation, a small group of highly qualiﬁed organized survivors with needed supplies would be very helpful for startingcivilization again and helping the other scattered survivors (though if the catastrophe is biological such contacts pose risks).It is unlikely that such a submarine would be available for a hostile agent who may want to create a global catastrophe and be theonly survivor, or leverage the risk of a global catastrophe for global blackmail, as such submarines will be available only to large stateactors and even international groups (this is not so in the case of underground bunkers, which anyone can dig). However, somedictators or billionaires could use submarines as personal refuges and even pay for their construction, the same way as they pay nowfor personal bunkers.Much of the time submarines will be isolated from dangerous information sources, including computer viruses and cyberattacksby narrow AI.Submarines would also help to create a professional class of people who exist to mitigate existential risks. While they are on thesubmarine they can engage in natural and social scientiﬁc research, policy research and advocacy, culture building, etc.The combination of social and technical advantages makes submarines an attractive type of refuge against a wide range of globalcatastrophes.4. Possible counterarguments for use of nuclear submarines as refugesHere we will address possible counterarguments against the project and ways to reply. These counterarguments also can bedivided into technical and social.Technical counterarguments involve dealing with the physics of the water medium, submarine technical characteristics, thepossible impacts of the catastrophes, and maintenance in a marine environment4.1. Arguments that submarines will not able to survive long enough independentlyDespite various claims that nuclear submarines may stay years underwater, actual maximum known underwater duration is only3 months. There are several reasons why longer underwater missions are problematic and we will now analyze them.First, most submarines require regular extensive maintenance in docks. Such maintenance would be very diﬃcult or impossibleafter a catastrophe. But the mode of use of a refuge-submarine will be rather diﬀerent than the use of a military submarine. Themilitary submarine secretly circles the ocean. But a refuge-submarine could be stationary in deep water not far from its port, whichwill result in much less wear on its engines. After a catastrophe, in most scenarios, it also would not need to stay under water foryears, but could remain on the surface. Regardless, specially built refuge-submarines should be provided with inbuilt redundancy ofcritical elements, and with self-repair capabilities. The latest British submarine is claimed to be able to stay 25 years under water(BBC, 2014), but has to surface every three months to replenish its food supply. While the food problem seems to be ﬁxable the mainproblem would be equipment breakdowns, which may require dock-ﬁxing. Even though a 50 years lifespan is now reachable for anuclear reactor, and most contemporary submarines carry spare parts for ongoing repairs and maintenance, there could still be needfor unexpected major repairs. A refuge-submarine would need to carry an even larger stockpile of space parts as well as very highquality metal 3-D printers to manufacture any parts not on hand.Second, seaweed, barnacles, and marine life damage submarine hulls. Submarines require regular docking to clean their hulls andstop corrosion. There are two types of repairs: medium overhaul, which is typically done once every several years and mostlyintended to remove corrosion, and large overhaul, which includes replacing many parts and refueling the nuclear reactor. After acatastrophe, neither type of overhaul would likely be possible. With current technology, it looks as though ﬁve years is the maximumtime of viability of a submarine without overhaul in port. In the future, remote-controlled repair drones might be able to somewhatextend this viability.Third, carbon dioxide accumulation is a constant problem for submarines. Submarines typically get rid of carbon dioxide by achemical reaction which uses non-renewable chemicals. Many tons would be required for years of survival and this would wasteprecious storage. But new technologies are being developed to clean carbon dioxide from the air without relying upon non-renewablechemicals; either by dissolving carbon dioxide in seawater (Coxworth, 2010) or using renewable nanomaterials (Stockton, 2014).Other technologies exist that are used in space. Another possible solution, if given enough space, would be to use plants to harvestcarbon dioxide onboard and produce food.Fourth, submarines have limited storage for long-term isolation, especially food. NASA rations are currently 1.7 kg per person perday, and there will be other needed supplies, such as medication, survival equipment, clothing and spare parts. Therefore, it might besafe to estimate that on average 5 kg of materials might be needed per person per day, though it may be much lower, perhaps 2–3 kg/day. (But it could be as small as 600 g of dry rice which has energy content of 2100 kcal.) Baum, Denkenberger, Pearce et al. (2015b).Returning to the Ohio class submarine example, each Ohio has a crew of 155 people and carries 24 UGM-133 Trident II missileseach weighing 59 tons, equaling 1416 tons total. If just the missiles were replaced with food and other supplies, then based on theabove usage estimate of 5 kg per person per day, it will provide supplies for 1827 days, or exactly 5 years.A. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–37304.2. Arguments that submarines are not eﬀective as refugesThere are some reasonable arguments that submarines are inadequate refuges which would not guarantee human survival, butonly provide a small chance of it. It is not easy to give numerical estimates of such a chance of survival but it might be safe to say(depending on the speciﬁc event) that it is between 1 and 10 per cent.1. Not universal protection. Most future catastrophes will be either too small or too large for dedicated refuges to be useful, as hasbeen shown by Jebari (2014). The most serious risks to humanity come from emerging technologies, including biotechnology,nanotechnology, and artiﬁcial intelligence, and such 20th-century style systems as nuclear submarines will provide little defenseagainst them. Refuges will also not be of use if the biosphere is severely damaged, and does not return to normal within 10–50years of a catastrophe, which could happen in the cases of runaway global warming, some broad-spectrum synthetic biologicalpandemics, global radioactive contamination, or a large bolide impact or a ﬂood basalt event.2. The ocean could be aﬀected by high tsunami and/or pressure waves in the case of a large asteroid or comet impact. Mostcurrent submarines can survive at a depth of 400 m, so they might survive long pressure spikes created by the waves above themas high as 200–400 m, but not kilometer size waves. Submarines are also designed to withstand short pressure spikes from closeexplosions of deep charges and even nuclear explosions. Energy of shock waves is inversely proportional to the square of thedistance (Costanzo 2010), but the open question is if underwater shock waves will decline quicker than surface waves. Recentsimulations of asteroid impacts in water (Patchett, 2016) showed that waves’ size depend on many factors during an impact.Another research suggested that pressure waves could contribute to the marine life extinction during asteroid’s impacts(Takayama et al., 2016), but numerical simulation showed that such waves will be attenuated by surface unloading. However,wave guides could form in water depth, which means that a submarine should stay in the shallow waters if passing of suchpressure wave is expected. However, the Russian-built titanium 1980s submarine “Komsomolets” could dive to 1250 m (Taras,2006) and Russia also now has a submarine “Losharik” with a working depth of at least 2 km or possibly even 6 km (Globalsecurity, 2016). Also, a submarine could be stationed in a basin like the Mediterranean Sea which would probably be less aﬀectedby an oceanic tsunami. The probability of bolide impact upon the Mediterranean Sea is 1/200 of the total probability of a bolidehitting the Earth. If there are several deployed submarines and they are widely distributed around the world, it is more likely thatsome of them would survive an impact event.3. In the most plausible scenarios of catastrophes, more people will survive on land, than on submarines. Even if acatastrophe had the intensity to kill 999 of 1000 people, millions of people would still survive on land. However, initial survivalmay mean nothing if the impact stage is followed by long-term contamination and high fatality rates. In any case, submarinescould become centers for preserving knowledge and civilization, and coordination and communication with other survivors.4. One of the weakest parts of the submarine project is humans. To be placed seemingly forever in a deep enclosed space exertsstrong pressure on the human mind, which may result in dangerous behavior and/or suicide. Navies, airlines, and other groups arefairly good at sorting out unstable candidates, and if such work becomes a channel for getting into space or another similarbeneﬁt, it will attract top-level applicants. Before a catastrophe crews may be rotated the same way as the rotated in current SSBN,that is every 3 months, and as no accidents of mass psychosis on board is known, it means that eﬀective technology ofpsychological training exists. It includes careful choosing of the crew members as well as some forms of entertainment on board,including high quality food, movies, and exercise facilities (Ohios have treadmills and a well-equipped kitchen). If a catastrophehappens it will put enormous stress on people on board as most their relative will die and because of large uncertainty about theirown survival. Large group of relatively young people of both sexes conﬁned in small space will be prone to internal conﬂictswhich could undermine survival of the submarine. But the problem is a general one, which would happen in space stations,underground bunkers and almost any other types of refuges.4.3. Is one submarine crew enough to rebuild human civilization?This question aligns with previous question of the eﬀectiveness of submarines as refuges, but is in fact wider, because it isapplicable to any type of refuge. It is related to questions involving the most eﬀective sex ratio in a refuge, advanced reproductivetechnologies, and future questions involving the proper numbers of oﬀspring. It may require special analysis by geneticists,demographers, and other researchers. But, in general, we think there is already adequate evidence that one crew could be enough torebuild human civilization, but not guarantee its survival, as during the catastrophe and after coming ashore the crew couldexperience many unpredictable events.The crew of an Ohio class submarine is 155 people. Evidence based on genetic variation suggests that groups of around 70 peoplecolonized Polynesia and the New World (Hey, 2005; Murray-McIntosh, Scrimshaw, Hatﬁeld, & Penny, 1998; Hanson, 2008). Thismeans that inbreeding was a soluble problem, possibly because women had many children which permits rapid selection.Inbreeding could be partly solved by using genetically diverse frozen sperm and eggs, and/or frozen embryos, and in vitrofertilization. In vitro fertilization often results in multiple births, which means that a smaller number of women would be needed tobirth many children in the ﬁrst generation, but highly trained medical professionals would be necessary.In vitro fertilization provides for reproduction in older ages, so if a submarine spends less than 10 years under water (likely, givenother constraints), reproduction onboard the submarine would be unnecessary. Additionally, the crew, embryos, and/or gametes,should be genetically diverse in order to lower the risk of inbreeding. Some studies show that inbreeding with ﬁrst cousins increasesthe rate of the birth defects 1.3 to 1.6 times compared to the background level of 3 per cent (that is to 2–5 per cent, equal to risk forA. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3731women after 40). So it could be an existential risk for a post-catastrophe human colony if it will have high fertility rates (Bennettet al., 2002). Repeated consanguineous marriages in Pakistan have resulted in the doubling of infant mortality (Bittles, 1994), whichis not good but acceptable for human survival. Consanguineous couples have higher fertility rates, which has social, but not biologicalreasons, and it may be helpful in restoring human population (Bittles, 1994; Helgason et al., 2008).Ecologists often use the “50/500 rule”, which states that minimum number of organisms needed to survive a populationbottleneck is 50 (because below that it will happen inbreeding depression), and to survive long term it is 500, as that is needed forevolutionary adaptability (Frankham, Bradshaw, & Brook, 2014). But this rule includes only fertile individuals, and not children, theelderly, or other members of society, so the actual number for a minimal population will likely be higher. A submarine refuge’s initialcrew will consist mostly or exclusively of fertile individuals, but over time the number of fertile individuals will decline.Lastly, any small accident could easily bring this number below critical levels, so while one submarine might be able to preventextinction, the possibility is not assured.We could consider clusters of multiple submarines as a means of expanding survivor populations, which seems possible as dozensof military submarines are always at sea.4.4. Arguments that creation of the submarine refuges is not the best strategy for approaching the problem of existential riskEven if submarine-refuges might work, large-scale projects have opportunity costs. If a large submarine refuge project werestarted, money and global attention could be diverted from other more cost-eﬀective, perhaps overall better projects, such as asteroiddefense or the creation of friendly AI. Therefore, this should be carefully analyzed in comparison with other mitigation andadaptation strategies.Another danger is that later stages of the project could become obsolete before completion. A completely new submarine refugeproject would take 10–30 years of planning, funding, and construction before becoming fully operational. During this time many newtechnologies will appear, which will each create new risks. So submarine refuges work best in an environment of slow technologicaldevelopment and low-tech risks. Therefore, given contemporary circumstances more quickly adapting existing military submarineswith smaller changes would probably be most eﬀective means of creating submarine refuges.5. Comparison with subterranean and space bunkersThe best standard for refuges against existential risks is surface independence. The two main types of such refuges which havebeen discussed in previous literature, are underground bunkers and space refuges (there are other type of refuges which are notsurface independent, such as private bunkers, ships at sea, Antarctic bases, remote islands, etc., but they are outside the scope of thisarticle, as they are not surface independent).Of all underground refuges the most attractive are nuclear bunkers like those built in the Cold War, since they already exist andprovide all the necessary equipment to survive a large-scale catastrophic event. Their main disadvantage is that they will be targetedin the case of war, and as their locations are known, they will be much easier to target than submarines. They cannot move, so theycannot escape some types of catastrophes. But they can house more people and distribute them widely in complex network of tunnels,with large amount of goods, etc. Unfortunately, the Earth’s thermal gradient prevents these bunkers from being both very deep (morethan 1 km) and surface isolated at the same time. Additionally, hostile survivors might easily attack them. Future bunkers could bebuilt in such places as Antarctic mountain ridges or as large networks of tunnels. Using submarines as refuges does not mean thatbunkers should be ignored, as the best protection is oﬀered by diversiﬁcation.Future space refuges, which include space stations with same number of people as in a typical submarine, or Moon or Marssettlements with even larger number of people, could provide dramatically greater Earth-surface independence. But they are muchless mature and require much more expensive technology. Their starting price is probably above 1 trillion dollars, (as the price of theISS is more than 100 billion dollars, and it able to support only 6 people for 3 months (ESA, 2013)), while 100–300 billion is the endprice for building of even the most sophisticated submarine-refuges (for example, 6 billion dollars is the price of the newest, mostsophisticated Columbia-class submarines in the US ﬂeet (O’Rourke 2016). Submarine refuges could help prepare people andtechnology for space refuges. Their main disadvantage is that they do not yet exist, will require decades to build, are much moreexpensive, and will be no less vulnerable to accidents or hostile acts as submarines. The problem of their self-suﬃciency is not solved,so the survivors would eventually need to return to Earth. These settlements could become competitive with submarines in terms ofprice and safety when new types of space exploration based on emerging technologies appear, but these new technologies willthemselves bring new risks.Submarines seem to have the best combination of advantages, as they combine the isolation of islands and Antarctic bases, andsurface independence similar to space bunkers, with the relatively low price and high viability of land bunkers. Additionally, theirtechnology is well-explored and their mobility is something no bunker can oﬀer. Ideally, all protection systems should work together.6. Types of catastrophes where submarines may help6.1. Probability that submarines-refuges will prevent human extinctionMany ideas about possible sources of global risks have been suggested (Freitas, 2000; Posner, 2004; Rees, 2003;Tonn &MacGregor, 2009; Torres, 2016a, 2016b). Beckstead (2015) wrote that most types of catastrophes are either overkill orA. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3732underkill for refuges to be useful.For example, consider bolide impacts as a (admittedly imperfect) guide for the size distribution of the future catastrophes.Asteroids of∼10 km size are 30 times more rare than ∼1 km size (Napier 2008). And 100 km bodies are even 30 times more rarethan 10 km. Assuming that 10 km is sweet spot where submarine-refuges could help, and 100 km will result in extinction anyway, weget the following distribution: roughly 97 percent of impact cases are underkill, 3 per cent could be saved by the submarine-refuges,and 0.1 per cent cases are overkill. The non-linear distribution of asteroid sizes favors underkill events. This is just a quick calculation,as for some types of catastrophes such tail distribution does not work. Even in situation of “underkill” submarines may be useful asthey will help in coordination of survivors and make reconstruction of the civilization more rapid and probable.Some types of futuristic catastrophes are always overkill, for example malicious artiﬁcial superintelligence, which is regarded bymany specialists as a most serious risk (e.g. Bostrom, 2014). Submarines will not help in some other scenarios previously identiﬁed byexistential risk researchers, e.g.: runaway global warming, accelerator accidents where small black hole may appear (Kent, 2004),and grey goo of self-replicating nanorobots (Phoenix & Drexler, 2004).Even if submarines are deployed, some errors or accidents could prevent their eﬀective use as refuges, or result in failure of theirattempt to rebuild civilization.Perfecting these estimations could be helpful for calculating the cost-eﬀectiveness of building submarine refuges as compared toother mitigation and adaptation strategies.6.2. Catastrophes typesBeckstead (2015) has argued that two types of catastrophes could make refuges useful: pandemics (Doherty, 2013) or a cobaltbomb (Kahn, 1960), and has also argued that both scenarios are not very plausible.We disagree that refuges are eﬀective against such a limited number of types of disasters and we also think that Becksteadunderestimates the risks of pandemic and radiological contamination, as they may become much more likely due to the of appearanceof new technologies in next 20 years.Artiﬁcial pandemic. The danger of an artiﬁcial pandemic created by means of synthetic biology is much larger than that of anynatural pandemic. Indeed, it will likely be one of the highest catastrophic risks in the 21st century. Pandemics may be designed byhostile agents to deliberately kill everyone on Earth. Or it might take a form of a multipandemic, where many diﬀerent agents wouldbe released simultaneously (Turchin & Green, 2017)Radiological contamination. The danger of global radiological contamination due to a nuclear war targeting nuclear powerstations or the use of cobalt bombs is likewise serious. Russia recently returned to the project of building cobalt bombs in the form of aproject on a 20Mt nuclear torpedo called “Status-6” and other such projects may exist in secret. Some natural events such as verylarge solar ﬂares, gamma-ray bursts or close supernova explosions may hypothetically produce radiological contamination as well. Inthese scenarios, ocean water has 400 times more mass than air in the atmosphere, and any radioactive elements will be stronglydiluted, so submarines in the ocean will be much less aﬀected than anything on the surface. A nuclear war scenario with an extremenuclear winter might cover much of the oceans in ice, but submarines could exist under it.Narrow AI virus aﬀects a robotic army. In the future, billions of robots will be connected by the internet of things, andmilitaries will be full of drones of all sizes. Computer viruses, perhaps developed by militaries, may come to have elements of AI, so itis imaginable that such a virus could make all moving robots (including self-driving cars, home robots and military drones) attackpeople. Such a mutiny would die oﬀ after energy and manufacturing ability is exhausted, but military level submarines could surviveit in deep remote parts of the ocean. However, most in the AI safety crowd think that superintelligence is more probable anddangerous than a virus in a robotic army (Bostrom, 2014; Yudkowsky, 2008).Short term runaway global warming. Submarines could protect against a temporary elevation of Earth’s temperatures to the50–70C range. One way this could happen would be via the abrupt release of methane from Arctic permafrost, methane clathrates inthe oceans, or a nuclear summer. To survive such a situation, a submarine would stay deep underwater, as only deep water might becold enough to maintain reactor safety; it may even have to search for cold spots.Bolide impact. This is a much less likely event and the bolide needs to be of an exact size, probably 1–10 km, for submarines to beuseful. Such an impact would create large shockwaves and tsunamis, followed by an “asteroid winter.” This winter could cover muchof the sea in ice. It could also be combined with poisoning of the atmosphere by various gases, including CO2, sulfur, nitric oxide, and“volcanic” dust. Submarines could also be very useful during a period of bombardment with many small comet fragments, if suchevent were to happen (Napier, 2015).Flood basalt event. A large volcanic event on a scale larger than a supervolcanic eruption, might change atmosphericcomposition and global temperature. While no ﬂood basalt events have happened on Earth in human memory, they have beenrelatively common during parts of Earth’s geologic history.Poisoning of the atmosphere may be because of oceanic anoxia, volcanic gases or artiﬁcial chemicals created by malevolentagent.Gamma-ray burst. As noted above, a gamma ray burst could potentially cause deep sterilization of large areas of the Earth’ssurface, even killing up to 3 km underground (Dar et al., 1997). But submarines could relocate to parts of the Earth where the gammaemitter will not be visible, or will be low on the horizon.Something unknown. As the number of ideas of possible catastrophes is constantly growing, it easy to suggest that we do notknow all possible scenarios. Submarines oﬀer broad-spectrum protection from a wide set of risks, perhaps including unknown ones.From the above, biological catastrophes, diﬀerent forms of nuclear war and its consequences, and AI seems to be most probableA. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3733catastrophes. Other catastrophes such as a large bolide impact are less than 0.01 percent in next century. This means that submarinesshould be supplied with biological and radiological decontamination equipment, and their internet connection with outside worldshould be limited.7. Some ways to make submarines even better refuges7.1. Technical upgradesOcean water contains nutrients and plankton. Submarines could pump and ﬁlter water inside to use as food, whether directly forhumans to eat, or through an intermediate species; bugs, seaweed, worms could all be grown onboard. Fishing also seems to bepossible in some form, as some deep-water organisms could survive many types of catastrophe. Even direct chemical synthesis couldbe used to create sugars and other edible chemicals.Underwater caches/habitats with useful goods could be created. As the inner size of a submarine is limited, it may be reasonableto stockpile useful goods, including food, medication, spare parts, etc., outside, but not within reach of the outside world. Theseaﬂoor could be a suitable place.A satellite communication system would be helpful, as good information will be precious after a catastrophe. The nature and theextent of the catastrophe will probably not be clear for the submarine refuge dwellers. Images from satellites, sea and air drones, andcommunication with space stations and land bases will provide this valuable information and will help the crew to determine the bestcourse of action.7.2. Crew and social organizationIn general, the problem of the crew preparation for long-term existence in conﬁned space is solved by military psychologists aswell as for long space mission (Vakoch, 2011) as we could judge from lack of known crew riots on submarines (while in the pact riotson ship were common).The most important part of this project is the people involved, and training them will be as important as building a technicallyrobust submarine. Such preparation should consider several factors.The preparedness of the crew is vital for the survivability of the submarine. Crewmembers should be the best people withextensive training and excellent health (Basner et al., 2014). Such people should be well paid, and this will be signiﬁcant cost of theproject. Fortunately, since the crew has to be young, that reduces costs because they are just starting their careers. Also, preparationfor space travel is another form of “payment,” not to mention the pride of being one of the few people given the opportunity to savethe world. There is a clear trade-oﬀ between being well-trained and being young enough to still reproduce well. This is a particularlyacute problem for women. One solution could be that small part of the crew will be older and with higher expertise, probably ex-military oﬃcers, including the commander, nuclear specialists and other specialists needed for submarine maintenance andnavigation. The other part of the crew could be young men and women who would cycle through the program over time.After a catastrophe there could be survivors on the land, on ships, or in underground bunkers. The submarine may work to rescueand transport them to safer places and for coordination of civilization rebuilding eﬀorts. This training can be practiced ahead of timeas part of disaster response eﬀorts, or as part of crew rotations.The submarine should preserve digital copies of cultural and scientiﬁc information. Such information will provide education andentertainment for people inside the submarine.Exercises in civilization rebuilding may be needed. We do not know much about the necessary conditions for rebuildingcivilization, so it would be beneﬁcial to experiment with such in training exercises on an island.Even if the submarine project does not work out, its attempt may help to change human values and thus improve the trajectory ofhuman history.7.3. Preparation to rehabilitation of the landAll submarine as refuges project make sense only if some habitable land survives, where humans could start new civilization. Suchland should be able to support some type of agriculture and be safe enough for human survival.To be well prepared the submarine needs:• Knowledge in form of physical books about history, technology and practical knowledge about agriculture and other useful things(Dartnell, 2015).• Various seeds like the ones in the Svalbard vault in Norway.• A large supply of essential tools, like knives, for use until descendants master metallurgy.• A freezer with sperm and eggs and someone on board who knows how to do in vitro fertilization.• High protection gear, which will be needed during ﬁrst expeditions to establish habitability of the land, like “spacesuits”,dosimeters, ﬁlters, etc.• Survival gear for establishing a colony, including hunting riﬂes, ﬁshing nets, radio communication, solar power chargers, tents,some simple machinery, etc.A. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–37347.4. Survival strategyThe submarine-refuge should be prepared for use in several stages, which could be diﬀerent for diﬀerent types of catastrophes,like a slow and concealed biological pandemic.1) Expectation. At this point the submarine is simply waiting in the ocean, probably in a secret location, as SSBNs do now.2) Impact phase. At the beginning of a catastrophe, the submarine uses its survival skills, for example to survive large waves from anasteroid impact.3) Endurance phase. In this phase the surface may be uninhabitable due to contamination, high or low temperature, or nuclearwinter. During that time the crew has to establish the nature and scale of a catastrophe (which may be no trivial task). It may needto send probes to surface to take samples. Based on this information, the crew should decide how long to stay submerged andwhere the best places are for landing. It also should try to make contact with other survivors.4) Land search. If they ﬁnd that all humanity is lost, they should wait until surface conditions improve enough to make short-termexcursions near prospective settlements and explore it by drones and expeditions.5) Landing. It is important to ﬁnd a good port for the sub, so it may dock and become the center of the future settlement, providingelectricity and shelter.6) Building the initial settlement and beginning procreation. After a settlement is established, it will be possible to start havingchildren. The number of children should be enough to ensure quick growth of, and their proper education will be crucial or a darkage is possible.7) Recovery. Even in the best case, 100 years after landing most of equipment will be lost, the original crewmembers dead, and thecolony will still be small, perhaps around in best case several thousand people. With such small population only a primitive societyis possible. In the best case nearly three hundred years will be needed to create society with a million members. At least severalcenturies would be needed to recreate technological civilization. So it would be important to preserve basic knowledge andimportant ideas, especially how to avoid global catastrophes again. The remains of the submarine may be such a reminder forfuture generations.8. Conclusion: project “Yellow submarine” as a way of unifying humanity for positive goalIn the town where I was born Lived a man who sailed to sea And he told us of his life In the land of submarinesSo we sailed up to the sun Till we found the sea of green And we lived beneath the waves In our yellow submarineThe Beatles.In the last few decades, the world has spent trillions of dollars building nuclear submarines. The US is going to spend $100 billionon a new strategic submarine program in the next 10 years and $200 billion more for its maintenance.Even if a small part of these resources were allocated to the creation of refuge-submarines, it could increase the probability of thesurvival of humanity within a speciﬁc range of possible future catastrophes.Such preparation could be started using existing military submarines, such as Ohio class SSBNs, by adding some speciﬁc books,supplies, seeds, and more female crewmembers. It would not lower military preparedness and would not require a large fundingallocation. As for costs, it is clear that the early stages of the project will not overstretch budgets, but could help military publicrelations. If more funds became available, the project could gradually grow in maturity, providing more and more protection at eachstage.Finding $1 billion of public money for retroﬁtting an old submarine seems diﬃcult in the current environment. For example, theSentinel project of the anti-asteroid telescope only attracted funding of 1–3 million a year, despite its goal of 450 million. But the“Yellow Submarine” project could provide a new goal for the military-industrial complex, which could help it maintain jobs andgovernment funding.One option for crowdfunding might be to sell tickets for a place on such a submarine. While this might not be ideal forpreparedness, if it managed to make such a refuge possible, it would be better than nothing. Another option could be a TV realityshow created around it, thus generating revenue.In conclusion, submarines are one of the best available options for refuges from existential risks, but refuges are not the beststrategy to escape existential risks. Creation of friendly AI and international cooperation would be more eﬀective. See more in “Planof actions to prevent x-risks” (Turchin, 2015).Conﬂicts of interestNone. This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.AcknowledgmentsWe want to thank David Denkenberger, author of “Feeding Everyone No Matter What” for insightful comments, Phil Torres fromthe X-Risks Institute, Sergey Xarkonnen for an important conversation and Dmitry Shakhov for proofreading. Readers of the forum“sovpl” provided valuable technical input about docking and maintenance of submarines. Our special thanks to writer David BrinA. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3735who has thought for a long time about using submarines as refuges. We would lastly like to thank the anonymous reviewers for theireﬀort and thoughtful consideration.ReferencesAsimov, I. (1981). A choice of catastrophes: The disasters that threaten our world. New York: Ballantine Books.BBC (2014). Royal Navy gets ﬁrst female submariners. http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-27278588.Basner, M., Dinges, D. F., Mollicone, D. J., Savelev, I., Ecker, A. J., Di Antonio, A., et al. (2014). Psychological and behavioral changes during conﬁnement in a 520-daysimulated interplanetary mission to mars. Public Library of Science, 9, e93298. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0093298.Baum, S. D., Denkenberger, D. C., & Haqq-Misra, J. (Denkenberger, Haqq-Misra, 2015a). Isolated refuges for surviving global catastrophes. Futures, 72(September),45–56. http://sethbaum.com/ac/2015_Refuges.html http://sethbaum.com/ac/2015_Refuges.html.Baum, S. D., Denkenberger, D. C., Pearce, J. M., Robock, A., & Winkler, R. (Denkenberger, Pearce et al., 2015b). Resilience to global food supply catastrophes.Environment, Systems, and Decisions, 35(2), 301–313.Beckstead, N. (2015). How much could refuges help us recover from a global catastrophe? Futures, 72(September), 36–44.Bennett, R. L., Motulsky, A. G., Bittles, A., Hudgins, L., Uhrich, S., Doyle, D. L., et al. (2002). Genetic counseling and screening of consanguineous couples and theiroﬀspring. Journal of Genetic Counseling, 11, 97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1014593404915.Bittles, A. H. (1994). The role and signiﬁcance of consanguinity as a demographic variable. Population and development review. Population Council, 20(September (3)),561–584. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2137601.JSTOR2137601.Bostrom, N. (2002). Existential risks: Analyzing human extinction scenarios and related hazards. Journal of Evolution and Technology, 9.Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence. Oxford University Press.Brin, D. (1990). Earth. Bantam Books.Brin, D. (2013). Existence. Tor Science Fiction.Brin, D., 2016. Personal communication.Brooks, M. (2007). World war Z. Three Rivers Press.Cirković, M. M., & Vukotića, B. (2016). Long-term prospects: Mitigation of supernova and gamma-ray burst threat to intelligent beings. Acta Astronautica,129(December), 438–446.Costanzo, F. A. (2010). Underwater explosion phenomena and shock physics. Proceedings of the IMAC-XXVIII february 1–4, 2010http://www.am.chalmers.se/∼thab/IMAC/2010/PDFs/Papers/s38p003.pdf.Coxworth, B. (2010). 1948 technology could help today’s submariners breathe easier. Newatlas(June)http://newatlas.com/dixon-ring-co2-scrubbing-system/15473/.Dar, A., Laor, A., & Shaviv, N. J. (1997). Life extinctions by cosmic ray jets. Physical Review Letters, 80(June (26))https://arxiv.org/pdf/astro-ph/9705008v1.pdf.Dartnell, L. (2015). The knowledge. Penguin Books.Doherty, P. C. (2013). Pandemics: What everyone needs to know. Oxford University Press.ESA (2013). How much does it cost? http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Human_Spaceﬂight/International_Space_Station/How_much_does_it_cost.Frankham, R., Bradshaw, C., & Brook, B. W. (2014). Genetics in conservation management: Revised recommendations for the 50/500 rules, Red List criteria andpopulation viability analyses. Biological Conservation, 170, 53–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2013.12.036.Freitas, R. (2000). Some limits to global ecophagy by biovorous nanoreplicators, with public policy recommendations Foresight Institute Technical Report.Fridleifsson, I. B., Bertani, R., Huenges, E., Lund, J. W., Ragnarsson, A., & Rybach, L. (2008). The possible role and contribution of geothermal energy to the mitigationof climate change. In O. Hohmeyer, & T. Trittin (Eds.), .Global security (2016). Project 210 Losharik. Accessed Nov 2016 http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/210.htm.Global security (2017). World-wide nuclear-powered attack submarines. Submarines Accessed Mar 2017 http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/ssn.htm.Green, B. (2014). Are science, technology, and engineering now the most important subjects for ethics?: our need to respond. IEEE Xplore . http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6893408/.Green, B. (2016). Emerging technologies, catastrophic risks, and ethics: three strategies for reducing risk. IEEE Xplore. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7560046/.Hanson, R. (2008). Catastrophe, social collapse, and human extinction. In N. Bostrom, & M. M. Cirkovic ́ (Eds.), Global catastrophic risksOxford: Oxford University Pressp. 554.Helgason, A., Pálsson, S., Gudbjartsson, D. F., Kristjánsson, T., & Stefánsson, K. (2008). An association between the kinship and fertility of human couples. Science, 319,813.Hey, J. (2005). On the number of new world founders: A population genetic portrait of the peopling of the Americas. PLoS Biology, 3(6), 965–975.Jebari, K. (2014). Existential risks: Exploring a robust risk reduction. Science & Engineering Ethics, 21, 541. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11948-014-9559-3.Kahn, H. (1960). On thermonuclear war. Princeton University Press.Kent, A. (2004). A critical look at risk assessments for global catastrophes. Risk Analysis, 24(1), 157–168.LaGrone, Sam. January 21, 2015 https://news.usni.org/2015/01/21/u-s-navy-enlisted-females-serve-subs-starting-2016.Leslie, J. (1996). The end of the world: The science and ethics of human extinction. London: Routledge.Lundquist, E. H. (2011). Ohio-class replacement will carry re-packaged and re-hosted weapons system. DefenceMediaNetwork. http://www.defensemedianetwork.com/stories/ohio-class-replacement-will-carry-%E2%80%9Cre-packaged-and-re-hosted%E2%80%9D-weapons-system/.Morrow, J. (1995). This is the way the world ends. Harcourt Brace & company.Murray-McIntosh, R. P., Scrimshaw, B. J., Hatﬁeld, P. J., & Penny, D. (1998). Testing migration patterns and estimating founding population size in Polynesia by usinghuman mtDNA sequences. Proceedings of National Academy of Science USA, 95 90479052.Napier, W. (2008). Hazards from comets and asteroids. In N. Bostrom, & M. M. Cirkovic (Eds.), Global catastrophic risks. Oxford University Press.Napier, W. (2015). Giant comets and mass extinctions of life. Monthy Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 000https://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.04451v1.pdf.Navy Times (2014). Mabus: First women selected for attack subs. URL: http://www.navytimes.com/article/20130124/CAREERS/301240311/Mabus-First-women-selected-for-attack-subs.O’Rourke, R. (2016). Navy columbia class (Ohio replacement) ballistic missile submarine (SSBN[X]) program: Background and issues for congress. https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/weapons/R41129.pdf.Patchett, M., Samsel, F., Tsai, K., Gisler, G. R., Rogers, D. H., Abram, G. D., et al. (2016). Visualization and analysis of threats from asteroid ocean impacts. Los AlamosNational Laboratoryhttp://www.ijird.com/index.php/ijird/article/viewFile/34952/28149.Pellegrino, C., & Zebrowski, G. (1995). The killing star. William Morrow Co.Phoenix, C., & Drexler, E. (2004). Safe exponential manufacturing. Nanotechnology, 15, 869.Posner, R. (2004). Catastrophe: Risk and response. Oxford University Press.Rees, M. (2003). Our ﬁnal century. Heinemann.Sabathier, V. G., Weppler, J., & Bander, A. (2009). Costs of an international lunar base. Center for Strategic and International Studies. http://csis.org/publication/costs-international-lunar-base.Shute, N. (1957). On the beach. Heinemann.Stephenson, N. (2015). Seveneves. William Morrow.Stockton, N. (2014). New nanomaterial takes the stink out of submarine air. Wired(November)https://www.wired.com/2014/11/nano-sub-co2-scrub/.Takayama, K., Voinovich, P., Timofeev, E., Merlen, A., Kaiho, K., Katayama, M., et al. (2016). Underwater shock waves and seismic waves generated by a catastrophicasteroid impact. National nuclear security administration (NNSA) advanced simulation and computing (ASC) programhttp://www.ifs.tohoku.ac.jp/jpn/shock-coe/A. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3736papers/issw23/2816p.pdf.Taras, A., 2006. Russian nuclear ﬂeet. Russian: Тарас A. Атомный подводный флот 1955–2005. — М.: АСТ, 2006. — 216 с. — ISBN 985-13-8436-4.Tonn, B., & MacGregor, D. (2009). A singular chain of events. Futures, 41(10), 706–714.Torres, P. (2016a). Agential risks: A comprehensive introduction. Journal of Evolution and Technology, 26(August (2)), 31–47.Torres, P., 2016b. Space bunkers. Manuscript .Turchin, A. (2015). Plan of Action to Prevent Human Extinction Risk. http://eﬀective-altruism.com/ea/ut/plan_of_action_to_prevent_human_extinction_risks/.Turchin, A. (2016). The Map of Shelters and Refuges from Global Risks (Plan B of X-risks Prevention), http://eﬀective-altruism.com/ea/12x/the_map_of_shelters_and_refuges_from_global_risks/.Turchin А. Green B. 2017. Multiple Simultaneous Pandemicsas Most Dangerous Global Catastrophic Risk Connected with Bioweapons and Synthetic Biology. Underreview in Risk Analysis.Psychology of space exploration: Contemporary research in historical perspective. In D. Vakoch (Ed.), CreateSpace independent publishing platformhttps://history.nasa.gov/SP-4411.pdf.World Nuclear Association (2016). http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/non-power-nuclear-applications/transport/nuclear-powered-ships.aspx.Yudkowsky, E. (2008). Artiﬁcial intelligence as a positive and negative factor in global risk. In N. Bostrom, & M. Cirkovic (Eds.), Global catastrophic risks [Oxford].A. Turchin, B. Patrick Green Futures 89 (2017) 26–3737