ABSTRACT: 
The theory of moral panics has been prominent in the sociology of deviance since the 1970s. This article uses this theory to trace the rise of the moral panic around the high number of heroin overdose deaths in Australian in the mid to late 1990s. It argues, however, that much of the panic was generated by groups not traditionally associated with moral panics, but by political progressives in the field of illicit drugs as well as victims, parent groups, and those who work with illicit drug users. In this way it was not a conventional right-wing moral crusade, but it was no less a moral panic. <br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article examines the social world of the social world and the social world. It argues that the social world is a moral panic, but one that as McRobbie and Thornton (1995) wrote exists within a ‘multi-mediated’ social world. It is not the moral panic of the 1960s where the folk devils are clear and the moral entrepreneurs are also clearly outlined. Indeed, it argues that the groups that were part of the production of the panic, the claims-makers, considered themselves to be humanitarians and to be on a mission to undermine the deviant status of the folk devils (the heroin users). In their efforts to bring the pro-blems that intravenous drug users (IDUs) were facing, these groups (such as drug and alcohol workers, researchers, and concerned parents) helped produce a moral panic. In this way this article adds to the sociological debate about new forms of moral panic and the way that stories of different groups of claims-makers produce new narratives (McRobbie and Thornton 1995; Dottor 2004), thus adding to sociological analysis and theories of moral panics. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 INTRODUCTION Moral panic theory has been a staple in sociology since the early 1970s, particularly from the time of the publication of Stan Cohen’s book Folk Devils and Moral Panics (1972). Cohen’s book was very successful and produced one of the few cross-over terms from sociology into the general lexicon (Hunt 1997). Received 14 April 2007; accepted 14 August 2007. The author thanks Professor Geoffrey Stokes and Lucinda Horrocks for their help with this article, as well as the anonymous reviewers for Deviant Behavior. Address correspondence to Grazyna Zajdow, School of History, Heritage and Society, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood Victoria, 3125, Australia. E-mail: grazyna.zajdow@deakin.edu.au Deviant Behavior, 29: 640664, 2008 Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN: 0163-9625 print/1521-0456 online DOI: 10.1080/01639620701839476 640 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 This study centers on the media attention given to the deaths from heroin overdose in the mid to late 1990s in Australia, mainly in New South Wales and Victoria.1 The article argues that what happened in that period was a moral panic, but one that as McRobbie and Thornton (1995:559) note exists within a ‘‘multi-mediated’’ social world. It is not the moral panic of the 1960s where the folk devils are clear and the moral entrepreneurs are also clearly outlined. Indeed, it argues that the groups that were part of the production of the panic, the claims-makers, considered themselves to be humanitarians and to be on a mission to undermine the deviant status of the folk devils (the heroin users). In their efforts to bring the pro- blems that intravenous drug users (IDUs) were facing, these groups—such as drug and alcohol workers, researchers, and concerned parents—helped produce a moral panic. I am not arguing here that these were the only groups involved in the production of the moral panic; conservative media commenta- tors, conservative politicians on law and order platforms, and police were also intimately concerned and were very much part of the story. However, this article will argue that in McRobbie and Thornton’s ‘‘multi-mediated social world’’ many groups from the left and right use the media to gain pro- minence for their causes, which often means producing moral panics as outcomes. The article studies this particular group of claims-makers and their efforts to use the existing panic over public heroin use and overdose deaths to modify the stigma of the heroin users and to change public policy to more closely mirror their demands for a more ‘‘medicalized’’ treatment of addicts. In this way this study adds to the sociological debate about new forms of moral panic and the way that stories of different groups of claims-makers produce new narratives (McRobbie and Thornton 1995; Dottor 2004), thus adding to sociological analysis and theories of moral panics. AN OUTLINE OF MORAL PANICS The term ‘‘moral panic’’ was confirmed within in the socio- logical lexicon by Stan Cohen in his book Folk Devils and 1New South Wales accounted for about half the deaths and Victoria then accounted for a substantial portion of the rest (Hall 2004). Moral Panics: The Old and the New 641 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Moral Panics (1972, 2002). Cohen writes that: Societies appear to be subject, every now and then, to peri- ods of moral panic. A condition, episode, person or group of persons emerges to become defined as a threat to societal values and interests; its nature is presented in a stylized and stereotypical fashion by the mass media; the moral barricades are manned by editors, bishops, politicians and other right- thinking people; socially accredited experts pronounce their diagnoses and solutions; ways of coping are evolved or (more often) resorted to; the condition then disappears, submerges or deteriorates and becomes more visible. (Cohen 2002:1) Cohen’s empirical work centered around the groups of young people called ‘‘mods’’ and ‘‘rockers’’ in 1960s Britain whose periodic clashes in some English seaside resorts led to a flurry of media interest because of the work of groups who con- sidered that the young people were exhibiting worrying signs of dissipation and violence. The violent episodes were rare and not really sustained, but the media interest produced a great amount of anxiety and panic among the public as to the direction of ‘‘modern youth.’’ Young people or ‘‘youth’’ is one of those categories or groups about which moral panics perennially simmer and occasionally break out (Cohen 2002). This group is an integral part of this story as well. There are three important actors, or groups of actors, involved in producing a moral panic. There are those whose actions are deemed to cause the moral panic, and around which the panic swirls—the folk devils. Then there are the moral entrepreneurs who consider it is up to them to bring to the greater populace’s notice the damage done by the first group and, finally, there is the media, which carries to the greater public the message of the panic and the concerns of the moral entrepreneurs. It was Howard Becker (1966) in Outsiders who introduced the idea of the moral entrepreneur, the righteous, or self- righteous individual who believes him- or herself to be a humanitarian in the cause of the betterment of society, and whose destiny is to move others to do the right thing as well. Moral entrepreneurs partake in many activities to bring their views to the public. They organize groups around their parti- cular views, conduct public information activities, and, of course, present themselves to the media as spokespeople 642 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 who can be counted on to provide the message, ultimately to influence public policy and perhaps even change laws. In Symbolic Crusade, Gusfield (1963) argued that the nine- teenth-century crusade for alcohol prohibition in the United States was more about the battle for hegemonic norms and values than about the effects of drinking habits. The conflict was between the norms of the abstemious, small town, native-born Protestants and the newly arrived groups of mostly mediteranean, Catholic, urban migrants. Ultimately the crusaders used all the means at their disposal to change the laws to outlaw the drinking of alcohol and were tempor- arily successful. Gusfield (1963:166) wrote that ‘‘Prohibition and Temperance have operated as symbolic rather than as instrumental goals in American politics. . . .The agitation and struggle of the Temperance adherents has been directed toward the establishment of their norms as marks of social and political superiority.’’ Deviance designation, which is what the Temperance cru- sade was about, according to Gusfield (1963), was a political struggle. As Schur (1980) points out, all deviance-desig- nation is such a struggle—there is an ‘‘inevitable link between deviance, political action and social change’’ (Schur 1980:2324). Deviance designations are what he terms ‘‘stigma contests,’’ but these are two-sided contests with both sides using all their armories, including the press, to impose their definitions and effect change to ‘‘basic social and moral meanings’’ (Schur 1980:133). A parallel, and sometimes competing, paradigm is the construction of social problems (Spector and Kitsuse 1977, 1987; Best 1989; Miller and Holstein 1993). Spector and Kitsuse (1977, 1987) argued that social problems only exist by dint of claims-makers constructing them. Social Construc- tionists, such as Spector and Kitsuse (1977, 1987), reject the notion that objective conditions give rise to social problems; rather, social problems exist only insofar as individuals or groups make assertions regarding some putative condition or event. The job of the sociologist is not to assess the reality of these claims, but to account for their emergence and maintenance by the claims-makers. Claims-makers by their nature make claims and air them through the media using various rhetorical constructions such as appeals to entitle- ments, equality, and tolerance, or fear, calamity, and loss Moral Panics: The Old and the New 643 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 (Ibarra and Kitsuse 1993). The media constitutes a class of setting that requires a particular language, and the socio- logical analysis should uncover the ‘‘mode of address in mass-mediated claims-making and . . . the implications . . . for understanding social problems as a language game’’ (Ibarra and Kitsuse 1993:50). The various forms of media are just one example of a setting, though, along with the legal- political and the academic. In the constructionist version of social problems, the focus is on claims-makers and claims-making. Claims-makers typ- ify social problems so that it is clear in what way a social problem is to be viewed. To do this, claims-makers increas- ingly use the expertise of professionals in their campaigns so that the press are convinced of their newsworthiness (Best 1989a:1). Unlike Spector and Kitsuse (1977, 1987), Best (1989b) argues that there are objective criteria for assessing the reality of claims and that many campaigns by claims- makers must overstate or exaggerate the problems they are highlighting to get the attention they need. This was the case for the figures of missing and kidnapped children produced by activists in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s. The term ‘‘moral panic’’ has reached beyond sociology and the academy to the media itself. Since the mid 1980s the term has been used by the popular media to negatively describe sociological or left-wing refusal to accept popular anxiety over subjects such as crime or drugs (see Bessant 2003). Tabloid media has been accused of creating moral panics for the benefit of populist and right-wing politicians by other (more sober) media.2 Then, by the 1990s, the ser- ious media started attacking sociologists or left-wingers for using the term to criticize well-founded fears felt by the population at large. It became part of the language of the cul- ture wars, particularly when the media wished to attack the ‘‘left- elite’’ (Hunt 1997). There have been a number of refinements, revisions, and outright condemnations of moral panic theory. Goode and Ben-Yehuda (1994) present three theories of moral panics. Grassroots theorists maintain that most panics come from 2Manne (2006:38) writes that it is ‘‘the furious reaction of old generals (of the left) still fighting the last war, who lay charges of moral panic—the cultural left’s version of the Right’s political correctness—as an alternative to thought.’’ 644 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 fears by the populace that are sometimes brought to the sur- face by particular events. Certain crimes such as a prominent pack rape only resonate because of the general fear of rape as well as the fear of young men in groups. The second theory was that generally favored in Britain in the 1980s in work such as Hall et al.’s (1978) Policing the State, which Goode and Ben-Yehuda (1994) refer to as elite-engineered moral panic. In this version, moral panics are used by ruling groups or classes to generate fear and panic within the gen- eral population to sustain their own power-base. Ruling classes, in this use of the term, play on the public’s fear of crime by focusing on particular groups’ involvement in rela- tively minor crime (such as young, black, male involvement in some mugging and theft) to sustain their own law and order policies. According to this theory, the fear of crime was generated by the moral panic, rather than preexisting it. Finally, Goode and Ben-Yehuda argue that interest groups such as victims’ groups and social workers, for example, alert the press to particular situations that they can manipulate to their own advantage. For example, in a world where health budgets are restrained by the state, groups of illness victims, in tandem with pharmaceutical companies, might present figures that suggest a rise in the prevalence of a particular ill- ness, thus panicking the public into believing that they are more likely to catch the illness than they may have pre- viously thought. Studies are presented to the media without contextualizing their backgrounds, profiles of sufferers are written in newspapers, letters to the editors from grieving parents are published, websites are constructed for people to tell their own stories of suffering. Baerveldt et al. (1998) argue that most moral panics are generated by a combination of these three types of entrepreneurs. Critics of moral panic theory such as Ungar (2001) argue that it has run its course as an adequate explanation for what happens in a postmodern risk society. Risk society relies on the expertise of scientists and other specialists, producing a more equal relationship between the various claims-makers. In answering these critics, Cohen (2002) argues that the per- vasiveness of risk does not obviate the existence of moral panics, rather it casts them in slightly different ways. I would argue that Ungar (2001) has overestimated the putative equality between claims-makers. Moral Panics: The Old and the New 645 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 The criticism of moral panic theory by McRobbie and Thornton (1995) relies on the success of the theory, rather than its failure. McRobbie and Thornton consider that as a result of the folk devils fighting back and using the new media itself, they are less marginalized. New types of media lend themselves to the claims of new and different groups, many representing the folk devils themselves. Although there is no let-up in moral panics, more media means more moral panics, the many voices also mean many, and competing claims-makers. The stigma contests (Schur 1980) have multi- plied in a postmodern, multi-mediated world. In a postmo- dern world, mass media becomes part of the ‘‘meaning generation process’’ (Dotter 2004:11). A productive way of viewing moral panics is as narratives in a filmic scenario. News and entertainment are becoming much harder to dis- tinguish in a multi-mediated world, but that does not mean that deviance does not exist, only that meanings become contested. ‘‘In the scenario, deviance shifts back and forth between biographical images and the broader context of cultural meaning framed in master status [of the deviant]’’ (Dotter 2004:47). THE STUDY The data comes from press reports, particularly from the major broadsheets in Melbourne and Sydney (the Age in Melbourne, and the Sydney Morning Herald, as well as the Australian). Some reports from the tabloids in those cities are also included as well as dailies in the other major cities. Local newspapers were not included, nor were papers from provincial cities and rural towns. The articles are predomi- nantly from 1997 to 2000 for reasons outlined later, but some are dated from 1995. The terms ‘‘heroin deaths’’ and ‘‘heroin overdose deaths’’ were inputted into two newspaper databases (Newsbank Newspapers and Factiva). A total of 545 articles were analyzed. In this media-portrayed ‘‘crisis,’’ the folk devil at the center of the panic was not the heroin user, but the drug itself and the overdose deaths that accompanied it. The moral entrepreneurs came from all sides of the political spectrum; they were the church leaders, the social workers, the politi- cians, the medical practitioners and affected parents’ groups. 646 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 They were also the drug users themselves through activist groups as well as those who worked with them. Finally, the media, particularly the broadsheet press, clearly sup- ported the drug users, defining the folk devils as the overdose death, rather than the person using the needle. The broad- sheet press seemed to accept the rhetoric that drug abuse is a health problem, not a legal one. Its coverage reflected this. To this end they gave qualified support to such initia- tives as heroin prescription trials (which ultimately failed to get off the ground) and Medically Supervised Injecting Centres (which succeeded, at least in Sydney). With all these different groups, it might be hard to make an argument for a moral panic, but all the qualities of a panic were there. There was drama, a sense of emergency and cri- sis, some exaggeration, a feeling of social dislocation, an evil force to be overcome, and intense media interest and manipulation (Cohen 2002:xxvii). The scenario and narrative of the moral panic are there (Dotter 2004). Cohen himself argues that perhaps certain subjects like genocide need moral panics to be produced by activists in the face of media indifference because ‘‘moral panics are condensed political struggles to control the means of cultural reproduction’’ (Cohen 2002:xxxv). I will argue that this is exactly what hap- pened in the heroin panic of the late 1990s. Certain activists and moral entrepreneurs used the media to alert an already worried public to the problem of heroin overdoses by occasionally exaggerating the picture, using the stories of addicts and more importantly, their parents, as victims and attempted to capture the policy and legal agenda. In a way they were more or less successful. THE SETTING Heroin use has been of periodic media interest since the late 1960s when visiting U.S. servicemen took their rest and rec- reation (R&R) leave from the war in Vietnam in Sydney and brought with them a demand for heroin and marijuana and a supply chain directly from South East Asia. Until then, heroin use had been confined to a very small group of artists and musicians. The spread of intravenous heroin use then quietly carried on into the 1970s, with a slow but steady rise in over- dose deaths. The mid 1980s was a period of renewed interest Moral Panics: The Old and the New 647 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 in heroin use and users. The prime minister at the time, R. J. Hawke, tearfully admitted to his daughter’s addiction to her- oin on national television, and this personal interest, added to the fear over HIV infections spreading from IDUs to the general population, created the forum for what became known as the National Campaign Against Drug Abuse (NCADA). This interest bubbled along until the mid 1990s when it became clear that heroin overdoses were climbing in number and state governments began to take action via various inquiries in Victoria and New South Wales. These inquiries and the subsequent reports took on a life of their own, recommending seemingly radical policies such as the decriminalization of marijuana, a general extension of drug substitution programs, and the trials of medically supervised injecting centers. However, the inquiries and the reports would never have been instituted without the public interest spurred on by media reports of open street markets in heroin, people injecting in public, and the problems associated with these, particularly overdoses. There is no room here to give a comprehensive historical overview of the illicit drug policy debate in the 1980s and 1990s. It should be noted that after the 1985 National Drug Summit, the establishment of NCADA, later the National Drug Strategy (NDS), was a defining moment. Two other moments occurred as well—the heroin prescription trial debate in the ACT (which was lost in 1997) after which inter- est turned to medically supervised injecting facilities, one of which was established in Sydney in 2001. According to Wayne Hall (2004) media attention really took off in mid 1993 when one tabloid, The Daily Telegraph in Sydney, published 180 articles related to heroin in one month. The two broadsheets in Melbourne and Sydney also published large numbers of articles but nowhere near this level. Teece and Makkai (2000) found that the total number of articles in all the Australian print media related to drugs and crime rose from 168 discrete items in 1995 to 299 in 1997 and fell back to 187 in 1998. Their study only looked at articles that mentioned drugs and crime together and ended in 1998. The earliest press reports studied here come from 1995. In Victoria this was the midst of the Premier’s Drugs Advisory Council and inquiry and in NSW, the events leading to the 648 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Wood Royal Commission. The Australian Capital Territory was also attempting to set up a trial of legally prescribed heroin to a small number of recalcitrant heroin users. While overdose deaths had been steadily rising from the early 1990s, the flood of very cheap, very potent heroin was pro- ducing a steep rise in deaths from this time. And while there had been a low-level but continual media interest in the story, from 1995 the pressure was being exerted by the claims makers in a concerted way. However, the bulk of the reports studied here are post 1997. This was because of an event described in the next section. THE MEDIA REPORTS In 1997 national figures on the steep rise in overdose deaths were reported in the press. A study produced by the National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre (NDARC) in 1995, which had been commissioned by the Commonwealth Department of Health and was to be used as a background document for a discussion of a proposed heroin trial, was released to the media (Hall 2004). While the report’s authors had not wanted to set off a panic response in the media and so did not release it earlier, the media reporting in 1997 certainly did this. The Age’s headline was ‘‘Steep Rise in Heroin Over- doses’’ (Middleton 1997) and the report begins with ‘‘the number of people dying from heroin overdose each year rose 700 per cent in the 15 years to 1995 and may not have peaked, a secret Federal Government study has found.’’ The Australian of August 2, 1997 reported that deaths had risen by almost 800% in 16 years and that the economic cost to the country was in the vicinity of $1.7 billion (Walker and Lyall 1997). The Age report does not quote any of the authors, but did note that the study found 22,500 people were expected to die that year from the misuse of some drug, including tobacco and alcohol, thus emphasizing the broad nature of the original report, which was duly ignored in all subsequent articles. The Australian report quotes Shane Darke from the NDARC about the typical victim being male, 31, and a long-term user. Up until that time, there had been sporadic reports of localized overdose deaths and state- based figures based on coroner’s reports, but this was the first time the deaths had a national basis. Moral Panics: The Old and the New 649 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 By 1999, there seemed to be a regular flow of national over- dose death figures. The Brisbane Courier Mail (Michelmore 1999) reported that 737 people had died nationally in 1998 and the Sydney Morning Herald (Totaro 1999) noted that heroin overdose was the cause of 10% of deaths in the under 45 age group. To keep the temperature up on the panic, the Hobart Mercury of September 20, 1999 published as its hyperbolic headline ‘‘Heroin Toll Spirals almost Unnoticed,’’ when it clearly had been noticed, and for a good few years. It is possible that it had not been noticed in Hobart because no one had died that year in Tasmania. This sort of headline is typical of a moral panic. Most reports from these national studies were accompanied by quotes from researchers, politicians, or health specialists. Some press reports also reiterated calls for heroin prescription trials or MSICs. For example, the Australian of September 9, 1997 (Kerin 1997:5) writes ‘‘(t)he findings triggered calls for supervised ‘safe injecting rooms’ for addicts in heroin hot-spots such as Sydney’s Cabramatta and Kings Cross and Melbourne’s St. Kilda.’’ The same article gives a quote from the AMA national presi- dent calling the deaths an epidemic and a disaster. Reports of the deaths also often included quotes from people whose children had died from overdoses. For example, The Herald Sun in Melbourne (Giles and Collier 1997: 4) published the photographs of nine people who died from heroin overdoses, with the permission of their families ‘‘to show how the epi- demic affects people from all walks of life. . . .They came from the city and the country. Among them were pensioners, nurses, labourers, successful businessmen and the homeless. The youngest was a 14 year old Springvale boy and the oldest, a 70 year old Wangaratta woman.’’ Tellingly, for a tabloid, the paper adds that all the victims’ families called for changes in the way society dealt with heroin users, ‘‘but attitudes were mixed on the introduction of heroin trials.’’ The presentation of the victims was a way of spread- ing the anxiety of heroin overdose, suggesting that everyone was equally likely to be a victim, when this was not really the case. What is important here is that death counts are objec- tive givens (because they are numbers, they can be seen and manipulated) for claims-makers; the count gives them a reality to play with (Goode and Ben Yehuda 1994). This is 650 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 common with health-related panics. Anti-tobacco activists prominently play on the theme that tobacco is the greatest of all the drug killers. Campaigns to bring mental illness to prominence frequently claim that depression is the major component in suicides. Similarly the number of deaths on the road and the various contributors to them such as alcohol or speed are also major media stories. THE CLAIMS-MAKERS A feature of all the articles was the use of various claims- makers, which included parents, professionals, and victims. What will also be explored is the way that the claims-makers made use of the media via the letters pages of the newspa- pers (mostly parents and others), as well as the op-ed pages (mostly professionals and scientists). The Grieving Parents A feature of many of the articles was the use of prominent acti- vists, generally families of overdose victims. Sometimes they were identified as such, but just as often, they were presented simply as grieving parents. One of the most prominent was Tony Trimingham. In an article in the Sunday Telegraph from Sydney (Harris 1997), he was presented as the father of a young man who had died, but also as the person launching a public campaign to change the laws surrounding heroin use. While Trimingham was probably the most prominent parent=activist (or at least the most likely to be contacted by the broadsheets), two others with opposing views were referred to. One was Margaret McKay who also had a deceased son from an overdose while on heroin. She believed that rather than a harm minimization approach with heroin prescription trials or MSICs, a more hard-line, albeit less legalistic, attitude was the answer. For her, the answer was the Swedish rather than the Swiss system.3 ‘‘If David had lived in Sweden, he would have been alive. . . .There is no way he 3After a period of loosening of legal controls in the 1960s, Sweden turned to a more coercive, although medicalized system related to illicit drugs. Long-term and enforced rehabilitation are a prominent part of the system. This is often compared to the Swiss system, which has an overtly harm minimization approach with heroin prescription, medically supervized injecting rooms, and other such measures. Moral Panics: The Old and the New 651 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 would have spent 17 years as a drug addict. They care about their young people over there’’ (Hannan 1999:15). In this quote you can see an appeal to the compassion of the speaker via the demonization of the opposition, who are accused of not caring about heroin addicts. It is the same appeal to com- passion as their opposing number use (see Trimingham 1999 later in the article). The other popularly quoted grieving par- ent was Tony Wood whose daughter had died from ingesting a single dose of ecstasy. He and his wife then became professional anti-drug advocates (see Cohen’s 2002:xiiixiv discussion of a very similar case in Britain, and Homan’s 1998 article on the Anna Wood case). Grieving parents were a staple portrait in this period. Not uncommonly, conferences and speak-outs were organized to give voice to them and to generate publicity. State and national government inquiries also brought forward their stories, which found their way to the national media. Most called for a greater medicalization of the illicit drugs issue, and many for specific remedies such as heroin prescription trials or injecting rooms. Parents ranged from a 1960s pop singer to police to politicians—all had lost children to heroin overdose. Even the premier of New South Wales at the time had lost a brother to heroin overdose in the early 1980s. All demanded that the portrait of the drug user be altered from the folk devil to the victim of either evil drug traffickers or a disease, or even both at the same time. Their child needed compassion and sympathy, not stigmatization. Professional Voices Alcohol and drug professionals, generally medical practi- tioners, but also others working with drug users, as well as researchers, were prominent in the press. This was parti- cularly the case with the broadsheets. Articles in op-ed pages by specialists and professionals were common. In the Age between March 1996 and June 1998, there were at least six opinion pieces by people in favor of radical changes to the law. Writing two pieces in favor of a prescribed heroin trial, the researcher, Gabrielle Bammer (1996 and 1997), wrote measured, almost technocratic pieces, even during very heated arguments about the proposed trial. The head of the Premier’s Advisory Committee in Victoria, David 652 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Pennington (1997:13), widened the net of potential victims and suggested a we are all in this war together type rhetoric. ‘‘Those who become dependent on heroin and similar drugs come from every walk of society—no section is immune. Turning the tide depends on every parent in the state playing their part, as well as schools, community organisations, sporting clubs, youth workers, police, courts and magistrates and many others. Unless all are mobilised, there is little chance of success.’’ The war on drugs has a negative reson- ance for many people opposed to the criminalization of the drug user, but the language of war could also be used by them. The emotional heat was turned up by Nick Crofts (1998), a researcher and medical practitioner who wrote Our drug policies are inhuman, ineffective in achieving their stated goals, damaging in uncountable ways to the health of individuals and of society. They are enormously costly and corrupting. They don’t work. . . .We know what to do. We just lack the heart, and the will to care for our young people. (Crofts 1998:13) The Crofts article takes a moral position, calling policies ‘‘inhuman,’’ implying that those who support those policies are inhuman as well. In Adelaide, the Director of Public Pro- secutions, Paul Rofe (1998:20), wrote ‘‘illicit drugs such as heroin and ecstasy are killing more and more young people. The death rate has doubled over the past five years. It is time we recognised that the traditional policing approach to the drug problem is not working.’’ This is very typical moral panic language. Ecstasy has caused very few deaths in Australia, but is widely used, so bringing it in to the argument sets the scene for widespread anxiety. It claims broad figures of death rates which do not clearly refer to any particular drug, and then it calls for a change in policy. Other articles canvassed professional opinions quite widely, and it was rare in the broadsheets to find a pro- fessional who disagreed with the general opinion that a change was needed. One article (Hill and Hill 1996) that represented a number of views quoted only one person in favor of the status quo and that was the current head of the drug squad in Victoria. The others consulted—the medical practitioner, the former police chief, the researcher, the Moral Panics: The Old and the New 653 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 worker with drug users, and the solicitor—all favored some form of legal change. However, not all were in agreement with a form of legalized or prescription heroin. McKay (1995) in the Age asked a number of professionals in the field and found some in favor but others, like the Salvation Army representative and the then head of Odyssey House were not keen on legalization. However, even these people did not see the drug user as a folk devil; rather, they saw the addict as a victim of structures and conditions beyond their control. McKay wrote: ‘‘[The head of Odyssey House] says any new drug strategy needs to tackle the issue of family support and youth unemployment. ‘We need to begin to think about it in far more complex ways than we have previously’’’ (McKay 1995:11). Another one by Hill (1996) quoted a number of ‘‘experts’’ who enunciated reservations about heroin pre- scription trials. A medical researcher at a research center is quoted as having an ‘‘open mind’’ about prescription heroin but supported a move away from prosecuting heroin users. Another doctor who had a large methadone maintenance practice suggested a better alternative was oral morphine, while the Salvation Army representative called for a closer examination of the Swedish system of compulsory drug rehabilitation. Even with their scepticism, none of the opi- nions canvassed mentioned greater demonization via legal control of heroin users. Instead, the health system and medi- cal control was considered a more humane option. In another long article in the Melbourne Age (Linnell 1998) a bleak picture of public injection was painted by the journalist, but instead of calling for greater law enforce- ment, it came out in favor of prescription heroin, giving the Swiss situation as a positive example. The article ended with a warning from one worker who said ‘‘with the street drug scene now, it is probably getting close to that point now where it could easily just slide out of control’’ and then the ‘‘streets would be beyond reclaiming’’ (Linnell 1998:11). Such warnings from the media are very typical of moral panics, suggesting chaos if the situation were not changed. Language reminiscent of classic moral panics did make its way to the press from unexpected sources. One professional in particular who had a specific agenda to change the laws related to illicit drugs was Dr. Alex Wodak. Wodak was often sought out by journalists for comment because of his long 654 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 experience as a doctor (he worked at St. Vincent’s hospital in Sydney) as well as his political position in relation to illicit drugs and the law. In one article about the swell of opinion in favor at the time for a heroin prescription trial, he was quoted as saying, ‘‘We’re changing from an era where sup- port for drug law reform is clearly considered to be a political liability, to an era where not supporting drug policy reform is becoming a liability . . . we’ve passed a cusp on that . . . even the mums and dads are bleating now’’ (Lyall 1997:25; emphasis added). At one point, a paper Wodak gave to a pro- fessional conference in Brisbane was picked up by the daily newspaper. In it he is quoted as saying that he would not be surprised if drug traffickers were not financially supporting the zero-tolerance regime because the illegality of heroin was helping to keep their businesses profitable. ‘‘A lot of people are actually doing very well out of prohibition and one of the groups that would least want to have change is the illicit drugs industry. . . . It is plausible the industry would financially support politicians who would resist change’’ (Wodak quoted in Murray 1999:5). Another professional who regularly used language remi- niscent of traditional moral panic coverage of drugs was a well-known Melbourne youth worker who rarely appeared in the broadsheet, but was a regular in the tabloid Herald Sun. He clearly stated his views in favor of heroin prescription trials and supervised injecting centers. Unlike the Age, which tended to present the IDU as middle-class and an everyman or -woman, Twentyman in the Herald Sun willingly described the underprivileged heroin addict, frequently a young mother with children, and just as frequently hungry. Twentyman regu- larly called Melbourne the heroin capital of Australia and even made public interest advertisements that were intended to be used in the way that graphic television advertisements were used to highlight the road toll (Twentyman 2000). The Victims Speaking for Themselves The type of reporting that is arguably the most difficult in raising compassion for heroin users is the confessional because it treads a fine line between presenting drug users as degraded and dangerous, and as victims of an illness deserving compassion. Many people in societies like Moral Panics: The Old and the New 655 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Australia accept the argument that heroin is illegal because it is so dangerous and find it hard to produce compassion for those who defy the law. One of the major confessional-type articles was the first- hand, middle-class, ‘‘if it can happen to me, it can happen to you too’’ type. The Melbourne Age regularly presented these types. The first I found was in 1995 and begins by describing how the author first picked up heroin in an exclusive Melbourne private school at the age of 16 (Anonymous 1995). Even while arguing for a radical change to the laws, the author writes Let me make this clear. I would not recommend the use of heroin. I have paid a heavy price with constant poverty, stress, and the threat of being busted, and my health has suffered. I have contracted hepatitis B and C, and my teeth are rotting. (Anonymous 1995:20) In July 1998, the Age ran an article entitled ‘‘Hi, I’m Lyall and I’m a heroin addict needing help’’ describing the stories of men and women who were in programs run by the Salvation Army (Tippet 1998). These stories presented much more conventional pictures of the most desperate of heroin users, but a month later an anonymously authored article called ‘‘My Life as a White-Collar Junkie’’ (Anonymous 1998) undermined the stereotypical story of the desperate and criminal junkie. Here was a detailed description of the way that the heroin flood had insinuated itself into many workplaces. During my little hiatus, the company employed three other junkies. Along with the four already there, this made for a cli- que. It also put me in touch with Clyde, a reliable supplier. He had a paging service and didn’t use the stuff himself. Not only was it terribly ’80s and business-like, it was very convenient. (Anonymous 1998:14) The storyteller then admits that he is drug free in a 12 Step program but finishes by writing Personally, I would like to see all drugs—tobacco and alco- hol included—legalised and the advertising of them banned. It’s not that I’ve become some wowsering fun-nazi, I’m just sick of seeing friends die. As long as the junkie wants to feel 656 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 that rush in his system, no amount of legislating or social engineering is going to quell that desire, or bring loved ones back from the dead. (Anonymous, 1998:14) LETTERS TO THE EDITOR Goode and Ben-Yehuda (1994) argue that letters to the editor have an important function in moral panics. They operate in a very determined fashion, so that they are not unfocused, but come in large numbers and with consistent messages. While letters to the editors in the main tabloid newspapers favored an anti-legalization position, even here this was not universal. Lawrence and colleagues (2000:258) found that in the month of August 1997, 61% of the Sydney Daily Telegraph letters and 79% of the Melbourne Herald Sun let- ters were against the heroin prescription trial. While the pro- legalization forces were in a minority, they still made up 40% of the Daily Telegraph letters. This was not the case in the broadsheets where the pro-legalization forces were a clear majority. Letters from parents of overdose death victims frequently appealed to the readers’ compassion for their children and for their own grief. Heroin addiction for these writers was not a legal issue, but a health issue, one that ultimately led to their children’s deaths. They frequently used very emotive language to present their case. One anonymous letter reads in part: In March our 17 year-old daughter died of a heroin overdose in her bedroom at our home. She is yet another example of the slaying of our youth resulting from ignorance and inap- propriate and insufficient government and community action. She was not a street kid, nor was she emotionally unstable or a criminal. She does not represent the stereotype that the majority of bureaucrats and the community believe drug addicts to be. She was an intelligent, sensitive high achiever who at 15 was seduced by experimentation and social press- ure from the wrong crowd and by the manipulation of drug traffickers. . . .Unless we apply understanding rather than judgement, compassion rather criticism, then the slaying of 4Of course, this is not necessarily the proportion of letters received by the newspapers, only those that the letters’ editors chose to publish. It would certainly be surprising if the letters overwhelmingly disavowed the view of the paper in general. Moral Panics: The Old and the New 657 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 youth will continue. How many more overdoses do we need to have before politicians are forced to listen and act? (Anonymous 1999:25) The letter writer presented his or her daughter as a naı¨ve vic- tim of a drug trafficker—the real folk devil. There seems to be more legitimacy for a victim who is intelligent and stable, than one who is unstable and severely disadvantaged. Again, it is the widening of the risk of addiction to the children of the middle-class who have a greater call on the community’s compassion than the poor and disadvantaged. Their daughter was also slain, she did not just die from misadventure— there has to be someone to blame for this. Another letter in the Daily Telegraph from Tony Triming- ham, who wrote many letters and was often quoted in other parts of the paper, said ‘‘Last Sunday more than 400 people attended our memorial service for overdose victims. Sadly there were representatives of over 60 families whose loved ones were alive 12 months ago. We have not time to waste; 1000 preventable deaths each year cannot be accepted’’ (Trimingham 1999:26). The use of the magic number 1,000 was an inflation of the actual number but his argument was clear. Medical practitioners and drug and alcohol agency workers also used the letters columns to argue for changes to the law as well as greater funding for their agencies. The use of letters in a campaign fashion can be seen in the outpouring of anger after the Vatican issued an edict banning a Catholic order of nuns from running the medically supervised injecting center in Sydney. The Vatican was accused of being inhuman, lacking compassion, and even being unchristian (see letters pages in the Sydney Morning Herald, October 30, 1999). The Daily Telegraph published many letters praising the decision, but still a prominent number of letters did not. SO WAS IT A MORAL PANIC? According to Victor (1998:548) some moral panics are actu- ally the unintended consequences of well-meaning interest groups and their supporters. Because these moral crusaders sincerely believe that a society will benefit from their con- tinuing crusade, they carry them on against resistance from 658 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 others. The more effective they become, the more the cru- sade turns into a moral panic. This was particularly the case in the moral panics about stranger danger and child sexual abuse in Australia and other countries in the 1980s and 1990s, as well as ritual sexual abuse panics in the United States and to a smaller extent in the United Kingdom. Many of these panics began as a result of feminist agitation around the previously ignored issue of child sexual abuse. They then took off with exaggerated claims by certain prominent acti- vists, along with the rise of groups of victims and Protestant fundamentalist groups, including psychiatrists and psycholo- gists aligned to them (see Jenkins 1992 for an excellent account of these panics in the United Kingdom). I have tried to show in this study that, although I would never compare the ritual child abuse panics with the very real rise in over- dose deaths in Australia in the 1990s, there was a component of interest-group moral panic in this tale. What is also clear is that serious people like Wayne Hall (2004) and others were very worried about the potential for moral panic when their research was taken up by the media. As he points out, NDARC research into heroin overdose deaths was used by all sides in the debate. However, some people, such as activists and parent groups, who had a polit- ical interest in changing drug laws did use the media in clas- sic moral panic fashion. By this I mean they used the media in their moral crusade to highlight overdose deaths and change the legal and social framework surrounding heroin use by appealing to the possibility of social fragmentation via people’s fears for their children. During the period covered in this article, there were two very clear examples of traditional, conservative moral panics around drugs. The first was the death of Anna Wood from ecstasy in Sydney, and a panic fired by the tabloid press and radio around young people in state care being allowed to inhale volatile substances (chroming) on supervised prem- ises in Melbourne (Homans 1998; Bessant 2003). In relation to the ‘‘chroming’’ panic, Bessant (2003:1112) writes that All the necessary ingredients were there for a great story, if not a fully rehearsed theatrical performance: disillusionment, lost children in peril, champions, bad characters, the auth- ority of the sovereign state, and deception. It had all the Moral Panics: The Old and the New 659 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 elements for great news. What happened in Victoria in January 2002 offers a classic example of the way the media, and the press in particular, engage in contemporary youth policy-making. Bessant argues that this particular moral panic could only have happened because the public were primed by the press to react in a particular way by the moral panic around her- oin. What I have tried to show in this article is how there are many nuances in modern moral panics and that it cannot be taken for granted by the left that the ‘‘good guys’’ do not indulge in the practice themselves. A reading of the afore- mentioned material shows that those wanting to change the status quo in a radical rather than conservative direction also use the press, and some sections of the press are willing to indulge them. Bessant writes that the media ‘‘tapped into a rich vein of vocabulary of images and categories that empha- sised the deviant status of ‘drug addicts’ and the plague-like status of the drug problem that experts, researchers and the media had been building up since at least 2000’’ (Bessant 2003:14). Actually, the rich vein goes much further back in time, and was partly, at least, a result of the attempt at ‘‘nor- malization’’ rather than stigmatization, by the researchers, professionals, and others in the field. The ‘‘plague-like sta- tus’’ and related language was used as much by the propo- nents of heroin prescription trials and supervised injecting centers, as their opponents. This is an excellent example of what Schur (1980) termed stigma contests. McRobbie and Thornton (1995) argue that in a social world where society and the social world are no longer monolithic entities, moral panics take on different hues. Dif- ferent interest groups and lobbies intervene and use the media, which is also no longer monolithic, to change the nature of the debate. One of the main aims of pressure groups is timely inter- vention in relevant moral panics- to be able to respond instantly to the media demonization of the group they rep- resent, and to provide information and analysis designed to counter this representation. The effectiveness of these groups and in particular their skills at working with the media and providing highly professional ‘‘soundbites’’ more or less on 660 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 cue make them an invaluable resource to media machinery working to tight schedules and with increasingly small budgets. They allow the media to be seen to be doing their duty by providing ‘‘balance’’ in their reporting. At the same time, they show how ‘‘folk devils’’ can and do ‘‘fight back.’’ (McRobbie and Thornton 1995:566) Most writers in the field of media and the presentation of illicit drugs in Australia describe the press debate as one- sided. In particular, they use the example of the Sydney tab- loid The Daily Telegraph as representative. The failure of the proposed heroin trial is used as an example of the way that a concerted campaign by one newspaper (and two radio pre- senters in Sydney) spooked the prime minister into condemn- ing the project when there was a general agreement for the trial to go ahead (Lawrence et al. 2000; Hall 2004). Com- mentators forgot that the prime minister had always been opposed to the trial. However, the same newspaper tried to do the same thing three years later when the Medically Supervised Injecting Centre was mooted for Sydney but did not succeed. Here the forces in favor of the MSIC had learned the problems of earlier times and made a successful intervention in the manner McRobbie and Thornton (1995) outline. In their analysis of the campaign by the Daily Tele- graph, Lawrence et al. (2000) argue that supporters of the proposed trial needed to reframe their arguments, which centered around the failure of the legal regime in dealing with the drugs problem, to one that used the families to tell their stories of pain and anguish and a greater medicalization of addiction. There is plenty of evidence that they did just this. Studies of moral panics around illicit drugs, particularly those that have emanated from the United States, have tended to concentrate on the use of the media to exaggerate the prevalence of drug use to enforce greater punitive mea- sures against users (cf. Reinarman and Levine 1989). This study has indicated how public fear of drug use can be har- nessed by different groups of claims-makers for their own, not necessarily punitive, perspectives. From a social con- structionist and social problems perspective, claims-makers are the all-important components of the evolution and main- tenance of social problems (Ibarra and Kitsuse 1993; Best Moral Panics: The Old and the New 661 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 1989a). The way they use the media, and the way the media uses their stories, are integral and important parts of the final narrative (Dottor 2004). In this way, moral panic theory is still a vital part of the theories sociologists use to analyze stigma contests and social problems. REFERENCES Anonymous. 1995. ‘‘How the User Pays.’’ The Sunday Age July 2:20. ———. 1998. ‘‘My Life as a White-Collar Junkie.’’ The Age August 1:14. ———. 1999. ‘‘The Prime Minister is out of Step.’’ The Advertiser February 16:25. Baerveldt, C., H. Bunkers, M. De Winter and J. Kooistra. 1998. ‘‘Assessing a Moral Panic Relating to Crime and Drugs Policy in the Netherlands: Towards a Testable Theory.’’ Crime, Law and Social Change 29:3147. Bammer, G. 1996. ‘‘Treating Heroin Users.’’ The Age March 11:13. ———. 1997. ‘‘Heroin Debate Needs to Come After the Trial.’’ The Age August 19:11. Becker, H. 1966. Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance. New York: The Free Press. Bessant, J. 2003. ‘‘Precursors to a Media Frenzy: Supervised Chroming, Young People in Care and the Victorian Government’s Drug Policy.’’ Youth Studies Australia 22(3):1117. Best, J. 1989a. ‘‘Claims.’’ Pp. 13. In Images of Issues: Typifying Contemporary Social Problems, edited by Joel Best. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. ———. 1989b. ‘‘Dark Figures and Child Victims: Statistical Claims about Missing Children.’’ Pp. 2137. In Images of Issues: Typifying Contemporary Social Problems, edited by Joel Best. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Cohen, S. 1972. Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of the Mods and Rockers. London: MacGibbon & Kee. ———. 2002. Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of the Mods and Rockers. London: Routledge. 3rd Edition. Crofts, N. 1998. ‘‘Small Dose of Humanity a Big Part of the Cure for our Drug Ills.’’ The Age June 22:13. Dotter, D. 2004. Creating Deviance: An Interactionist Approach. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press. Giles, T. and K. Collier. 1997. ‘‘9 Lost Lives—Heroin Epidemic Hits All Ages.’’ The Herald Sun October 8:1. Goode, E. and N. Ben-Yehuda. 1994.Moral Panics: The Social Construction of Deviance. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. Gusfield, J. R. 1963. Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the American Temperance Movement. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 662 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Hall, S., C. Critcher, T. Jefferson, J. Clarke and B. Robert. 1978. Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the State and Law and Order. London: MacMillan. Hall, W. 2004. ‘‘The Contribution of Research to Australian Policy Responses to Heroin Dependence 19902001: A Personal Retrospec- tion.’’ Addiction 99:560569. Hannan, L. 1999. ‘‘Addicts Mum: Time for Zero Tolerance.’’ The Sun Herald December 5:15. Harris, S. 1997. ‘‘Heroin Kills 13: Weekly Toll Includes Boy 14.’’ Sunday Telegraph September 21:3. Hill, K. 1996. ‘‘Legal Drug Plan to Foil Heroin Trade.’’ The Age, January 3:1. Hill, K. and D. T. Hill. 1996. ‘‘Experts Cautious on Drug Scheme.’’ The Age January 4:4. Homan, S. 1998. ‘‘After the Law: Sydney’s Pheonician Club, the New South Wales Premier and the Death of Anna Wood.’’ Perfect Beat 4:5683. Hunt, A. 1997. ‘‘’Moral Panic’ and Moral Language in the Media.’’ British Journal of Sociology. 48:629648. Ibarra, P. R. and J. I. Kitsuse. 1993. ‘‘Vernacular Constituents of Moral Dis- course: An Interactionist Proposal for the Study of Social Problems.’’ Pp. 2154. In Constructionist Controversies: Issues in Social Problems Theory, edited by G. Miller and J. A. Holstein. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Jenkins, P. 1992. Intimate Enemies: Moral panics in contemporary Great Britain. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Kerin, J. 1997. ‘‘Heroin Toll Hits Record 620 after 25% Jump.’’ The Australian September 9:5. Lawrence, G., G. Bammer and S. Chapman. 2000. ‘‘Sending the Wrong Signal: Analysis of Print Media Reportage of the ACT Heroin Prescrip- tion Trial Proposal, August 1997.’’ Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 24:254264. Linnell, G. 1998. ‘‘A New Fix on Drugs.’’ The Age June 22:11. Lyall, K. 1997. ‘‘Experimenting With Heroin.’’ The Australian August 2:25. Madigan, M. 1999. ‘‘Heroin Toll Spirals Almost Unnoticed.’’ The Hobart Mercury September 20:20 Manne, A. 2006. ‘‘Love Me Tender? Sex and Power in the Age of Pornography.’’ The Monthly December 19:3442. McKay, S. 1995. ‘‘Is it Time to Legalise Hard Drugs Like Heroin?’’ The Age November 30:11. McRobbie, A. and S. L. Thornton. 1995. ‘‘Rethinking ‘Moral Panic’ for Multi-Mediated Social Worlds.’’ British Journal of Sociology 46:559574. Michelmore, K. 1999. ‘‘Overdose Deaths Hit Record Levels.’’ The Courier Mail December 8:5. Moral Panics: The Old and the New 663 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 Middleton, K. 1997. ‘‘Steep Rise in Heroin Overdoses.’’ The Age July 30:1. Miller, G. and J. A. Holstein. 1993 (eds) Constructionist Controversies: Issues in Social Problems Theory. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Murray, D. 1999. ‘‘Criminals Financing Anti-Drugs Campaign.’’ The Courier Mail July 9:5. Pennington, D. 1997. ‘‘Tackling Demand in the Fight Against Dangerous Drugs.’’ The Age May 16:13. Reinarman, C. and H. G. Levine. 1989. ‘‘The Crack Attack: Politics and Media in America’s Latest Drug Scare.’’ Pp. 115137. In Images of Issues: Typifying Contemporary Social Problems, edited by J. Best. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Rofe, P. 1998. ‘‘Strive for Solutions to Youth Crime.’’ The Advertiser January 24:25. Schur, E. M. 1980. The Politics of Deviance: Stigma Contests and the Uses of Power. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc. Spector, M. and J. I. Kitsuse. 1977=1987. Constructing Social Problems. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Teece, M. and Makkai, T. 2000. Print Media Reporting on Drugs and Crime 19951998, Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra. Trends and Issue in Crime and Criminal Justice Series. Tippet, G. 1998. ‘‘Hi, I’m Lyall and I’m a Heroin Addict.’’ The Sunday Age July 12:9. Totaro, P. 1999. ‘‘Heroin Now Cause of One in 10 Deaths for under 45s.’’ Sydney Morning Herald December 8:2. Trimingham, T. 1999. ‘‘We Cannot Accept this Preventable Death Toll.’’ Daily Telegraph November 1:26. Twentyman, L. 2000. ‘‘A Deadly Message.’’ The Herald Sun February 10:19. Ungar, S. 2001. ‘‘Moral Panic Versus the Risk Society: The Implications of the Changing Sites of Social Anxiety.’’ British Journal of Sociology 52:271291. Victor, J. S. 1998. ‘‘Moral Panics and the Social Construction of Deviant Behavior: A Theory and Application to the Case of Ritual Child Abuse.’’ Sociological Perspectives 41:541565. Walker, J. and Lyall, K. 1997. ‘‘Deaths Hit Older Users as the Debt hits $1.7bn.’’ The Australian August 2:5. 664 G. Zajdow D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 4: 15 7 O ct ob er 2 01 0 