ABSTRACT: 
In Sin City (Robert Rodriguez, 2005) and 300 (Zack Snyder, 2006) extensive post-production work has created stylised colour palettes, manipulated areas of the image, and added or subtracted elements. Framing a discussion around the terms ‘affect’ and ‘emotion’, this paper argues that the digital technologies used in Sin City and 300 modify conventional interactions between representational and aesthetic dimensions. Brian Massumi suggests affective imagery can operate through two modes of engagement. One mode is embedded in a meaning system, linked to a speci?c emotion. The second is understood as an intensi?cation whereby a viewer reacts but that reaction is not yet gathered into an alignment with meaning. The term ‘digital afx’ is used to describe manipulations that produce imagery allowing these two modes of engagement to coexist. Digital afx are present when two competing aesthetic strategies remain equally visible within sequences of images. As a consequence the afx mingle with and shift the content of representation. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper argues that the digital techno-logies used in Sin City and 300 modifier conventional interactions between representational and aesthetic dimensions. Brian Massumi suggests affective imagery can operate through two modes of engagement. One mode is embedded in a meaning system, linked to a specific emotion. The second is understood as an intensification whereby a viewer reacts but that reaction is not yet gathered into an alignment with meaning. The term ‘digital afx’ is used to describe manipulations that produce imagery allowing these two modes of engagement to coexist. Digital afx are present when two competing aesthetic strategies remain equally visible within sequences of images. As aconsequence the afx mingle with and shift the content of representations. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 This article was downloaded by: [University of Kent]On: 09 January 2012, At: 07:57Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKNew Review of Film and TelevisionStudiesPublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rfts20Digital afx: digital dressing andaffective shifts in Sin City and 300Aylish Wood aa Film Studies, School of Arts, Jarman Building, University of Kent,Canterbury, CT2 7UG, UKAvailable online: 16 Aug 2011To cite this article: Aylish Wood (2011): Digital afx: digital dressing and affective shifts in Sin Cityand 300 , New Review of Film and Television Studies, 9:3, 283-295To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17400309.2011.585860PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLEFull terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsThis article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representationthat the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of anyinstructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primarysources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly orindirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.RESEARCH ARTICLEDigital afx: digital dressing and affective shifts in Sin Cityand 300Aylish Wood*Film Studies, School of Arts, Jarman Building, University of Kent, CanterburyCT2 7UG, UKIn Sin City (Robert Rodriguez, 2005) and 300 (Zack Snyder, 2006) extensivepost-production work has created stylised colour palettes, manipulated areasof the image, and added or subtracted elements. Framing a discussion aroundthe terms ‘affect’ and ‘emotion’, this paper argues that the digital techno-logies used in Sin City and 300 modify conventional interactions betweenrepresentational and aesthetic dimensions. Brian Massumi suggests affectiveimagery can operate through two modes of engagement. One mode isembedded in a meaning system, linked to a specific emotion. The secondis understood as an intensification whereby a viewer reacts but that reaction isnot yet gathered into an alignment with meaning. The term ‘digital afx’is used to describe manipulations that produce imagery allowing these twomodes of engagement to coexist. Digital afx are present when two competingaesthetic strategies remain equally visible within sequences of images. As aconsequence the afx mingle with and shift the content of representations.Keywords: Sin City; 300; emotion; affect; Brian Massumi; digital images;colourDigital afx: digital dressing and affective shiftsBoth Sin City (Robert Rodriguez, 2005) and 300 (Zack Snyder, 2006) are visuallystriking films, extensive post-production work having altered colour palettes,manipulated the high and low lit areas of the image, and added or subtractedelements. Given the impact of digital technologies on the imagery of these films,this paper considers how such technologies provide a further means of influencingour experiences and interpretations. Its focus is on how digital manipulations alterconventional interactions between representation and aesthetics in popularcinema and reflects on the affective potential of these manipulations.Characters are the principal markers whereby aspects of the world, inparticular those inflected by political, cultural and social concerns, come intonarrativised and also aestheticised space. Aestheticised space exists in anyrepresentational work of art, where aesthetics is broadly understood to mean theISSN 1740-0309 print/ISSN 1740-7923 onlineq 2011 Taylor & FrancisDOI: 10.1080/17400309.2011.585860http://www.tandfonline.com*Email: a.wood@kent.ac.ukNew Review of Film and Television StudiesVol. 9, No. 3, September 2011, 283–295Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 stylisation of imagery. If the stylisation goes beyond simply depicting an object orcharacter, there is the potential for a gap to begin to open between the image and itsreferent. As a consequence an image contains within it the capacity for a doubleimpact on a viewer. This impact resides in how resemblance is recognised, whichcoexists with another complex reaction involving a balance between interpretationand a more direct or affective response. Affective imagery in all eras of the cinemaallow both a figure and mise-en-sce`ne to be configured to elicit an emotionalresponse in a viewer. Such a strategy is apparent in the contemporary use of digitalprocesses, and is especially exaggerated in the post-production work of Sin Cityand 300. However, as these films further show, digital materiality also makes itpossible to generate a dual aesthetic within a single set of images, extending theaffective techniques available to filmmakers. When two competing aestheticstrategies remain equally visible within a sequence of images ‘digital afx’ emerge.The contraction ‘afx’ in the term digital afx signals a particular kind ofaffective response, one that relies on the fx used in the production of a film’simagery. Affect and affective response are both familiar ideas in discussions offilm, though their development as terms of critical insight within cinema studiesis relatively recent. Broadly speaking affect has been used to indicate theemotional response of a viewer to film (Plantinga 2009). Sound is also important,whether as music or soundscape. Underpinned by distinct paradigms, psycho-analytic, cognitive and phenomenological approaches share the view thatcharacters and their actions have the capacity to provoke a felt response inviewers (Pajaczkowska and Ward 2008; Grodal 1997; Sobchack 2004). Editing,visual and aural stylisations are also key means through which a response maypotentially be elicited. The figure and location, both stylised, whether throughmise-en-sce`ne, editing or framing, combine to create a range of responses in aviewer. Two studies of the horror genre have used the terms ‘objectless anxiety’and ‘horror-dread’ to describe anxiety provoked specifically by film style. Thesestudies offer the view that elements other than character have the capacity toelicit an affective response from viewers (Hills 2003; Freeland 2004). Theselatter approaches are also suggestive of an opening gap between the image andreferent. The objects and figures on the screen are recognisable, but there isanother dimension in play. This dimension may not be directly representative, butis instead evocative of something that provokes unease.This latter point can be aligned with an alternative way of thinking aboutaffect (Massumi 2002). For Massumi, affect leads to an embodied response, but ithas a more autonomous quality, felt in the body without being codified ororiented towards a meaning system. A perceiver’s direct response to a stimulus isas yet unaligned to quantifiable reactions, such as movement or an emotionalresponse. In reacting to a stimulus such as a set of moving images, this affectiveresponse coexists with an interpretive one, establishing different modes ofconnectivity to an image. These different modes have an ability to modify eachother, heightening or dampening a viewer’s engagement. The modes ofconnectivity are grounded in intensity, an embodied response to an image, andA. Wood284Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 qualification, which equates to signified meaning. Massumi suggests that there isno direct relationship between the qualities or meaning of the imagery and theintensity, strength or duration of response. Instead: ‘the relationship betweenlevels of intensity and qualification is not one of conformity or correspondencebut rather of resonation or interference, amplification or dampening’ (Massumi2002, 25). These insights from Massumi can be used to explore the digitalmanipulations of Sin City and 300 to see how they modify the relationshipbetween intensity and qualification, and whether the dual aesthetic of digital afxalter our interpretations of the contents of representations.Digital dressing: reconfiguring figures and their environmentsWorking with digital intermediates (DIs) gives filmmakers the capacity to renderall live-action malleable (Prince 2004). Once the image has become whollyaccessible to the filmmaker, the gap between the image and referent has thepotential to be widened, loaded with other kinds of resonances (Manovich 2001).These resonances have the potential to heighten or dampen the impact of animage. One of the most obvious impacts of the DI has been on the colour palettesof feature films. Much digital colour grading has pursued the same end as longer-standing film processing practices: to alter the colour tones of a sequence within afilm, frequently in ways that allow the colour to resonate with the emotional toneof the film (Belton 2008; Higgins 2003).In Sin City and 300 the widening gap between the image and its referent isvisible through the remediation of the original design of the comic books and theextended presence of digital manipulations. Nevertheless, some of thesemanipulations follow, albeit it in a more exaggerated way, longer-standing usesof colour. For instance, one of the most striking aspects of 300 is the crush, themanipulation of high and low lights in the image, as well as the colour wash.Picking up on Lynn Varley’s colour work in the comic book version of 300, thecolours are not only desaturated but also limited to a narrow range. Through usinga DI a single dominant colour scheme places both the human figures and theirlocation into the same aesthetic environment. A fight between a man and boy iscoded with a cool greenish-blue tone in which white flesh tones of the charactersappear greyish. When the man and boy speak about the glories of battle thiscolour gives way to a more golden hued sequence in which their flesh takes on asimilar glow. In the sequence that tells the story of Leonidas’ boyhood when,starving and exposed to the snow, he traps and kills the wolf and successfullyreturns to claim his crown, a cold blue dominates both the figure and location. Inthese particular examples each colour palette is a stylistic strategy that primarilyunderscores the action of the sequence: the stomach churning brutal training fightbetween adult and child, the golden grandiosity of Spartan philosophy andtraining, and the coldness of the environment and clinical tactics of the youthfulLeonidas. The limited colour palettes resonate with and enhance the intensity ofthe emotive strategies of the narrative told via the figures and their actions.New Review of Film and Television Studies 285Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 As described above, the colour palette of these scenes underscore the action,generating dramatic control through colour. Such a use of colour palettes is not aninnovation of the digital era, indeed dramatic control through colour is evident inearlier examples of cinema, from the experimental use of Technicolor in BeckySharp (Rouben Mamoulian, 1935), the heightened colour of Wizard of Oz (VictorFleming, 1939) to the stylisation of Red Desert (Michelangelo Antonioni, 1964)and the limited sepia-toned palette achieved in McCabe and Mrs Miller (RobertAltman, 1971). What is distinctive about colour control in the digital era is theextensiveness and degree of manipulation available to a filmmaker. As a con-sequence, working within a digital environment gives filmmakers the option of‘digitally dressing’ both the character and their location, with the added potentialof controlling and separating out different elements of the image. It is true to saythat the colour palettes of the imagery might be controlled via film stock choicesand tinting during processing, or bleach by-pass, or on-set using lighting effectsand filters; however, each of these manipulations alters the image globally ratherthan targeting a single element. Within a digital environment any element has thepotential to be altered in post-production to the extent that skin tones in 300 canbe manipulated to take on the predominant hue of the imagery, de-emphasisingnaturalistic colour conventions in favour of more expressive ones that matchacross both figure and location. Through such digital dressing the relationshipbetween the figure and location undergoes a shift; consequently, location ceasesto be only the background for actions and instead becomes a more active visual oraural presence. The elements generating an emotional response in the viewertherefore shift away from only being character-based.This shift in relationship between figures and their location has been articulatedin various ways, usually in the context of art cinema in which the relationshipbetween character and action is often more deferred. As a consequence, acharacter’s place within the location, as opposed to their actions, becomes of interestas it begins to take on meaning and associations for a viewer. Barbara Klingerdevelops a contrast between arresting and indelible images to tease out the affectiveand interpretive dimensions of images in which action is deferred. Though she iswriting about The Piano (Jane Campion, 1993) her comments provide a way intothinking about the imagery of SinCity and 300. Of an arresting image Klinger states:It occurs when a film stops to contemplate an exquisitely composed, significantlyevocative and/or uncanny image. The forward motion of the narrative slows downor temporarily halts, allowing this spectacle to capture fully our attention . . . Theexact meaning of the arresting image is unclear; it is at once visually stirring andinterpretively opaque. The mystifying qualities of the arresting image are, in turn,deeply related to its affective dimension . . . We can consider the arresting image,then, as the ‘money shot’ of the art film insofar as it delivers a payoff for one of thegenre’s chief pleasures: contact with highly aestheticized, ambiguous and affectingimagery. (2006, 24)Underlying the distinction that Klinger makes between an arresting image andones that pass us by in the flow of events is the familiar split between time andA. Wood286Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 space, or narrative and spectacle. The arrested image is the one that slows orengages the senses through a different pacing. The time-less quality of anarresting image ensures that the aestheticised and ambiguous imagery is moreavailable to be seen. It is the configuration of timelessness and ambiguity thatdistinguishes the arresting image from what Klinger calls an indelible image.While an indelible image still contains striking visuals, its configuration is suchthat it lacks ambiguity. Unlike arresting imagery it does not remain open, but isinstead enlisted to a trajectory established by the narrative:[Referring to Titanic ] As in many Hollywood films, the indelible image does notwish to remain truly mysterious; rather, it represents the culmination of the film’snarrative trajectory and emotional structure. Thus, one distinction between arrestingimages in blockbusters and in art films lies in the former’s repudiation of ambiguity.(Klinger 2006, 28)The films discussed in this paper fall short of the arresting imagery to whichKlinger refers, but the notion of affective imagery not straightforwardly tied to thenarrative trajectory of a film is relevant to a discussion of both 300 and Sin City.To consider further the idea of affective imagery untied from narrativetrajectory, Brian Massumi’s work is helpful. In his view, an affect, or intensity, isunderstood as the body being momentarily held by a sensation, often a soundand/or image:Intensity is qualifiable as an emotional state, and that state is static – temporal andnarrative noise. It is a state of suspense, potentially of disruption. It’s like a temporalsink, a hole in time, as we conceive of it and narrativize it. It is not exactly passivity,because it is filled with motion, vibratory motion, resonation. And it is not activity,because the motion is not of the kind that can be directed (if only symbolically)toward practical ends in a world of constituted objects and aims (if only on screen).(Massumi 2002, 26)Massumi’s analysis is distinctive in arguing that while intensity is embodied, itdoes not equate to affect understood as a synonym for emotion (2002, 27). ForMassumi an emotion is a qualified intensity, by which he means that the emotionis registered as belonging to a meaning system or having a particular function. Bycontrast an affect is a perceiver’s direct response to a stimulus that is as yetunaligned to quantifiable reactions, such as movement or a felt emotion. It is thelack of alignment of an affect that causes a viewer to be suspended, uncertain ofwhere to direct their interpretation. In the following, I suggest that digitaldressing and digital afx generate both kinds of affect, an intensity that is qualifiedas recognisable emotion, and an intensity that remains unaligned. The imageholds two modes of connection for a viewer, an interpretive one that is groundedin narrative and an affective one that troubles the stability of interpretation.Affective shifts: stepping out from representationsHaving followed Massumi’s lead in arguing that affect and emotion are not thesame, there is a problem with the kind of language that can be used in describingNew Review of Film and Television Studies 287Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 the affective and emotive impact of imagery. Though somewhat clumsy, thefollowing will use the word emotive to mean qualified intensity. The impact ofimagery in 300 and Sin City not only resides in the actions of the characters, but inthe emotive shift generated by digital dressing, and also in the affective shift ofdigital afx. To make clearer the distinctive aesthetic possibilities offered by usinga DI it is worth first considering Alien (Ridley Scott, 1979), a film made usinganalogue techniques that also relies on an extensive stylistic dressing of itscharacters and locations. Alien will be used to describe an emotive shift, as it isthen easier to demonstrate the affective shifts of both 300 and Sin City.Alien is a horror/SF hybrid, and so it is not surprising that it would have a richvisual style. Even so the aesthetics of the film are more distinctive than is usualfor these genres. In Alien light and shadow are fully exploited to heightensuspense in such a way that the pervasive uncertainty surrounding the creature isas much to do with the resonances embedded in the aesthetics of the location asthe characters and their actions. Like Sin City and 300, the lighting and colourdesign fully encompass both the figures and their location. Many of the iconicmoments of Alien take place within the confines of the Nostromo where theimagery plays on establishing visual connections between the exo-skeletalstructure of the alien and the internal structure of the craft. The lines of panellingalong the corridors on the Nostromo are often aligned as close vertical parallels,with horizontal connections running between the two. At times there is a curl ofwire or a clinking chain dripping oil or water, with ducts and wider vents runningalong the roof opening into the dimly lit space above a character’s head. All ofthis is low lit and heavily shadowed, but with lights carefully placed so that someedges stand out. Once the creature has been introduced via brief and often fear-laden glimpses, the editing and framing reverberates across both the lines of thecreature and those of the craft, generating tension and toying with our uncertaintyas to whether any high lit edge is ducting or a limb of the deadly creature. Inmaking the Nostromo and the creature visually equivalent the sets of associationsavailable for a viewer begin to intensify. Instead of focusing only on the threat ofthe creature, we begin to ask which is the greatest threat to the crew: the creatureor the vessel.Through matching the aesthetic of the Nostromo with that of the creature, ashift occurs. The Nostromo ceases to simply be a representation of a place whereaction occurs, and becomes a presence out of which emerges a wider expressionof threat and entrapment. There is an intensification of feeling around thelocation, one that begins to modify the interpretation of the imagery. This doesnot mean that the imagery is ambiguous in the same way as an arresting image,but its representational dimension provides the material for one interpretationthat can be shifted by its emotive dimension. This modification amplifies thethreat generated around the creature. Alien, then, generates an intensity that isqualified as a recognisable emotion. It also demonstrates that emotive shifts arenot a facet of digital manipulations per se. The distinction between an emotiveshift and the affective shift of digital afx in 300 and Sin City is that the latter areA. Wood288Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 generated via the visible combination of two distinct visual conventions within asingle set of images.Where Alien was made in an era of analogue technology, the manipulations of300 and Sin City rely on the different materiality of digital media technologies. Itis this different materiality that makes it possible to create imagery with the dualaesthetic of digital afx. One outcome of working within a digital environment isthat the relationships between elements within the image have the potential tobe altered. To expand, once footage exists within a digital environment, eitherthrough a conversion to a DI or because it was captured in a digital format, all theinformation is available to interventions using digital technologies. This differsfrom analogue techniques in which the relationships between the elements are setin camera, or when the footage is shot. For instance, in Alien, all the texturedcombinations of light and shadow, industrial piping, exo-skeleton and drippingmatter were captured in camera as the actors performed on the carefully designedand lit set. The cinematographic choices led to the camera movements andframing, which again were achieved through the relationship between camera andperformer. While the editing, sound design and score add additional dimensionsto the audio-visual imagery, the relationships between the visual elements withinany given frame are established at the moment of filming. The extent of thecontrast between light and dark may be altered by post-production processing ofthe film stock but the line of light and shadow is set by the in camera shot. Theaesthetic possibilities available to a filmmaker follow from the ways in whichthey exploit moving image technologies to influence the look of a film.In a digital environment it has become possible to manipulate many moreparts of the image in post-production than had usually been feasible usinganalogue techniques. This is not to say that digital technologies are in some waybetter, only that they offer an additional array of choices to the filmmaker. Thisarray of choices can be understood through two different conventions, those oflayers and groups. Compositing techniques, in both analogue and digitalenvironments, are a means of working across layers. At its simplest this involvescombining background and foreground elements, which further draws attentionto the ways in which potentially separable elements of the image can beconsidered in terms of the conventions through which they are grouped together.In mainstream cinema the aim is usually to ensure the illusion of integrated live-action and fx elements, a convention that can be described as continuity grouped.Zelig (Woody Allen, 1983) and Forrest Gump (Robert Zemeckis, 1994), theformer produced using non-digital and the latter digital compositingtechnologies, both used compositing to embed their respective central actorwithin footage of historical events, an example of grouped compositing.Ungrouped elements are only rarely encountered in popular cinema, unless fullymotivated by the narrative, such as the use of colour and black and white imageryin Pleasantville (Gary Ross, 1998). Working in layers also pre-exists digitalenvironments, but the latter has increased the pervasiveness of this kind ofmanipulation during post-production.New Review of Film and Television Studies 289Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 The potential pervasiveness of digital manipulation is perhaps most obviousin Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow (Kerry Conran, 2004), Sin City and300 in which blue or green-screen filming techniques were extensively used. Butextensive digital manipulation does not in itself generate digital afx. These areonly present if the imagery has a degree of affect, or unqualified intensity.Though Sky Captain is extensively manipulated any intensity in the imagery isfully embedded in a meaning system. The digital dressing of the film relies onintertextual stylisations. The digitally constructed sets resemble Max Fleischer’sSuperman (1941) cartoon series, though the soft blue and red tones of thefuturistic art-deco New York of the original have given way to the more sepia-toned look of Sky Captain. As the storyline follows ‘a hero saves the day’trajectory typical of series films from the later 1930s (for instance, Flash Gordon(1936) and Buck Rogers (1939)) as well as the Superman franchise, the softnessof the imagery and the glowing faces of the figures give an overall impression of anostalgic evocation of futuristic heroes gone by. Sky Captain shares with Sin Cityand 300 a stylisation based on bringing together a mix of aesthetic antecedents.Nevertheless, in Sky Captain the different strategies are merged seamlessly, anexample of immediacy that precludes the emergence of digital afx (Bolter andGrusin 1999).Colour as digital afx in Sin CityBy contrast to Sky Captain, in Sin City and 300 the manipulation of the imagerycreates a dual aesthetic. The emotive potential is visible in the digital dressing ofthe film, while digital afx generate an intensity whose meaning is less easy toalign. The story-world of Sin City is graphic in its depictions of violence anddraws on exploitative traditions for the costuming of the women characters. LikeSky Captain, it too plays on noir conventions, but its digital dressing tends moretoward exposing the brutality underlying the genre than the illusion of individualclean-cut heroes who so often save the day. Where the soft tones of Sky Captainaesthetically capture the ultimate safety of its story-world, the uncompromisinggreyscale of Sin City presents an emotive palette offering little escapism from theviolence of the action. Marked by the contrast of heavy shadow and bright light,the reality of the world of Basin City is equally stark: kill or be killed.The greyscale of Sin City is, however, only one of the stylistic strategies in play,as another significant aspect of the imagery is the use of colour. The relationshipbetween the colour and greyscale elements of the image can be defined by the waysin which these elements are grouped and ungrouped. The affective dimensionsassociated with these stylisations depend on the extent of the gap between intensityand qualification. The greyscale imagery is a digital dressing creating the potentialfor an emotive shift described earlier in relation to Alien. But as the greyscale seepsinto the gap between the image and its referent, the shift is further underscoredthrough the second aesthetic dimension created by the splashes of colour in theimagery of Sin City. The particular facet of a digital environment exploited in SinA. Wood290Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 City is to run these two strategies concurrently, and it is from this practice that thedigital afx emerge. Taken on their own, each of the strategies operates within theconfines of either colour conventions or those of film noir, and so alone they are notafx. For instance, the use of colour is at times motivated in the sense that it conveyssome aspect of characterisation within the story-world. In the sequence whenDwight drives Jackie-Boy to the Tar Pits, his distress is expressed through the use offlashing colours. Similarly, the greyscale imagery draws on both film noir and hard-boiled detective conventions, both in terms of the exaggerated chiaroscuro lighting,as well as the characters and their milieu. The distinctiveness of Sin City lies in theways these two separate strategies are combined into a single set of images. When incombination, the meaning of the colour and greyscale cease to be only motivated bythe characters or textual conventions.The simple presence of a colour differential need not necessarily lead todigital afx, however. For instance, the coexistence of greyscale and colour in SinCity is quite different to that seen in Pleasantville. In the latter any gap betweenimage and referent is tethered by its explanation within the narrative ensuring thatthe colour differentials come to have meanings within the terrain of the story-world of Pleasantville. In Sin City no such explanation is provided and so anyassociations that accumulate need not only be governed by the story-world orgeneric convention, though a number clearly are. For instance, a consequence ofplacing Goldie’s colour palette within a different aesthetic strategy to Marv’s isthat we can re-read the aesthetics of Goldie’s presence. Instead of thinking onlyabout how she is represented as a woman, we can also think about what thepresence of colour per se stands for within Sin City. While Goldie is a cliche´, aprostitute wrapped in red satin sheet, the use of colour is not necessarily sayinganything about her status as a sex worker. Rather the colour sets in play analternative set of resonances that sit in relation to the emotive environmentalready established by the greyscale aesthetic.Robert Rodriguez, the director of Sin City, has stated that he thought of colouras a weapon through which he could heighten the impact of the imagery of thefilm, with red blood used to underscore a character’s pain, bringing it to theforeground like a ‘colour-close-up’. Similarly, some gruesome images could betoned down to make their violence more palatable (Rowe 2005). An implication ofRodriguez’s comments is that colour has the potential to act as distraction,catching a viewer’s attention at key moments to heighten or diffuse a reaction. Butif colour is dissociated from narrative events, it can also be seen as an affectiveshift whose impact on a viewer is not easily contained within a meaning system.The colour imagery of Sin City, then, lends itself to both interpretive and affectiveconnections. In relation to representation and characterisation, Goldie and RourkeJr.’s colourisation can be interpreted as saying something about them. A simpleassociation would be red for sex and yellow for corrosive poison. In addition, theircolourisation expresses what they stand for in Marv and Hartigan’s worlds –literal distractions from their lives in Basin City. For viewers of Sin City thepatches of colour are also a distraction, whose potential for creating an affectiveNew Review of Film and Television Studies 291Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 shift varies in the different moments and contexts in which they are encounteredwithin the film. They appear in the flash of an eye, on the flesh of a limb in a club oron the street, an inconsistent presence often without any stable status. The affect ofcolour, appearing and disappearing as it does, insistently leaves meaning aside. Inthis sense colour is an example of digital afx, a distraction that has no meaning initself. These digital afx betray the viewer with a promise of something butdelivering only a fleeting presence. The splashes of colour gather attention butleave the viewer with just the greyscale world and its contagion of violence andexploitation. It is almost as if colour only intensifies through its loss.The push and pull of digital afx in 300The aesthetic of 300 also relies on work carried out within a digital environment,and it too combines aesthetic strategies within a single sequence of images atvarious moments within the film, generating a push–pull of digital afx. Bycontrast with Sin City, in 300 colour often groups figures within their location, anapproach similar to that of Sky Captain. The crush digitally dresses the imageryof 300 creating the primary aesthetic and emotive tone of the film. The crushedcolour palette, the digitally constructed set and the extraordinary figures enteringthe story-world all gesture towards its status as a story, which though based on ahistorical event, nevertheless revels in its lack of authenticity. As the fxsupervisor of 300, Grant Freckelton, stated: ‘Screw history, let’s make it lookcool’ (Armstrong 2007).Though the digital dressing of the crush dominates 300, when they are presentthe digital afx add a further dimension to the visual strategies of the film. Throughthe crush one strategy of 300 is an overt attempt to affect the viewer, though theintensity of the imagery remains qualified. Explicit within the imagery andnarrative of 300 is a glorification of violence and death, a celebration of afanatical desire to protect one’s nation against any odds, with a perception thatanyone who stands against this protective militarism is weak, corrupt andsomehow degenerate. Add into this mixture the honed body of elite fighters fromwhich deformed individuals are excluded by culling, a contrast with the Persianarmy that exploits mutated bodies as cannon fodder. In a film that relies on acrush that makes the shadows so visually impenetrable, it is perhaps notsurprising that shades of subtlety in 300’s characterisations of its heroes andvillains are also lacking in visibility. While it is easy to feel quite exercised overthe politics of these representations, the fx throughout 300 play up the film’sartifice. While not going so far as to claim this a self-reflective act by thefilmmaker, the high degree of artifice exposes the ways in which 300 deploysmythmaking strategies so overt that they reveal themselves.The digital dressing of the crush encompasses all elements of the imagemaking the narrative arcs of heroes and villains as inauthentic and as manipulatedas each other. The imagery has an otherworldly quality that resides outside theconventions of live-action cinema. The overall impact is to configure the earth,A. Wood292Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 sky and bodies as one, recalling glowering nineteenth-century lithographs onfaintly yellowing paper, making them tales from history, from a mediumassociated with ‘long ago’. The long ago quality of the imagery sits alongside amore explicit process of mythmaking that defines the parameters of thestorytelling. 300 is not only a fictional account of what occurred at Thermopylae,it also shows the process of the mythologisation of that battle for the purpose ofmotivating others to make an equivalent sacrifice. When the narrator of this storyis revealed towards the end of 300, we realise that it is Dilios the injured Spartansent by Leonadis to tell the story of Thermopylae, which he does as propaganda topromote the cause. From the moment the voice-over begins to speak of the mightySpartan customs, telling of Leonadis’ origin story, the aesthetic of the presentationtakes on a grandiosity befitting the claims of the narrator. From the first tale of thenear naked teenage boy shivering in the snow as he slays a monstrous glowingeyed wolf, it is necessary that the enemies of the extraordinary heroes bethemselves larger than life, for how else can the worth of the Spartans be proven?If the heroes are clever, powerful and strategic men, then their enemies must alsobe powerful, strategic and clever, though ultimately flawed. Taken in terms ofrepresentation all these connections become problematic, easy to align with afascistic view of the world dominated by perfect white bodies, whose injuries areconjured as breathing life into a future premised on sacrifice. In terms ofmythmaking the logic, though not defensible, has a sense to it. The emotivequality of the colour palette that blends the brutality of the action withglorification amplifies the process of mythologisation. As the artifice slips morefully into the foreground, the exaggeration carries an intensity, one that tumblesover into our experience and our interpretations of what the imagery represents,heightening equally what viewers might like or dislike about 300.The digital afx are embedded within the context of this emotive mythmakingwhen the imagery of the predominant aesthetic is combined with an additionaldynamic that pushes and pulls at a viewer. This dynamic operates within adifferent aesthetic strategy to that of digital dressing created using the crush. Thestrategy of digital dressing groups all the elements together, whereas the affectivedynamic works to extravagantly ungroup elements of the image provoking anaffective shift. This is most obviously true of the close fighting action of the battlesequences, as it in these scenes that the fx create imagery with an in-betweendimensionality. During the battle sequences, there are sections in which a 2-Dblood spatter associated with the carefully choreographed movements of the fightis overlaid on seamlessly edited shots of 3-D action taken at different speeds fromthree separate cameras. To achieve this the makers of 300 exploited invisible CG‘morph’ zooms in such a way that the action was apparently captured in acontinuity of tracking and zooms (Williams 2007). The combination of the twoaesthetic strategies, the crushed colour palette and the dynamic of the 2-D/3-D‘spatter and zoom’, creates the affective impact of the battle sequence. No longersimply watching a flow of aesthetically heightened pomp and circumstance, theviewer is further pushed and pulled into and out of the graphic action. The digitalNew Review of Film and Television Studies 293Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 environment is again important in enabling the generation of this affect. Theblood is one of the few elements of the imagery of 300 that could be described asungrouped, since it is visualised as a 2-D digital construction. These two sets ofimages, the zoom morphs and the 2-D splatter, form part of what is often referredto as the arresting imagery of 300, by which we can understand that it is almostliterally striking. In the context of a discussion of Reservoir Dogs, Paul Gormleyhas commented that: ‘An “affective” reading might stress the strong mimeticconnection between the body of the viewer and the actions and images of thetorture scene’ (2005, 11). In the affective dynamics of the morph zoom and bloodspatter such a bodily connection does indeed seem to be echoed. Locked into analmost literal affective shift through the framing established by this push–pull,there is a sense in which a viewer feels the blow-by-blow account of a battle toldfrom a perspective seeking to glorify. But this feeling is a strange sensation, anestranging one that generates a degree of uncertainty in where to ‘put’ oneself.A viewer is caught in a dynamic of being pulled in for a closer look at graphicallystylised violent action even as spatter is arcing outwards from the wound.Whatever the particular associations that may finally emerge, perhaps a mixtureof admiration for the fx and degrees of revulsion at the content of the imagery, thedigital afx create a moment of intensification generated from a state of being inbetween reaction and meaning, caught on the verge of something.Neither Sin City nor 300 make use of an arresting image as described byBarbara Klinger. The affective shift of their doubled aesthetic also sets them apartfrom the indelible imagery of fx films such as Titanic which ‘repudiateambiguity’. The doubled aesthetic instead conjures other dimensions that sitalongside the action-led trajectory of the narratives. The argument of this paper isnot offered as a means of recuperating 300 or for that matter Sin City, rather itpresents a way of thinking about the impact of their affective dimensions on theaesthetic and representational strategies of both films. In every set of images thereare always diverse tendencies and levels of organisation that gesture to particularinterpretations and also provoke a range of experiences. In The Future of theImage Jacques Rancie`re argues that images are operations that couple anduncouple in ways that create and frustrate expectations (Rancie`re 2007, 1–31).Though Rancie`re does not directly discuss digital manipulation, it can bedeployed in ways that are central to these operations. The particular materiality ofworking in a digital environment offers practitioners the ability to work acrosslayers of the image to group or ungroup elements of the image. As a consequence,they have the potential to develop aesthetic strategies that combine moreconventional representations with digital afx. In discussing affect Brian Massumistates: ‘Nothing is prefigured in the event. It is the collapse of structureddistinction into intensity, of rules into paradox’ (2002, 27). In the digitallyrendered provocations of Sin City and 300 digital afx trouble the stability of arepresentation, even if they cannot undo the representational matrix within whicha figure operates. Digital afx can emerge when two competing aesthetic strategiesremain equally visible within a sequence of images. In the moment when the gapA. Wood294Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 between the image and referent is exposed by digital afx, the security of astructured distinction is withheld, and as a consequence the afx mingle with andshift the content of representations. Where these shifts lead is more difficult to sayas the answer belongs in the more individual responses of each viewer, butnevertheless the shifts are evident and have the potential to give pause. In thatpause it becomes possible to begin asking how this imagery works: what itrepresents and what is the purpose of its affective dimensions.AcknowledgementI would like to acknowledge the Arts and Humanities Research Council for their awardgiven under the Research Leave scheme.ReferencesArmstrong, Matt. 2007. Stylizing Sparta in 300: VFX art director Grant Freckelton oncreating the look. http://www.studiodaily.com/main/print/7807Belton, John. 2008. Painting by numbers: The digital intermediate. Film Quarterly 61,no. 3: 58–65.Bolter, Jay David, and Richard Grusin. 1999. Remediation: Understanding new media.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Freeland, Cynthia. 2004. Horror and art-dread. In The horror film, ed. Stephen Prince,189–205. London: Rutgers University Press.Gormley, Paul. 2005. The new-brutality film: Race and affect in contemporary Hollywoodcinema. Exeter: Intellect.Grodal, Torben. 1997. Moving pictures: A new theory of film genres, feelings andcognition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Higgins, Scott. 2003. A new colour consciousness: Colour in the digital age. Convergence9, no. 4: 60–76.Hills, Matt. 2003. An event-based definition of art-horror. In Dark thoughts: Philosophicreflections on cinematic horror, ed. Steven Jay Schneider and Daniel Shaw, 138–57.Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.Klinger, Barbara. 2006. The art film, affect and the viewer: The Piano revisited. Screen 47,no. 1: 19–41.Manovich, Lev. 2001. The language of new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Massumi, Brian. 2002. Parables for the virtual: Movement, affect, sensation. New Haven,CT: Duke.Pajaczkowska, Claire, and Ivan Ward. 2008. Shame and sexuality: Psychoanalysis andvisual culture. London: Routledge.Plantinga, Carl. 2009. Moving viewers: American film and the spectator’s experience.Berkeley: University of California Press.Prince, Stephen. 2004. The emergence of filmic artifacts: Cinema and cinematography inthe digital era. Film Quarterly 57, no. 3: 24–33.Rancie`re, Jacques. 2007. The future of the image. London: Verso.Rowe, Robin. 2005. Editing Frank Miller’s Sin City – Part 1. http://movieeditor.com/2005/sin.city.htmlSobchack, Vivian. 2004. Carnal thoughts: Embodiment and moving image culture.Berkeley: University of California Press.Williams, David E. 2007. Few against many. American Cinematographer 88, no. 4:52–65.New Review of Film and Television Studies 295Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 07:57 09 January 2012 