ABSTRACT: 
Analysis of teachers\u27 agency as multifarious change, embedded in educational reform in the global era, stands largely unexamined in educational policy. Although the concept of teachers as agents has political implications, beyond this, examining teachers\u27 agency offers ways of describing and reviewing changes to teachers\u27 work and relations within evolving education systems. Local systems draw from globally orientated education policies, which continue to influence to the way that local systems redesign education. In the global context, education systems are complex interactions between structure and agency, evidenced as \u27multiplicity undergoing change\u27. In other words, there is dynamic and dialectic interplay between structure and agency. Teachers\u27 agency, germane to dynamic interplay, means that teachers are not only engaging in the reproduction of structural change aligning globalization-driven reforms to their work and practice, but also, in adapting and reacting to new structural conditions, they are transformed through their actions. In this paper, the focus becomes teachers\u27 agency as a framework for understanding how teachers are redesigned and reassembled to do things differently within restructured education systems. Finally, the discussion considers the possible consequences of teachers work and practice, given teachers\u27 agency relative to the macro policy of superfigures and the transitional national/global structures.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper examines teachers' agency as multifarious change, embedded in educational reform in the global era, stands largely unexamined in educational policy. Although the concept of teachers as agents has political implications, beyond this, examining teachers' agency offers ways of describing and reviewing changes to teachers' work and relations within evolving education systems. Local systems draw from globally orientated education policies, which continue to influence to the way that local systems redesign education. In the global context, education systems are complex interactions between structure and agency, evidenced as ‘multiplicity undergoing change’. In other words, there is dynamic and dialectic interplay between structure and agency. Teachers' agency, germane to dynamic interplay, means that teachers are not only engaging in the reproduction of structural change aligning globalization-driven reforms to their work and practice, but also, in adapting and reacting to new structural conditions, they are transformed through their actions. In this paper, the focus becomes teachers' agency as a framework for understanding how teachers are redesigned and reassembled to do things differently within restructured education systems. Finally, the discussion considers the possible consequences of teachers work and practice, given teachers' agency relative to the macro policy of superfigures and the transitional national/global structures. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  This is the published version Vongalis-Macrow, Athena 2007, I, Teacher : re-territorialization of teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education, British journal of sociology of education, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 425-439. Available from Deakin Research Online http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30024153 Reproduced with the kind permission of the copyright owner Copyright: 2007, Taylor and Francis This article was downloaded by: [Deakin University] On: 02 October 2011, At: 22:15 Publisher: Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK British Journal of Sociology of Education Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cbse20 I, Teacher: re‐territorialization of teachers’ multi‐faceted agency in globalized education Athena Vongalis‐Macrow a a La Trobe University, Australia Available online: 02 Jul 2007 To cite this article: Athena Vongalis‐Macrow (2007): I, Teacher: re‐territorialization of teachers’ multi‐faceted agency in globalized education, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 28:4, 425-439 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01425690701369376 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and- conditions This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material. British Journal of Sociology of Education Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 425–439 ISSN 0142-5692 (print)/ISSN 1465-3346 (online)/07/040425–15 © 2007 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/01425690701369376 I, Teacher: re-territorialization of teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education Athena Vongalis-Macrow* La Trobe University, Australia Taylor and Francis LtdCBSE_A_236829.sgm10.1080/01425690701369376British Journal of Sociology of Education0142-5692 (pri t)/1465-3346 (online)O ginal A tic e2 07 & Francis84 000 uly 007D At e aVo gali -Macrowa.vong is@l trobe.edu.au Analysis of teachers’ agency as multifarious change, embedded in educational reform in the global era, stands largely unexamined in educational policy. Although the concept of teachers as agents has political implications, beyond this, examining teachers’ agency offers ways of describing and review- ing changes to teachers’ work and relations within evolving education systems. Local systems draw from globally orientated education policies, which continue to influence to the way that local systems redesign education. In the global context, education systems are complex interactions between structure and agency, evidenced as ‘multiplicity undergoing change’. In other words, there is dynamic and dialectic interplay between structure and agency. Teachers’ agency, germane to dynamic interplay, means that teachers are not only engaging in the reproduction of structural change aligning globalization-driven reforms to their work and practice, but also, in adapting and reacting to new structural conditions, they are transformed through their actions. In this paper, the focus becomes teachers’ agency as a framework for understanding how teachers are redesigned and reassembled to do things differently within restructured education systems. Finally, the discussion considers the possible consequences of teachers work and practice, given teachers’ agency relative to the macro policy of superfigures and the transitional national/global structures. Introduction In can be argued that the 1990s presented a new era for teachers, which included a global dimension to the way their profession was reconceptualized (Mason, 1998; Young, 1998; Zanten, 2000). The globalization of trade and services couched educa- tion in the language and possibilities of the market in which education became a weightless product essential to enhancing human and social capital. Within the global economic terrain, new ways to fit education and teachers were sought. From the 1990s onwards, educational policy has focused on redefining teachers as adaptive and *Faculty of Education, School of Educational Studies, La Trobe University, Bundoora Campus, Melbourne 3086 Australia. Email: a.vongalis@latrobe.edu.au D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 426 A. Vongalis-Macrow responsive professionals in the context of educational change as a constant. The emerging knowledge economy constituted a tap root feeding the growth of globalized inspired policy that sort to systemize social and economic transformation and clarify the ramifications of the global trade in knowledge. Tapping into globalized policy, education reforms appeared as assemblages of reactions and proposals to do things differently when the global trade in knowledge and knowledge-making drew from not only local but also global sources. Macro-education policy figures, such as the OECD and the World Bank, at the forefront of systemizing global responses to knowledge economy, produced strate- gies implicating changes to education systems. Macro policy intentions for educa- tional reforms meant that both structures and agents were drawn into the globalization policy terrain. When Sinclair (1999, p. 60) posited that ‘transformation of working life is at the heart of globalization’, he emphasized that as well as struc- tures being co-opted for transformation, a result of globalization, restructuring essentially means redesigning the way people work. In other words, workers’ capac- ity to act within their work would undergo change so that some form of transforma- tion in both worker and work is resultant. The duality of change centralizes workers’ agency, which is both transformed but also does the transforming. In the case of teachers’ work, teachers’ work practices carry out the restructuring processes so that new educational structures emerge and consolidate over time, and in doing so there is a change in teachers’ agency. Systemic change, feeding off the global economic tap root, becomes glaringly co-dependent on the necessary and concordant actions of agents. However, the proliferation of policy and research (Taylor et al., 1997; Ball, 1998; Smyth & Shacklock, 1998; Zadja, 1998; Strain, 2000) on educational change attests to the fact that the duality of teachers’ agency and relation to systemic change is problematic. As a way to examine the troublesome duality of teachers’ agency, the first section intends to unpack the relationship between structure and agency, arguing against the view that agency is a singular entity pit against structure. The argument is framed around issues of multiplicity because when we analyse a system undergoing change, what we are in fact observing are collective proposals to do things differently so that ‘multiplicity is undergoing transformation’ (Deleuze & Guattari, 1988), leading towards some sort of change in the nature of relationships and between the constituent parts. The subsequent section analyses global policy and the critical issues that emerge when agency is reassembled in relation to structural changes. Finally, the problematic nature of teachers’ agency is shown, especially how govern- ing control over teachers’ agency and subsequently changes their work beyond their control. In order to discuss the problematic nature of teachers’ agency, a word of caution about globalization contextualized research. Mapping out the full extent of glocal- ized responses to the knowledge economy falls out of the scope of this paper. Rather, the paper traverses key developments that characterize structural changes, which characterize globalized education and epitomize the era of globalization in the 1990s. The intention is to map out the causal terrain necessitating responses D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 427 from teachers’ agency at the macro level rather than addressing the specificity of localized changes. Any research that delves into global policy hits upon problems of glocalization; that is, the diversity of localized responses to global policy. However, as other researchers have determined (Jones, 1998; Spring, 1998; Stiglitz, 2002), aggregate policy indicators characterize trends and thus can guide understanding of complexity in global era. In mapping out the aggregate trends that characterize structural and agency changes, the intention is to clarify how teachers have been reconstructed and re-territorialized within the current globaliza- tion landscape. Re-forming systems: re-forming relations An education system consists of structures, agents and relationships. Defining an education system as relationships between structure and agency captures somewhat the dialectical forces acting within a system and the possibilities in the outcomes of change. If we are to situate that system within a globalized social context, then to understand educational change we need to understand how globalization changes education systems; that is, how globalization changes structures, agents and their interrelations. Breaking down systemic features to examine structural and agential changes, relies on detailed descriptions of both structure and agency. Understanding structure and agency through a social-realist lens ascribes dialectical dimensions to systems, attempting to give a sense of reality to systemic change where changing phenomena are broken into parts and people (Archer, 1995). Identifying people and parts of globalized systems gives ontological presence to globalization phenomena by focusing on how globalization acts upon constituent parts of systems and what people do as a result of it. Even though the phenomena of globalization are contested, social realists argue that the affects of phenomena associated with global- ization do have observable impacts (Nash, 1999, 2002). Globalization has compo- nents, which remain ‘hidden’, but a social-realist perspective proposes that these are more likely to be revealed when examining how they affect systems. This explanation makes the assumption that although it is not possible to observe all the globalization processes at work, what can be observed is the impact that some phenomena have on social constructs such as social structures or agents. Structure refers to systematic ways of organizing resources (human and capital), and agency is made up of actions that are part of the obligations of a particular position that carry degrees of authority and autonomy, which are enabled through structural interaction (Archer, 1984; Nash, 1999; Willmott, 1999). However, the social-realist framework, as neatly as it frames a way of working with globalization, also propagates reduction as an answer to complexity. Globalization is complex politics and processes, and to unpack constituent parts of globalization in order to trace how change occurs and impacts on agency misses the essence of complexity as social realism. A critical issue for research is how to make sense of complexity in such a way that it remains intensively multifarious, troublesome and yet understood. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 428 A. Vongalis-Macrow The emerging globalized teachers’ agency A way forward may be to further explore the components of agency as transformation takes place in globalized structures. If we deconstruct the components that frame agency as defined by Archer (1984), there appear three interconnected aspects. These aspects—obligations, authority and autonomy—become the assemblages of agency. Rather than reducing agency to a category, acknowledging the assemblages of agency gives greater multiplicity and dimension to agency. From this standpoint, unpacking the multiplicity of agency investigates not only how a single entity responds to struc- tural reforms, but rather how complex entities transform through the tri-agency components of obligations, authority and autonomy, reacting to structural change. As intimated previously, Sinclair (1999) stated that globalization leads to the trans- formation of working life. Such a statement presents teachers’ work as uncomplicated causal responses to globalization. The effect creates and sustains a binary, which pits globalization, as a cause, against the effect on work/teacher. But, if we unpack agency, and ask what happens to teachers’ obligations, authority and autonomy when working within globalized structures, this allows for a clearer picture of how change can have multifarious and uneven affects on teachers and their work. As teachers are being deployed and re-territorialized (Deleuze & Guattari, 1988) within globalized educa- tion systems, the reassembling of their agency (i.e. their obligations, authority and autonomy) in new ways creates a distinct reshaping of teachers’ work in globalized education systems. Extrapolating upon teachers’ distinct agential capacity requires an exploration of the structural terrain in which teachers’ complex agency becomes engaged and embedded. The next section of the paper describes developments in global educa- tional perspectives through an outline of aggregate trends in education policy that illustrate key structural reforms leading up to the current context of globalization. Examining these developments leads towards a clarification of the uneven impact of change on teachers’ agency and how teachers are being re-territorialized within policy proposals of superfigures accentuating the production possibilities of globalization. Aggregate structural reforms signalling the emergence of macro agency Research into globalization began in the 1960s, a period that demarcated the shift from national to global perspectives (Robertson, 1990). In the 1960s, the World Bank conducted research calculating human capital values and how these could be used to fight the cycle of poverty in the developing world. The research identified factors that contributed to poverty including education, healthcare, housing, unemployment and the culture of poverty. From these factors it was argued that education was the most effective long-term measure to eliminate poverty as the dividends it returned not only aided the individual, but also education provided social returns (Spring, 1998). As a result, lending for educational development produced economic benefits while also making significant social progress through the promotion of the right to education as a human necessity (Psacharopoulos, 1985). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 429 In 1962, the World Bank began its first educational project, recognizing the demand for education in many developing countries that had achieved independence and were developing nationhood. This unprecedented demand for education showed up as a 200% increase in higher education and 250% increase in secondary education (Morrow & Torres, 1995). During this period the graduation rate in OECD countries increased from 44% in the 1950s to 59% in the 1960s (OECD, 2000). Education became a means to invest in economic growth for nations as well as for individuals. By the mid-1970s to 1980s, common debates across different nations focused on who should pay for education reforms. While there are localized differences in how countries dealt with education policies in this era, economies recovering from the effects of the economic crisis in the mid-1970s reviewed educational spending in response to taxpayers’ growing concerns about who benefits from education spending and who should pay for this benefit (Psacharopoulos, 1996). The replacement of dated administrative and bureaucratic structures, thought to be impeding more effi- cient organization of education systems, led to the devolution of management and decentralization of bureaucratic control that targeted education practices that were seen to impinge on efficiency. Building upon the ‘who pays for education’ arguments emerging from the previous decade, the education policies aggregated towards ‘where the buck stops’. For many developed nations, the cuts to education were contextual- ized within the ‘crisis’ of the welfare state when cost–benefit analysis of the ongoing expenditure on social services also came under greater scrutiny (Deacon et al., 1997; Meade & O’Donovan, 2002). The new resource and regulatory frameworks for devolved school systems meant that issues of equity and equality were reconceptualized in accordance with the bureaucratic administration of the new framework (Lawn, 1996). The devolved school systems had to show an effective use of resources by being able to account for achievements towards defined objectives (O’Connor, 2002). This framework for education further pushed reform towards school-based solutions rather than grand socio-political processes. The aggregate trend of the era emerged as corporate mana- gerialism (Kriesler & Halevi, 1995) that framed education change by focusing on economic indicators (Brown, 1997), seeking ways to validate education in social and economic terms (Marginson, 1999). Globalization reorganized the production and utilization of knowledge on a global scale (Castells, 1997) and education, as producer and creator of knowledge, became a lynchpin for supporting globalized change. Education policy from the mid-1990s onwards highlights the role of globally orientated organizations to increasingly incor- porate education as part of the ongoing economic development agenda in the global era (CERI, 1998a; Wood et al., 1998 ; World Bank, 1999). The role of global orga- nizations and their influence in policy-making had significant impact on the global conceptualization of education policy and directives. From European countries, Rinne (2000) sums up the trend in education development in the global era. Even though the school and educational policy undoubtedly have their own partially autonomous possibilities to affect the development of mankind and the world view, pattern of thought and functional models of growing generations, it looks inevitable that D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 430 A. Vongalis-Macrow the limits and structure of education are determined by powers that are greater suprana- tional economic and social structures. (Rinne, 2000, p. 131) Buenfil-Burgos (2000) outlines similar trends in Mexico, and Rhoten (2000) discusses changes in Argentina that have a striking similarity, Marginson (1999) outlined changes in Australia, and Hawkins (2000) those in China. What is specific to educational change in the global era is the presence of international organizations, acting supranationally, framing globally orientated policy and strategizing ways to enhance the knowledge economy, through education. The structural form of education creates the architecture for teachers’ agency. The form frames capacity and shapes function and actions. Operationalizing globalized structures meant new literacies, skills and learning for teachers. The desirability of the technical savvy facilitator shaped work patterns and expectations. Debates around whether these changes meant de-professionalizing or re-professionalizing sought ways to clarify the consequences of educational change for teachers work and practice (Ozga, 1995; Young, 1998; Britzman, 2000). Clearly some new form of teacher was in the making, but the question of how that form was taking shape and place remains uncertain. Teachers’ work is complex and how complexity is further generated by the policy input of macro agencies, such as the OECD and the World Bank, raises questions about what it means to be a teacher and the reconstructed patterns of teachers’ work. Viewed from the lens of teachers’ agency, clarification of the process of change illus- trates sequential developments in the different aspects of teachers’ agency acting to create and sustain a generative model of globalized education systems. Thus far, controlling teacher’s work by limiting what they can do, how they work, how often, with whom they exchange information, and so on, has encountered back- lash, low morale, large-scale resistance and crisis in the teaching profession. Changing a teacher’s working life is not a deterministic outcome. Part of the backlash against teachers’ change (Soucek & Pannu, 1996; Vongalis, 2004) can be attributed to the way that policy-makers have adopted a reductionist approach to teacher reforms (Ozga, 1995). Basically, teachers have been treated like a quality product that can be nudged into shape to best fit what schools need in order to meet the demands of future employment and economic imperatives. To quote Deleuze and Guattari, ‘variation is the oldest form of thought’ (1988, p. 12). To understand teachers’ transformation, not only as re-professionalism, but as multiplicity undergoing change, necessitates viewing the teacher as a critical, complex and troublesome agent and that, when educational restructuring occurs, it is teachers’ fragmented contingency of agency that is reassembled and re-terrritorialized within globalized education systems. As discussed previously, Archer identified at least three aspects of agency, these being agents’ obligations, authority and autonomy. These three aspects of agency delimit and define the boundaries of teachers’ position and practice (Archer, 1995), and it is these three aspects of agency that are changing independently yet coherently, in response to the restructuring of education to meet the needs of the new global economy. The next section breaks down the assemblages of what constitutes teach- ers’ agency in the global context, using education policy text from the OECD and the D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 431 World Bank, to highlight how governing control of teachers’ work and practices manifest in education reforms. Debates around teachers’ obligations in restructured education systems Teachers’ obligations define their boundaries and limitations to their positions. They are regulatory and legal constructs that determine the bounds of a profession (Willmott, 1999). Increasingly teachers’ obligations in the globalized context are two- fold; obligations to student achievement and to their school. These obligations are increasingly shaped by business-like operational measures, underpinned by the conception of education as a product and relations based on business-like exchanges where students are customers and clients. Young (1998, p. 8) describes this as the ‘technocratic modernisation’ of teachers. Teachers’ responsibilities controlled by stringent government regulations are directed toward the delivery of education as a product/service for students met under business pressures where teachers’ obligations are structured to improve the performance of students (Hoy et al., 2000). OECD policy regularly equates teacher accountability to student outcomes, for example, As governments look for a closer relationship between investment in teachers and outcomes for students, the pressure for evaluation is growing. (CERI, 1998b, lines 313–314) Increasingly, as the demands of the knowledge economy become more complex, so the demands on teachers appear more intense. The teacher of today is required to assure learning performance of every student and refine their work practice so that every student has equal but different opportunities to learn and participate in the future of working in a learning dominated economy. This is no easy task on the part of the teacher. However, policy targeting the improvement of teacher quality still approaches re- territorializing the teacher in this complex postmodern landscape, through the addi- tion of more accountability and regulatory tasks, coupled with tighter controls of teaching work. World Bank policy couches teachers’ obligation in the production and delivery of education as a service and good, stating that there is ‘more intense pressure on the capacity of schools and teachers to deliver educational goods’ (Vongalis, 2003, p. 124). Decisions about teachers’ obligations are made by government departments, managers or recently formed statutory bodies. OECD policy predicts the rise of the middle manager in teacher development plans that, … will need to emphasise the development of a participatory learning organisation, in which everybody plays a willing part in the mission. The writing of development plans for individual teachers will become less important than the spirit in which teachers engage in such plans, and the coordination of various learning activities. Middle managers will have a crucial role to play. (CERI, 1998b, lines 388–393) As teachers’ obligations appear to be more progressively shaped by quality assurance measures, managed within business like rules and regulations, teachers’ work within the growing compliance culture that fits their work practices to accountability D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 432 A. Vongalis-Macrow measures. In this equation, their time is a resource that needs to be assessed and accounted for. What does it mean to be a teacher when your obligations enclose your identity and work within a quality assurance framework? The proliferation of rules and regulations suggest a commodification of teachers’ agency, which becomes a by- product in the input–output organizational model. Another set of obligations, often overlooked in current policy, is the obligation teachers have to the profession that go beyond getting the job done. These obligations relate to reclaiming the work and its conditions and imagining the reconstruction of these two elements within a changing educational context. Teachers’ are not only concerned with student achievement, but are also concerned about the big issues that effect their position and work. This suggests that teachers’ agency responds to both social and education change; hence OECD policy stresses that: Teacher development has to be part of a wider programme of change, that gives clear authority for schools to do things in new ways, and enables teachers to widen their perspec- tive to see beyond the influences that have traditionally shaped their behaviour. (CERI, 1998b, lines 498–501) The lasting effects of educational footprints that show the historical relevance of teachers attests that teachers are not only relevant to the classroom but make a contri- bution to the world as workers and educators. However, this more social obligation is diminished in the current climate of change. Britzman states that: If teacher education is to join the world, be affected by its participation in world making, and question the ‘goodness’ of its own passions, we must rethink no only past practices and what goes under the name of professionalism, but also the very imagination it will take to exceed compliance, fear controversy, and ‘unclaimed experiences. (2000, p. 204) The prioritizing of teachers’ obligations, to meet the knowledge economy, and the restriction of the agency, though regulatory and targeted outcome-driven behaviour, suggests that policy guidelines downplay teachers’ social relevancy. In turn, policy affects may curtail teachers’ capacity to assert and direct their full agency towards social structures that reconstruct the relationship between knowledge, learning and social change (Hartley, 1992). Policy venturing into ways of aligning structural changes with reforming teachers’ agency appears to construct teachers as uncomplicated professionals that can be repo- sitioned and regulated to do things differently within a new landscape. A process model of policy instrumentalizes the product, teachers, as a product that can be trans- formed entirely provided the parameters of change are reinforced (Deleuze & Guattari, 1988). The politics and language of societies of control (Krejsler, 2004) suggests that, by experimenting with the right control, the desired behaviour and outcomes follow. Policy attempts that align globalization, education and teachers deplete teachers’ agency since teachers’ disengage from acts that reform their obligations as teachers. Reforming teachers’ obligations (i.e. the rules that govern their profession) becomes the responsibility of other educational stakeholders. Au and Apple (2004) argue that teachers are omitted because they are seen as potential interrupters of D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 433 proposed change. There is coherence in policy trends to gel teachers’ obligations with regulations. Politically, teacher’s work and practice is taken up with meeting compliance rather than raising issues. Thus, when work practices are governed by meeting obligations, the form the practice takes is more likely to generate system maintenance. Debates around teachers’ authority in restructured education systems The authority of the teacher as a knowledge specialist sustains a meaningful role for teachers that can be pursued with freedom and passion (Britzman, 2000). The authority comes from being able to acquire and teach knowledge, this exchange ensuring that teachers are critical agents in the education system. Knowledge creation, production and consumption places knowledge as the subject and object of the global economy. Within the knowledge-making terrain, teachers’ expertise in knowledge, learning and pedagogy could be valuable. However, when examining the contribution that teachers are making as knowledge-based workers, it appears that teachers are the mere messengers of the system (Smyth & Shacklock, 1998). In other words, their authoritative part of their agency is under-utilized. Teachers’ do have significant authority in the classroom and in student learning outcomes. World Bank policy represents the trend to focus teachers’ authority on student learning. For example: An effective teacher is able to discern from among alternatives what enhances student learning and what does not, and works to that end of raising student achievement. (World Bank, 2000, lines 197–199) Teachers’ pedagogical expertise is not the issue, but their authority in education is more likely to be exclusively recognized as the skills of teaching and student learning outcomes. Other areas of authority, such as deciding curriculum, standards and educational goals, were for the most part left to other educational agents. Teaching as an ethical activity and teachers’ authority comes from not only giving information but also creating an environment in which learning has intrinsic value and the education is enlarged to include broader sets of literacies, including critical, conscious-raising learning. Teachers are concerned about knowledge and opportu- nity (Hanushek, 1995; Papanastasiou, 1997), and the teachers’ authority to represent different views of education and knowledge stems from an enlarged view of education as a public good. If this aspect of agency (i.e. teachers’ moral and ethical authority in steering and guiding learning) is excluded from policy, then the continued subjugation of educa- tion to the market proceeds unimpeded and teachers are further de-territorialized from having input into the direction of educational change. The OECD is supportive of teachers as change agents. Policy states: Teaching and learning must not neglect the teachers themselves, whose expertise, motiva- tion and organisation needs to be brought to bear in support of change, rather than being neglected or, worse still, being regarded as an obstacle. (CERI, 1998a, p. 25) D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 434 A. Vongalis-Macrow However, the capacity to develop the significance of their authority in the global land- scape, in the full sense of the word, would give their authority greater determination in how their expertise is engaged. Rather than being mere supporters of change, as suggested by OECD policy, they would be building and shaping change. While there are exceptions, the general policy shift during this period has been towards diminish- ing the authoritative element of agency so that educational authority was steadily withdrawn from teachers and placed in the hands of policy-makers and regulators. Debates around teachers’ autonomy in restructured education systems Autonomy relates to the capacity held by teachers to determine and pursue their own interests and make effective their demands. Teachers’ autonomy peaked during the 1920s–1970s, when teachers’ collective agency, through teachers’ unions and profes- sional organizations, drove and shaped professional aspirations. During this period, teachers formed practical relationships with other agents that consolidated teachers’ power in supporting the development of their profession in an autonomously constructed way (Ozga & Lawn, 1981; Spaull, 1986). Within the current terrain of globalized education, a ‘redesigned’ (Lawn, 1996, p. 114) teacher has emerged. I would add that the teacher is not only redesigned, but re-territorialized intentionally within the classroom. New professionalism meant to break from the old professional model (Lawn, 1996; Mason, 1998; Young, 1998; McClure, 1999) so that teachers’ relations aligned with a market model of education (Davies, 2000; Smyth & Shacklock, 1998). OECD policy states: Teacher development has to be part of a wider programme of change, that gives clear authority for schools to do things in new ways, and enables teachers to widen their perspec- tive to see beyond the influences that have traditionally shaped their behaviour. (CERI, 1998b, lines 498–501) Giving teachers professional makeovers means an endless cycle of professional devel- opment. If teachers’ collective autonomy was drawn into the re-making of the profes- sion, then having the right to speak about the kinds of professional development and professional learning that enhances teachers’ agency, not only as facilitators for students but also as self-reflexive agents within a globalized system, would be essen- tially learning. Often, changes to teacher professionalization are imposed and teachers have limited say in changes made on their behalf. Within the limitations of restricted consultations, the policy hierarchy of government, education bureaucrats and school heads decide the ‘job descriptions’ for teachers (Lawn, 1996, p. 114). The general trend shows that the dimension of teachers’ work where they exercise autonomy to make free and self-interested judgement about their profession and its development has moved away from being a critical agential normative. According to World Bank policy, the autonomy of the profession to collectivize is explicitly sanctioned though unionism. The unions are stakeholders in the continuing professional development of teachers, while also collectivizing interests through free- dom of association and collective bargaining. The policy states: D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 435 Allow freedom of professional association and some form of collective bargaining consis- tent with labor legislation; involve representatives of these associations in reform discus- sions, and establish arbitration procedures. (World Bank, 2000, lines 129–131) For the difference between individual professionalization and professionalism as a whole, go to the heart of teacher autonomy, the nature of that autonomy and the degree of compliance and conformity embodied in these terms (Britzman, 2000). McClure (1999) argues that collective decision-making practiced through unions is actually an expression of exclusion. She equates professionalism with elitism. McClure constructs a case for the irrelevance of this type of collective professionalism to the ‘technological complexities of global environments’ (McClure, 1999, p. 3). This line of argument portrays the bureaucracy of teaching organizations as obstacles to public trust, creating instead an ‘economy of cousins’, where individuals seek to protect their own interests rather than promote professional merit. The issue of public trust and investing trust in teachers. Thus policy states: If teachers succeed in adapting to new challenges, by collectively developing new objec- tives and competencies that match the challenge of change, they will be held in high esteem. If they are perceived to be failing, the criticism and demoralisation of teachers that has been growing in some countries could become an irreversible spiral. (CERI, 1998a, lines 308–311) Advocating individual teacher empowerment comes at the expense of collective action for professional autonomy. Kirkpatrick (2000), as a head of four American teachers’ unions, asserts that the power of the organization obstructs reform and teacher autonomy. The fact that he defines teacher autonomy as an individual state points to the growing criticism of centralized professional structures, such as teachers’ unions, presented as obstacles to the relationships between teachers and their communities (McClure, 1999). The new professionalism promotes individuality over the group. An emerging problem for teacher’s autonomy is whether negotiations centre on the individual teacher or the profession as a collective. An attempt to redress the reduction of collective autonomy, at local levels, comes from the global federation of teachers’ union, Education International, which addresses these issues in the context of global politics that construct teachers’ work. Established as a macro agency especially constructed to represent teachers at the global level of policy-making, it aims to ‘further the cause of organizations of teachers and education employees, to promote the status, interests, and welfare of their members, and to defend their trade union and professional rights’ (Education International, 2002). Education International is trying to sustain the global ‘collective strength of teachers and education employees’ (Education International, 2002) in order to manage change and assert control over the way that teachers respond to change. Reassembling agency for transformation: navigating new terrain Restructuring education systems for the knowledge economy has implications for the way that teachers’ agency is reconstructed. Increasingly, the educational terrain D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 436 A. Vongalis-Macrow presents teachers with a more complex and intense working context where their obli- gations are highly regulated and expectations of teacher performance are high. The downwardly causal affects of the global economy has shaped education systems and the way that teachers operate within globalized systems. It appears that, for teachers, change is a constant—meaning that their work is reconstructed and their duties reas- sembled in response to changing educational policy. In the transformation of education, so that it is responsive to the global character of change, teachers are critical agents whose actions and behaviours have the capacity to reinforce and sustain change. Teachers not only engage in the reproduction of structural change but also adapt and react to new structural conditions so that they reproduce the intentions of change, and in doing so are themselves transformed through their new ways of interacting with new structures. This crucial process of interaction is at the heart of policy statements that emphasize the important role of teachers in the ‘positive’ implementation of educational change (Higginson, 1996; CERI, 1998a; World Bank, 1999). What teachers do and how they react to educa- tional change is significant in determining the outcomes of change. However, as the educational terrain becomes more dependent on the intense and complex work of teachers, policy checks the profession by insisting that teachers can be treated like a quality product, updated, shaped and remodelled to fit the demands of delivering education. This paper has outlined the inherent tensions precipitated by such policy-making. In doing so, a case has been raised for thinking of teachers as forms of multiplicity undergoing transformation. An example, at least three factors determining teachers’ agency—obligations, authority and autonomy—are undergoing significant reform in the way that teachers’ work is reassembled and re-territorialized in current education policy. Each factor represents a different dimension to teachers’ work and undergoes different stresses and tension in the light of change. Educational policy underwritten by supranational organizations and its localized versions has magnified teachers’ obligations. Faced with educational restructuring underpinned by market-based outcomes, teachers’ obligations have increased to include more work time spent in the verification of quality provision. Quality provi- sion is framed in the likeness of product quality control that is part of a regularized process of delivering educational services. Much like new-age, new-generation robots, teachers’ efficacy of work practices are dedicated to localized class and school sites so that their agency, once penetrating the social–political arenas, now is re-terri- torialized strictly on site. While obligations have extended, the diminution of other aspects of agency func- tion has occurred to remove professional autonomy from teachers’ work. Most nota- ble in the re-assemblage of agency is the attenuation of professional authority and the complete redefinition of autonomy so that teachers are engaged on different and mostly individual terms. As authority and autonomy has decreased presence in shap- ing agency, so the capacity of teachers’ agency reforms to sustain new models. As teachers’ agency is directed and obligated to the classroom and school-based work, it means reduced capacity to engage with broader, social–cultural structures. In other D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 437 words, teachers are required to be specialists in pedagogical matters and limit their professional association and knowledge to matters that deal with pedagogical and classroom matters. The capacity of agency to engage with social and political issues is almost negligible. Beyond avenues of limited consultation on specific issues, teach- ers’ input into policy matters is restricted, as are teachers’ social voices. There is deep contradiction in teacher policy that seeks to reconstruct teachers as involved and committed professionals who take on an increasingly complex task of making sense of the world for their students. As the teacher obligations increase to reflect the new engaged and committed professional who responds to teaching on a deeper level, key aspects of teachers’ agency that engages teachers more fully in their work are steadily removed from reconstructing the teacher. Policy has a tendency to mechanize and control the teacher rather than seeking to broaden their capacity to transform education systems. Education policy governed by market rhetoric logic has teachers performing like ‘education units’. To move away from the policy of control and the limitations inherent in the adop- tion of top-down policy approaches, both entities—structures and agency—need to be re-viewed outside this paradigm whereby structures are constructed by those in control and agency is moulded to fit structure. This binary is unsustainable in the face of creating transformative education systems that account for learning and education in a different, non-marketized and complex way. Stepping away from such a para- digm would entail the detachment of education from market-based discourse and influence where learning is defined as knowledge and skills relevant to the economy. That is not to say that education should not prepare people for an economic life, but the issue is whether this is not best achieved through students’ engagement with learning and education as a value in itself. For example, Deleuze (cited in Krejsler, 2004) defines education as production of desires on the part of the learner. Desire has many paths. The point here is that education is shaped by the learner, guided by the teacher, in a web of local and global learning situated in a complex terrain between the personal, the local and global. Policy needs to move away from mechanistic and economically driven reassembling of structure and agency as the generative model of educational change in order to remain relevant vehicle to for guiding transforming education systems and meeting learner desires. If the goal is to remodel education for the future, and not about restructuring political and economic power, then transfor- mation is about considering multiplicity and enhancing the full agency capacity of all stakeholders undergoing change. References Archer, M. (1995) Realist social theory: the morphogenetic approach (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press). Archer, M. S. (1984) Social origins of educational systems (London, Sage Publications). Au, W. & Apple, M. (2004) Interrupting globalization as an educational practice, Educational Policy, 18, 784–793. Ball, S. (1998) Big policies/small world: an introduction to international perspectives in education policy, Comparative Education, 34(2), 119–130. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 438 A. Vongalis-Macrow Britzman, D. P. (2000) Teacher education in the confusion of our times, Journal of Teacher Education, 51(3), 200–205. Brown, D. (1997) The politics of reconstructing national identity: a corporatist approach, Australian Journal of Political Science, 33(2), 255. Buenfil-Burgos, R. N. (2000) Globalization, education and discourse political analysis: ambiguity and accountability in research, Qualitative Studies in Education, 13(1), 1–24. Castells, M. (1997) The information age: economy, society and culture: the rise of the network society (Oxford, Blackwell Publishers). CERI (1998a) Education policy analysis (report) (Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). CERI (1998b) STAYING AHEAD: in-service training and teacher professional development (Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). Davies, D. (2000) Developing teachers: the challenges to lifelong learning, Educational Review, 52(1), 90–91. Deacon, B., Hulse, M. & Stubbs, P. (1997) Global social policy international organisations and the future of welfare (London, Sage Publications). Deleuze, G. & Guattari, F. (1988) A thousand plateus (Minneapolis, MN, The University of Minnesota Press). Education International (2002) Education International. Available online at: http://www.ei-ie.org/ main/english/index.html (accessed 20 September 2002). Hanushek, E. A. (1995) Who chooses to teach (and why?), Economics of Education Review, 14(2), 101–117. Hartley, D. (1992) Teacher appraisal. A policy analysis (Edinburgh, Scottish Academic Press). Hawkins, J. N. (2000) Centralization, decentralization, recentralization—educational reform in China, Journal of Educational Administration, 38(5), 442–454. Higginson, F. L. (1996) Teacher roles and global change (issues paper no. ED-96/WS/24) (Paris, UNESCO). Hoy, C., Jardine, C. B. & Wood, M. (2000) Improving quality in education (London & New York, Falmer Press). Jones, P. W. (1998) Globalisation and internationalism: democratic prospects for world education, Comparative Education, 34(2), 143–155. Kirkpatrick, D. W. (2000) Teacher unions and educational reform: the view from inside, Government Union Review, 19(2), 1. Krejsler, J. (2004) Becoming individual in education and cyberspace, Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice, 10(5), 489–503. Kriesler, P. & Halevi, J. (1995) Corporatism in Australia (Kensington, NSW, Social Policy Research Centre, University of New South Wales). Lawn, M. (1996) Modern times? Work, professionalism and citizenship in teaching (London, The Falmer Press). Marginson, S. (1999) After globalisation:emerging politics of education, Journal of Educational Policy, 14(1), 19–31. Mason, R. (1998) Globalising education (London, Routledge). McClure, M. W. (1999) Teaching—the peculiar profession: a review essay, Educational Administration Quarterly, 35(4), 562–572. Meade, R. & O’Donovan, O. (2002) Editorial introduction: corporatism and the ongoing debate about the relationship between the state and community development, Community Development Journal, 37(1), 1–9. Morrow, R. A. & Torres, C. A. (1995) Social theory and education (New York, State University of New York Press). Nash, R. (1999) What is Real and what is realism in sociology, Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 29(4), 445–466. Nash, R. (2002) A realist framework for the sociology of education: thinking with Bourdieu, Educational Philosophy and Theory, 34(3), 273–288. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 Teachers’ multi-faceted agency in globalized education 439 O’Connor, T. R. (2002) Program evaluation and policy analysis. Available online at: http:// faculty.ncwc.edu/toconnor/308/308lect11.htm (accessed 5 March 2002). OECD (2000) Education at a glance (Paris, Centre for Educational Research and Innovation Indicators of Education Systems, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). Ozga, J. (1995) Deskilling a profession: professionalism deprofessionalisation and the new mana- gerialism, in: H. Busher & R. Saran (Eds) Managing teachers as professionals in schools (London, Kogan Page Limited). Ozga, J. & Lawn, M. (1981) Teachers, professionalism, and class: a study of organized teachers (London, Falmer Press). Papanastasiou, C. (1997) Factors that influence students to become teachers, Educational Research and Evaluation, 3(4), 305–316. Psacharopoulos, G. (1985) Education for development (London, Oxford University Press). Psacharopoulos, G. (1996) Economics of education: a research agenda, Economics of Education Review, 15(4), 339–344. Rhoten, D. (2000) Education decentralization in Argentina: a ‘global–local conditions of possibility’ approach to state, market, and society change, Journal of Education Policy, 15(6), 593–619. Rinne, R. (2000) The gobalisation of education: Finnish education on the doorstep of the new EU millenium, Educational Review, September, p. 131. Robertson, R. (1990) Mapping the global condition:globalization as the central concept, in: M. Featherstone (Ed.) Global culture (London, Sage Publications), 15–31. Sinclair, T. J. (1999) Synchronic global governance and the international political economy of the commonplace, in: M. Hewson & T. J. Sinclair (Eds) Approaches to global governance theory (Albany, NY, State University of New York Press). Smyth, J. & Shacklock, G. (1998) Remaking teaching (London, Routledge). Soucek, V. & Pannu, R. (1996) Globalizing education in Alberta, in: S. Roberston & H. Smaller (Eds) Teacher activism in the 1990’s (Toronto, James Lorimer and Company Ltd). Spaull, A. D. (1986) Teacher unionism in the 1980s: four perspectives (Hawthorn, Vic., Australian Council for Educational Research). Spring, J. (1998) Education and the rise of the global economy (New Jersey, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.). Stiglitz, J. (2002) Globalization and its discontents (New York, W.W. Norton & Company). Strain, M. (2000) Changing teachers’ work: the reform of secondary schooling, School Leadership and Management, 20(2), 262–265. Taylor, S., Rizvi, F., Lingard, B. & Henry, M. (1997) Educational policy and the politics of change (London, Routledge). Vongalis, A. (2003) Deployed to deliver: the displaced agency of teachers in globalised education systems (Melbourne, Monash University). Vongalis, A. (2004) Global education policy directives: impact on teachers from the North and South, International Education Journal, 5(4), 488–501. Willmott, R. (1999) Structure and agency and the sociology of education: rescuing analytical dual- ism, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 20(11), 5–21. Wood, E. M., Meiksins, P. & Yates, M. (1998) Rising from the ashes? Labor in the age of ‘global’ capitalism (New York, Monthly Review Press). World Bank (1999) Education. Available online at: www.worldbank.org (accessed June 2000). World Bank (2000) Teacher supply, training and professional development (Washington, DC, World Bank, Education Sector, The Knowledge Resource Base). Young, M. (1998) Rethinking teacher education for a global future: lessons from the English, Journal of Education for Teaching, 24(1), 51–62. Zadja, J. (1998) Global education: designing a renewed agenda for teacher education, Education and Society, 16(1), 87–100. Zanten, A. V. (2000) ‘Plus ca change …?’ Changes and continuities in education policy in France, Journal of Education Policy, 15(1), 1–4. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 2 2:1 5 0 2 O cto be r 2 01 1 