ABSTRACT: 
Journal ArticleSpecial Issue: Spindel Supplement: The Lives of Human AnimalsHumans are a kind of animal, and it is a natural and sensible idea that the way to understand what it is for a human person to persist over time is to reflect on what it is for an animal to persist. This paper accepts this strategy. However, especially in the light of a range of recent biological findings, the persistence of animals turns out to be much more problematic than is generally supposed. The main philosophical premise of the paper is that living systems generally are best treated as processes rather than things. These processes prove to be so complexly intertwined and interdependent, that there is no unique, objective way of distinguishing the individuals from which they are composed. For this reason the animalist perspective, it is argued, problematizes as much as it resolves the problem of personal identity. Traditional concerns with responsibility and reactive attitudes provide an intelligible and defensible motivation for distinguishing the individuals we standardly assume as the explanandum in these discussions. But, from a biological point of view, the underlying individualism is a contingent perspective, as much justified by these concerns as providing an objective grounding for them. © 2014 The University of Memphis. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper examines the questions of personal identity, namely the nature of a human organism, and the nature of a species. It is argued that the notion of human being is a process based on multiple biological subprocesses, and dependent on its participation in multiple social processes for its most distinctive properties. It is argued that the notion of human existence is a logically reductive model of the human human, but it is a broader approach to the emergence of the individual. The paper concludes by suggesting that the notion of human existence is a logically reductive model of the human human, and the nature of the human human is a logically reductive model. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
     1    Animalism   and   The   Persistence   of   Human   Organisms1         John   Dupré,   Egenis,   University   of   Exeter          Introduction      The   poster   for   the   Spindel   conference   for   which   the   talk   on   which   this   paper   is   based   was   prepared   announces:   “According   to   “animalism,”   our   fundamental   nature   is   given   not   by   our   psychological   capacities,   but   by   our   biological   constitution:   we   are   primates   (Homo   sapiens),   and   like   all   organisms,   we   persist   just   in   case   we   continue   living.”      I   certainly   have   no   doubts   that   we   are   animals,   primates,   etc.,   and   that   our   persistence   amounts   to   the   continuation   of   our   living.      So   this   does   seem   a   good   place   to   begin   an   account   of   personal   identity.      Coming   to   this   topic   from   the   philosophy   of   biology   rather   than   from   an   immersion   in   recent   debates   over   personal   identity,   however,   this   description   raises   several   questions.   First,   what   is   a   fundamental   nature?      Clearly   what   is   intended   is   the   fundamental   nature   of   a   species   (ours),   but   much   work   in   philosophy   of   biology   has   suggested   that   species   exhibit   no   such   thing.      Does   this   matter?      Second,   what   is   an   organism?      This   may   seem   a   strange   question:   at   least,   to   paraphrase   Justice   Potter   Stewart,   surely   we   know   one   when   we   see   it?      I   shall   suggest   that   things   are   more   complicated,   and   that   this   may   present   some                                                                                                                                                                           1   I   am   grateful   to   the   organizing   committee   for   the   Spindel   conference,   and   especially   Stephan   Blatti,   for   providing   me   with   the   opportunity   to   consider   these   issues.      Thanks   to   various   attendees   at   the   conference   for   discussion   of   the   ideas,   and   to   Ann-­‐Sophie   Barwich   for   very   helpful   comments   on   an   earlier   draft.   The   research   leading   to   these   results   has   received   funding   from   the   European   Research   Council   under   the   European   Union's   Seventh   Framework   Programme   (FP7/2007-­‐2013)   /   ERC   grant   agreement   n°   324186.          2    qualifications,   at   least,   to   the   animalist   view   summarized   above.      And   finally,   even   if   we   know   what   an   organism   is,   do   we   know   what   it   is   for   it   to   persist,   to   continue   living?            This   paper   will   address   the   above   questions   from   the   perspective   of   contemporary   biology   and   philosophy   of   biology.      I   shall   argue   that   while   it   is   a   very   good   idea   to   think   about   humans   as   animals,   which   of   course   they   are,   successful   development   of   this   idea   requires   that   we   avoid   a   variety   of   common   but   misguided   ideas   about   animals.      A   particular   hazard   is   that   many   common   views   of   life   reflect   the   projection   of   ideas   derived   from   a   very   unusual   organism,    Homo   Sapiens,   onto   life   generally.      More   productive   will   be   to   attempt   to   rethink   ourselves   in   the   light   of   a   more   general   understanding   of   life   that   draws   on   the   best   contemporary   biological   science.      Doing   so,   I   shall   argue,   gives   some   surprising   insights   into   the   question   of   personal   identity.       Biological   Natures      The   account   of   animalism   quoted   above   implies   that   we   persist   as   long   as   we   maintain   the   same   ‘fundamental   nature’   provided   by   our      ‘biological   constitution’.      ‘Fundamental   nature’   sounds   like   a   synonym   for   ‘essence’,   a   concept   that   has   been   widely   criticized   in   the   philosophy   of   biology   (Hull   1965;   Dupré   1993).      Perhaps   we   shouldn’t   worry   too   much   about   this,   or   about   what   makes   some   features   of   an   organism   ‘fundamental’,   and   content   ourselves   with   a   broad   description   of   the   organism.      However,   without   some   identification   of   fundamentality   we   are   in   danger   of   disturbing   an   intuition   that   surely   is   part   of       3    the   motivation   for   animalism,   that   something   biological   is   more   fundamental   than   the   psychological   capacities   on   which   rival   accounts   of   personal   identity   are   based.      After   all,   having   a   range   of   psychological   capacities   is   as   much   a   characteristic   of   members   of   Homo   sapiens   as   is   having   four   limbs   or   opposable   thumbs.            We   should   begin   by   distinguishing   some   different   concepts   of   biological   natures.      One   idea   suggested   by   the   above   quote   is   that   each   human   individual   has   a   nature   determined   by   its   membership   of   its   particular   species.      This,   in   turn,   suggests   an   appeal   to   the   idea   of   species   as   natural   kinds   grounded   in   a   particular   (species-­‐)essence,   and   survival   as   depending   on   the   individual   continuing   to   realize   this   essence.      But   this,   unfortunately,   is   exactly   the   conception   of   biological   essences   that   has   been   so   widely   rejected   by   philosophers.      One   very   simple   reason   for   this   rejection   is   that   it   is   difficult   to   understand   how   a   species   defined   by   some   essential   property   could   gradually   evolve   into   a   different   species,   presumably   defined   by   some   new   and   distinct   essential   property.      Though   the   question   of   how   species   should   be   understood   continues   to   provoke   lively   debate   (Wilson   1999),   an   essentialist   answer   that   would   also   answer   the   question   what   constitutes   the   essential   property   of   an   individual   human,   the   property   that   suffices   for   the   continued   existence   of   that   human,   looks   distinctly   implausible.      An   alternative   to   the   approach   just   considered   is   to   move   directly   to   the   individual   essence,   the   property   or   properties   of   the   individual   that   must   be   maintained   if   the   individual   is   to   survive,   and   look   to   biology   for   an   account   of       4    this   property.      This   strategy   would   simply   sidestep   problems   with   the   essence   of   a   species.   This   concept   of   a   biological   essence,   however,   proves   equally   problematic.      A   human   organism   has   enormously   different   properties   at   different   times   over   its   lengthy   lifespan,   and   the   matter   of   which   it   is   composed   is   constantly   being   recycled   and   replaced.      Why   should   ‘biological’   properties,   whatever   these   may   be,   be   given   priority   over   psychological   (or   any   other)   properties   in   determining   the   identity   of   the   individual?      The   assumption   that   they   should   sounds   suspiciously   like   a   dogmatic   reductionism;   its   motivation,   at   any   rate,   is   problematic.            Both   the   essentialist   approaches   I   have   just   considered   are   rooted   in   a   metaphysics   of   substances,   things   of   particular   kinds.      Within   this   framework   basic   questions   arise   as   to   what   kinds   of   things   there   are,   and   what   makes   things   members   of   a   particular   kind.      An   answer   to   the   latter   question   should   then   tell   us   what   it   is   for   a   thing   of   a   particular   kind   to   persist:   it   will   continue   to   exhibit   the   properties   that   make   it   a   thing   of   the   kind   it   is.      From   this   perspective   animalism,   as   sketched   in   the   introductory   quotation,   seems   a   natural   position.   However,   the   attempt   to   develop   such   an   account   immediately   runs   into   problems.      The   way   forward,   I   believe,   is   to   recognize   that   an   organism,   human   or   otherwise   is   not   a   thing,   or   substance,   at   all,   but   a   process.      What   we   are   looking   for   are   not   the   constant   properties   that   determine   the   persistence   of   a   substance,   but   the   activities   that   sustain   an   individual   process.      My   objective   in   this   paper,   then,   is   to   explore   the   prospects   for   a   processual   animalism.      Later   in   this   paper   I   shall   say   something   more   about   what   processes   are,   but   to   motivate   this   move   I   must   first   say   a   bit   more   about   organisms.       5       Organisms      It   is   widely   supposed   that   organisms   fall   into   two   kinds.      On   the   one   hand   are   single-­‐celled   organisms—bacteria,   protists,   yeasts,   etc.—that   reproduce   by   fission.      Here   the   organism   is   just   the   cell.      Though   by   far   the   majority   of   organisms   fall   into   this   category,   since   the   topic   here   is   humans   my   main   concern   will   be   with   the   second   kind,   multi-­‐cellular   organisms.      These—animals,   plants,   and   some   fungi—are   complex   entities   in   which   the   cells   are   functionally   differentiated   in   different   parts   of   the   whole   organism.      Nevertheless,   these   entities   are   often   conceived   as   originating   from   a   unique   founder   cell,   a   zygote   or   spore.      Because   of   this   origin,   all   the   descendant   cells   that   make   up   the   multicellular   organism   are   assumed   to   share   the   same   genome,   which,   therefore,   is   often   assumed   to   constitute   the   individual   essence   of   the   organism   (cf.   Kripke   1980,   112-­‐3).      I   call   this   conception   of   the   organism   a   multicellular   differentiated   cell   lineage   (MDCL)   (Dupré   2012,   ch.   13).      One   problem   with   the   MDCL   is   that   it   is   not   true   that   all   multicellular   organisms   reproduce   this   way.      Many   plants   reproduce   vegetatively,   for   example   from   rhizomes   (e.g.   nettles),   runners   (e.g.   strawberries)   or   rooting   branches   (e.g.   brambles).      Some   starfish   reproduce   by   shedding   an   arm,   which   gradually   grows   into   a   complete   star.      In   these   cases   there   is   no   founder   cell   to   initiate   a   new   MDCL.   It   is   not   uncommon   here   to   bite   the   bullet,   and   insist   that   plants   that   grow   from   rhizomes,   runners,   starfish   arms,   etc.,   are   not   really   new   plants,   but   parts   of   the   parent   plant.      This   move   is   often   codified   in   the   distinction   between   genets,       6    which   include   all   the   vegetative   descendants   of   the   originating   plant,   and   ramets,   what   superficially   looks   like   an   individual   plant   but   may   strictly   speaking   be   only   part   of   a   larger   genet.      I   don’t   wish   to   object   to   the   introduction   of   the   technical   term   ‘genet’   but   note   only   that   for   the   more   common   sense   purposes   of   the   present   discussion,   organisms   to   which   this   distinction   can   be   applied   are   typically   ramets   not   genets.      It   is   true   that   humans   restrict   themselves   to   more   familiar   modes   of   reproduction,   though   strictly   speaking   homozygotic,   or   “identical”,   twins   should   be   seen   as   two   ramets   but   a   single   genet.   But   at   any   rate   there   are   other   reasons   why   the   concept   of   a   human   organism   as   a   lineage   of   cells   deriving   from   an   originating   founder   cell   (gamete)   is   problematic.      There   is   more   to   a   human   than   the   MDCL.      Noting   the   various   reasons   why   it   is   not   true   that   all   the   cells   in   a   human   share   the   same   genome   will   point   to   a   more   adequate   conception   of   the   organism,   human   or   otherwise2.      We   should   begin   by   interrogating   the   ‘same’   in   same   genome.      What   is   generally   intended   is   to   refer   to   the   sequence   of   nucleotides   in   the   nuclear   DNA,   which   does   indeed   remain   more   or   less   content   throughout   development   and   cell   differentiation.      But   as   well   as   there   being   a   lot   more   to   a   cell   than   DNA,   there   is   a   lot   more   to   DNA   than   sequence.      Given   that   the   length   of   DNA   in   a   human   cell   is   about   2   metres,   and   the   diameter   of   a   human   cell   is   typically   of   the   order   of   20   micrometres,   it   is   no   surprise   that   the   DNA   is   elaborately   folded,   or   ‘condensed’.      And   the   exact   conformation   of   this   more   or   less   condensed   DNA   is   constantly                                                                                                                                                                           2   The   following   points   are   discussed   in   more   detail   in   Dupré   2012,   Chs.   7   and   13.       7    changing,   in   ways   that   are   critical   to   its   behavior.      Only   a   small   proportion   of   the   DNA   is   exposed   to   the   transcription   machinery   in   any   cell,   and   the   differences   in   this   respect   account   for   the   difference   of   gene   expression   in   different   cells.      As   well   as   changing   its   physical   structure   in   the   process   of   development   and   cell-­‐type   differentiation,   the   structure   is   affected   by   influences   from   the   environment,   broadly   construed   to   include   everything   from   the   cellular   chemical   milieu   to   social   interactions.      These   changes   are   the   subject   of   the   rapidly   expanding   science   of   epigenetics   (see   Riddihough   and   Zahn   2010,   and   papers   cited   therein).      In   short,   then,   even   cells   that   have   the   same   DNA   in   terms   of   nucleotide   sequence   may   contain   DNA   with   functionally   very   different   properties.         And   this   is   only   the   beginning   of   the   ways   in   which   different   cells   in   the   same   human   body   contain   different   genomes.      An   unknown   number   of   people   are   actually   chimeras,   meaning   that   they   developed   not   from   one   genome   but   two,   which   merged   early   in   development,   resulting   in   an   organism   different   parts   of   which   contain   quite   distinct   genomes.   It   is   not   known   how   common   this   phenomenon   is,   as   investigation   would   require   analyzing   genomes   from   many   different   parts   of   the   same   body   in   large   numbers   of   people,   something   that   has   not,   as   far   as   I   know   been   attempted.      It   is   known   that   such   cases   exist,   from   very   rare   instances   when   genetic   tests   appear   to   have   show   that   a   woman   was   not   the   mother   of   her   child,   as   the   genome   in   the   cells   from   which   her   DNA   was   tested   is   different   from   that   which   formed   the   ovum   that   gave   rise   to   her   child   (Yu   2002).      More   familiar   is   the   chimerism   that   comes   about   artificially   from   transplantation   medicine,   including   blood   transfusion.                8    But   more   relevant   than   any   of   this   is   the   fact   that   humans   are,   like   all   or   almost   all   other   complex   organisms,   massively   symbiotic.      In   addition   to   the   cells   standardly   considered   as   human,   a   human   body   contains   trillions   of   microbial   cells—bacteria,   archaea,   and   fungi   (Xu   and   Gordon   2003).      The   largest   concentration   of   these   is   in   the   gut,   but   they   also   live   on   the   surface   of   the   skin   and   in   all   other   body   cavities.      In   fact   these   microbial   symbionts   outnumber   human   cells   by   about   ten   to   one,   and   contain   over   98%   of   the   genes   in   the   human   body.      It   has   become   increasingly   clear   that   these   microbes   are   not,   as   was   once   assumed,   merely   passengers   who   had   found   congenial   habitats   in   the   interstices   of   the   human   body,   but   essential   contributors   to   the   well-­‐being   of   the   human   system.      Elsewhere   I   have   argued   that,   while   there   may   be   theoretical   contexts   in   which   the   human   is   best   treated   as   no   more   than   an   MDCL,   as   an   individual   interacting   with   the   wider   environment   the   symbiotic   whole   including   the   microbial   symbionts   is   the   more   appropriate   concept   (Dupré   2010,   Ch.   11).      The   point   to   which   all   these   examples   lead   is   that   distinguishing   individuals   within   functioning   biological   systems   composed   of   multiple   intertwined   lineages   of   cells   is   far   from   trivial,   and   may   be   done   in   different   ways.   It   is   very   probably   universally   true   of   multicellular   organisms   that   they   thrive   only   in   interaction   with   large   numbers   of   symbiotic   microbes.      Most   plants   require   elaborate   communities   of   fungi   and   bacteria   to   modulate   the   interaction   between   their   roots   and   the   surrounding   nutrient   environment.      And   microbes   themselves   do   not   generally   live   isolated   lives,   but   form   parts   of   complex   microbial   systems,   such   as   biofilms,   often   involving   many   different   cell   types.      In   fact   the   majority   of   microbes   in,   for   instance,   the   human   gut,   are   themselves   combined   into   such       9    biofilms,   perhaps   constituting   a   further   kind   of   individual   in   addition   to   the   individual   microbial   cells   and   the   encompassing   human.      This   deep   interdependence   between   cells   involved   in   quite   distinct   lineages   provides   serious   difficulties   in   deciding   the   boundaries   of   the   individual.            Consider   an   especially   complex   community,   the   leafcutter   ant.      Like   many   ant   species,   these   organisms   include   a   variety   of   castes,   such   as   the   large   soldier   ants,   which   defend   the   colony   against   invaders,   and   of   course   the   queen.      Specialized   ants   cut   up   leaves   and   transport   them   to   the   nest,   where   a   different   caste   of   ants   chews   them   up   and   takes   them   to   a   special   area   of   the   colony   where   a   fungus   is   cultivated   that   provides   food   for   the   colony.      The   digestion   of   the   leaves   first   requires   the   attention   of   communities   of   bacteria   that   predigest   the   leaves,   and   a   range   of   other   bacteria   are   required   to   protect   the   whole   system   from   hostile   organisms,   most   notably   a   fungus   that   over   time   tends   to   take   over   the   fungus   gardens   and   ultimately   destroy   the   colony.      A   further   set   of   chambers   is   reserved   for   waste   products   from   the   gardens,   the   proper   treatment   of   which   is   also   important   for   maintaining   the   health   of   the   system.      In   a   system   such   as   this   there   are   many   entities   that   have   plausible   claims   to   be   individuals.      To   common   sense   an   individual   ant   is   an   organism,   though   it   has   frequently   been   proposed   that   the   whole   colony   of   ants   form   a   single   superorganism.      Is   the   fungal   colony   a   further   individual   organism?   Is   it   also,   or   alternatively,   a   part   of   the   larger   colony   (its   stomach)?      And   so   on.          10    I   don’t   propose   to   offer   an   answer   to   these   questions   here3.      My   main   point   is   just   that   the   question,   what   is   an   individual   organism,   far   from   being   answered   by   an   appeal   to   biology,   is   shown   by   current   science   to   be   extremely   difficult.      What   we   find   in   the   living   world   are   deeply   interconnected   and   interdependent   processes,   and   distinguishing   individuals   within   these   complex   systems   is   difficult,   can   often   be   done   in   multiple   ways,   and   may   be   counterintuitive.      A   second   point,   recalling   the   positive   theme   of   this   paper,   is   that   the   best   way   of   understanding   these   multiply   intertwined   cell   lineages   is   in   terms   of   a   hierarchy   of   processes.      A   human   life   is   a   developmental   process,   and   the   many   constituent   lineages   that   contribute   to   its   continuation   are   themselves   processes.      The   set   of   such   processes   will   change   during   the   life   cycle,   but   the   coherence   of   the   process   nevertheless   provides   a   fairly   robust   kind   of   unity,   though   other   such   unities   can   be   found   within   the   hierarchy.       Humans      The   reader   may   be   disappointed   or   relieved   to   hear   at   this   point   that   I   don’t   think   the   question   whether   symbiotic   microbes   are   part   of   a   human   individual   is   of   deep   and   immediate   importance   to   the   question   of   personal   identity.      The   understanding   of   living   systems   as   a   hierarchy   of   intertwined   processes   is                                                                                                                                                                           3   One   possible   approach   is   in   terms   of   a   broad   concept   of   the   immune   system.      Thomas   Pradeu   (20xx)   develops   this   idea,   and   shows   that   immune   systems   of   various   kinds   are   pervasive   throughout   the   living   world.      Such   an   account   endorses   the   inclusion   of   most   symbiotic   bacteria   as   part   of   the   human   organisms,   as   these   are   recognized   as   ‘self’   by   the   immune   system.      This   account   does   not,   however,   exclude   the   possibility   of   a   nested   hierarchy   of   individuals.             11    relevant   rather   from   the   other   direction:   Homo   sapiens   is   a   profoundly   social   organism;   human   individuals   are   complexly   and   multiply   interconnected,   and   form   multiple   higher   level   individuals.      The   important   moral   from   the   biological—or   animalist—view   of   the   person   is   that   the   centrality   of   the    individual   person   that   is   so   central   to   the   longstanding   philosophical   debate   about   personal   identity   is   not   as   obvious   as   it   usually   seems.      In   fact,   I   believe,   its   obviousness   rather   reflects   the   individualism   that   is   so   central   to   Western   thought   in   the   last   few   centuries,   and   most   importantly   the   application   of   this   individualism   to   a   more   or   less   reductive   view   of   the   social.      Methodological   individualism,   for   instance,   counsels   us   to   treat   social   entities   as   entirely   intelligible   as   the   sum   of   their   individual   human   parts.      Many   internal   objections   have   been   raised   against   this   position,   though   it   still   informs   most   of   economics   and   a   good   deal   of   other   social   theory.      My   point   here   is   that   such   individualism   gains   no   support   from   reflection   on   human   biology.      Perhaps   the   simplest   place   to   start   thinking   about   the   limits   of   human   individuality   is   with   human   reproduction.      It   is   common   to   think   of   a   human   life   as   beginning   at   the   point   of   conception,   the   merger   of   a   human   sperm   and   egg.      It   is   certainly   correct   to   say   that   this   event   may   sometimes   initiate   a   human   life   cycle,   and   that   all   human   life   cycles   are   initiated   by   such   an   event   (or   occasionally   by   two   such   events).      But   the   identification   of   a   necessary   condition   of   the   appearance   of   a   new   entity   is   hardly   the   same   thing   as   identifying   the   beginning   of   the   entity.   Compare   this   view   of   the   origin   of   a   human   life   with   the   suggestion   that   the   signing   off   on   a   planning   application,   or   perhaps   the   laying   of       12    the   first   stone,   may   initiate   the   existence   of   a   building;   the   career   of   the   building   would   more   plausibly   be   dated   from   the   completion   of   the   construction.         A   different   perspective   on   human   reproduction   is   to   treat   the   event   of   fertilization   as   initiating   a   very   gradual   process   of   fission.      The   fetus,   from   this   point   of   view,   is   the   part   of   the   mother’s   body   where   this   fissioning   process   is   taking   place.      In   the   same   way,   various   events   in   the   cell,   such   as   genome   duplication,   are   directed   towards   cell   division.      But   one   is   not   tempted   to   think   that   the   duplicate   chromosomes   are   part   of   a   different,   yet   to   be   formed,   cell.   In   many   cases   of   cell   division   it   is   plausible   to   date   the   origin   of   the   new   cell   to   the   separation   of   the   two   cell   membranes.      The   human   case   is   actually   less   clear-­‐cut.      Whereas   in   the   case   of   the   cell   the   daughter   cell   may   constitute   a   fully   independent   entity,   for   example   in   the   case   of   a   free-­‐living,   or   planktonic,   bacterium,   this   is   certainly   not   the   case   for   the   birth   of   the   infant.      The   latter   is   entirely   dependent   on   the   mother   and   very   gradually   becomes   independently   viable   over   a   long   period   of   time.      In   parallel   with   the   various   entities   that   can   be   distinguished   in   the   ant   colony,   it   seems   perfectly   plausible   to   consider   the   mother/infant   dyad   as   continuing   to   be   a   single   biological   system.      Note   that   both   parts   of   the   system   substantially   affect   the   behavior   and   physiology   of   the   other.      So   parallel   to   the   intertwining   of   processes   I   described   in   the   case   of   the   ant   colony,   we   may   see   here   the   very   gradual   separation   of   a   process   into   two,   with   no   determinate   point   at   which   this   separation   is   complete.      If   this   reading   of   the   case   of   birth   is   legitimate,   it   becomes   more   plausible   to   suggest   that   humans   may   be   parts   of   a   variety   of   other   higher-­‐level   entities.          13    Humans   are,   after   all—and   this   is   the   point   that   the   centrality   of   individualism   in   so   much   recent   thought   almost   inevitably   tends   to   obscure—profoundly   social   creatures.      Despite   considerable   antipathy   to   the   idea   in   the   last   quarter   of   the   twentieth   century,   it   is   increasingly   accepted   that   selection   of   higher-­‐level   entities   (social   groups   (Sober   and   Wilson   1998)   and   even   of   multispecies   communities   (Dupré   2012,   ch.   12))   is   likely   to   be   an   important   evolutionary   process.      But   it   is   anyhow   not   clear   why   the   ontological   significance   of   social   groups   should   depend   on   sometimes   quite   arcane   questions   about   evolution.      When   we   are   discussing   personal   identity   it   is   natural   to   think   that   membership   in   a   family,   a   firm,   a   sports   team,   or   a   university   may   be   important   aspects   of   a      person’s   identity.      This   may   seem   like   no   more   than   a   play   on   the   word   ‘identity’;   but   there   is   a   real   philosophical   issue.      Should   we   think   of   these   social   entities   as   no   more   than   the   ontological   sum   of   their   parts   (members),   or   rather   as   real   entities   that   may   causally   influence   their   members   (Elder-­‐Vass   2011)?      This,   or   the   more   general   question   of   so-­‐called   downward   causation,   is   an   issue   that   has   been   much   discussed   by   philosophers   of   social   science   and   others,   and   I   cannot   pretend   to   resolve   it   here   (but   see   Campbell   1974;   Andersen   et   al.   2000).      At   the   very   least,   however,   the   possible   reality   of   social   entities   should   not   be   dismissed   on   the   basis   of   a   questionable   interpretation   of   evolution.      Even   though   to   us—conscious   human   ‘individuals’—the   centrality   of   the   individual   perspective   may   be   inescapable,   it   is   worth   reflecting   that   from   the   point   of   view   of,   say,   an   alien   xenobiologist,   a   perspective   more   like   that   which   we   adopt   towards   the   leafcutter   ants   may   be   more   useful.          14    It   is   at   any   rate   clear   that   many   of   the   most   distinctive   properties   of   humans,   for   example   linguistic   capacity   or   the   tendency   to   accord   with   social   norms,   are   properties   that   are   only   conceivable   as   pertaining   to   individuals   as   parts   of   larger   collectives.      It   is   again   no   doubt   possible   to   suppose   that   such   higher-­‐level   properties   are   in   turn   reducible   to   the   aggregated   properties   of   individuals   and   their   relations.   But   like   many   such   reductive   projects,   success   in   its   actual   implementation   has   been   meager,   and   philosophical   justification   for   the   attempt   is   at   best   controversial.            In   summary,   then,   the   human   individual   is   a   process   composed   of   multiple   biological   subprocesses,   and   dependent   on   its   participation   in   multiple   social   processes   for   its   most   distinctive   properties.      This   is   not   meant   to   imply   that   the   traditional   notion   of   the   human   individual   is   indefensible,   only   that   the   attempt   to   ground   the   individual   in   biology   tends   to   problematize   rather   than   clarify   the   concept.      A   natural   conclusion   to   draw   from   the   layered   complexity   of   biological   systems,   including   our   own,   is   that   the   distinguishing   of   individuals,   rather   than   being   something   unproblematically   provided   by   nature,   is   something   we   do   to   serve   particular   practical   or   theoretical   purposes.      It   is   not   hard   to   locate   the   relevant   concerns   in   the   philosophical   tradition   of   discussion   of   personal   identity.      Prominent   among   such   concerns   are   questions   of   individual   rights   and   responsibilities   that   are   central   to   the   social   order.   More   controversially,   it   might   be   argued   that   our   interest   in   the   criteria   of   individuation   for   persons   reflects,   at   least   in   part,   the   uniquely   individualist   social   and   political   ideology   that   has   characterized   Western   society   for   the   last   few   centuries.                   15    Processes         I   have   claimed   that   biological   entities,   including   ourselves,   are   better   understood   as   processes   than   as   enduring   substances.      It   is   incumbent   on   me   now   to   say   a   little   more   about   how   this   distinction   should   be   understood4.      The   contrast   between   substance-­‐   and   process-­‐based   metaphysics   is   of   course   an   ancient   one,   tracing   back   to   pre-­‐Socratic   thinkers   such   as   Parmenides   and   Democritus   on   the   one   hand,   and   Heraclitus   on   the   other.      It   is   often   assumed   that   the   scientific   revolutions   of   the   seventeenth   century   marked,   among   other   things,   a   decisive   victory   for   Parmenidean   atomism,   and   hence   substance   metaphysics.      In   light   of   this   it   is   somewhat   ironic   that   quantum   mechanics,   field   theories,   and   much   of   contemporary   physics,   seems   far   more   naturally   understood   as   processual.      The   issue   should   not,   at   any   rate,   be   taken   as   closed.      The   main   point   that   I   want   to   stress   about   processes   here   is   that   a   process   depends   for   its   existence   on   change.      Whereas   change   presents   a   familiar   problem   for   substance   metaphysics,   namely   that   of   determining   which   changes   are   consistent   with   the   persistence   of   the   substance,   for   a   process   change   is   essential   for   its   persistence.      Compare   a   mountain   and   a   whirlpool.      It   may   in   fact   be   the   case   that   all   kinds   of   microphysical   processes   are   necessary   for   the   stability   of   a   mountain,   and   the   mountain   itself   may   be   a   phase   in   various   geological   or   tectonic   processes.      Still,   it   seems   imaginable   that   a   mountain   might   continue   in   perfect   stasis   for   a   period   of   time   without   ceasing   to   exist.      Indeed                                                                                                                                                                           4   The   dominant   figure   in   recent   revivals   of   process   metaphysics   is   Whitehead   (e.g.   1929).      Rather   more   accessible   recent   discussions   include   Rescher   (1996)   and   Seibt   (2013).             16    complete   stasis   is   the   ideal   form   of   persistence   for   a   substance.      For   a   whirlpool,   on   the   other   hand,   stasis   immediately   implies   non-­‐existence:   if   the   parts   stop   moving   the   whole   process   falls   apart.      It   is   important   to   distinguish   stasis   from   stability.      Whirlpools   can   be   very   stable.   The   red   spot   on   Jupiter,   a   very   active   storm   twice   the   size   of   our   planet,   has   existed   for   at   least   the   last   two   hundred   years   and   very   likely   much   longer.      The   circulation   of   gases   within   this   process   are   stabilized   by   flanking   jet   streams,   themselves   part   of   larger   dynamic   meteorological   systems.      More   to   the   point,   biological   systems   are   stabilized   to   varying   degrees   by   internal   metabolic   processes,   and   by   interactions   of   various   kinds   with   their   wider   environments.      Stasis   for   an   organism   implies   death.   This   stabilization   is   quite   different   from   the   stability   of   a   mountain   or   a   table,   where   stability   results   simply   form   the   lack   of   any   processes   or   forces   that   tend   to   disrupt   the   arrangement   of   parts.            Of   course,   since   as   I   have   noted   biological   systems   should   strictly   be   understood   as   life   cycles   rather   than   as   any   particular   stage   of   the   life   cycle,   what   is   stabilized   is   in   fact   itself   a   process   that   occurs   on   a   much   longer   time   scale.      From   the   perspective   of   typical   human   time   scales   some   such   life   cycles   provide,   nonetheless,   a   very   stable   appearance.      Some   trees   live   for   thousands   of   years,   and   though   their   continuation   is   sustained   by   metabolic   processes   at   vastly   more   rapid   time   scales   than   those   of   their   life   cycles,   the   overall   system   maintains   a   very   stable   state.      Indeed,   one   of   the   reasons   for   questioning   the   analogy   between   organisms   and   machines   implicit   in   the   recent   fashion   for   mechanism   is       17    that   the   stability   provided   by   such   processes   is   orders   of   magnitude   greater   than   that   generated   by   any   mechanistic   technology   with   which   we   are   familiar.      The   question   of   time   scales   is   a   particularly   important   one   for   understanding   biological   process.      I   have   mentioned   the   interaction   between   contiguous   processes   exemplified   by   the   omnipresence   of   symbiosis,   but   there   is   also   a   hierarchy   of   processes   at   different   time   scales   that   make   up   living   systems.      Many   metabolic   processes   necessary   for   the   maintenance   of   life   last   small   fractions   of   seconds.      Cell   divisions   take   place   over   hours.      And   the   directional      (as   opposed   to   circular,   as   for   many   metabolic   processes)   process   that   constitutes   development   lasts   for   the   lifespan   of   the   organism.      The   fact   that   relative   to   the   time   scale   of   a   particular   process   processes   at   much   longer   time   scales   can   be   treated   as   unchanging   is   what   makes   a   substance   ontology   or   a   mechanistic   framework   adequate   for   many   purposes.         Whether   or   not   they   should   ultimately   be   seen   as   processes   themselves,   the   atoms   that   are   rearranged   during   metabolic   processes   may,   form   the   point   of   view   of   the   latter,   be   treated   as   unchanging   things.      So   also   may   be   the   more   obviously   processual   structural   features   of   the   cell   within   which   these   metabolic   processes   are   constrained.      Even   if   a   mountain   is   ultimately   part   of   a   tectonic   process,   it   is   certainly   safe   (in   most   cases!)   to   treat   it   as   a   thing   as   one   walks   up   it.      A   process   ontology   has   no   difficulty   in   accounting   for   the   usefulness   of   thinking   in   substance   terms.   There   are,   however,   obvious   dangers   of   forgetting   the   particular   context   relative   to   which   a   particular   entity   can   be   treated   as   a   stable   thing.          18    Human   Processes   and   Personal   Identity5      I   do   not   propose   to   offer   here   any   general   answer   to   the   question   what   constitutes   the   identity   of   a   process   over   time.      I   suspect   that   there   is   no   such   general   answer,   and   that   given   the   entanglement   at   least   of   living   processes   any   local   answer   will   be   dependent   of   the   interests   we   have   in   distinguishing   a   particular   process.   In   many   cases   we   can   apply   familiar   strategies   for   tracking   the   identities   of   substances   since,   as   just   noted,   many   processes   are   highly   stable   within   a   time   frame   of   interest.      The   medium-­‐sized   dry   good   in   our   homes   remain   pretty   much   unchanging   over   the   periods   of   years   during   which   they   share   our   lives.      For   guests   at   a   cocktail   party   macroscopic   features   of   other   guests   are   sufficiently   stable   that   problems   of   identity   over   time   are   hardly   pressing.      However,   questions   of   personal   identity   are   generally   considered   over   time   scales   of   a   lifetime,   and   here   things   become   more   difficult.      Traditional   approaches   to   the   identity   of   substances   over   time   address   the   problem   of                                                                                                                                                                           5   One   prominent   sceptic   about   personal   identity   over   time   has   explicitly   denied   that   there   is   any   benefit   to   be   gained   from   treating   persons   as   processes   rather   than   enduring   things:   “Any   claim   to   the   effect   that   a   mental   self   is   best   thought   of   as   a   process   rather   than   an   object   can   be   countered   by   saying   that   there   is   no   sense   in   which   a   mental   self   is   a   process   in   which   a   rock   is   not   also   and   equally   a   process.”   (Strawson,   1997).      Since   I   am   sympathetic   to   a   fully   processual   ontology   I   am   inclined   to   think   that   rocks   may   indeed   be   (very   slow)   processes.      But   a   processual   ontology   will   need   to   distinguish   very   different   kinds   of   process,   a   point   that   makes   the   above   remark   a   simple   non   sequitur.      A   human,   unlike   a   rock,   is   an   element   in   a   hierarchy   of   complexly   interconnected   processes.      It   is   also   possible   to   adopt   a   mixed   ontology   in   which   there   are   both   objects   and   processes,   in   which   case   the   premise   of   the   argument   is   false.          19    identity   through   change:   what   qualitative   changes   to   an   entity   are   consistent   with   its   still   remaining   numerically   the   same   entity.      Answers   to   such   questions   generally   suppose   that   there   is   some   feature   or   features   of   the   entity   in   question   that   remains   constant   and   the   persistence   of   which   determines   the   continued   existence   of   the   entity.      Such   a   feature   is   of   course   notoriously   difficult   to   find   for   persons   since   if   we   suppose   that   a   fifty   year   old,   say,   is   the   same   person   as   a   five   year   old   who   existed   forty-­‐five   years   ago   it   is   very   difficult   to   find   any   interesting   common   features.      It   has   sometimes   been   supposed   that   a   biological   feature   such   as   genome   sequence   might   do   the   job,   but   for   various   reasons   discussed   above   this   is   an   unsatisfactory   answer.   In   fact   standard   answers   to   the   question   of   personal   identity   do   not   seek   a   common   feature,   but   a   set   of   relations   between   temporal   parts   of   the   supposedly   enduring   entity.      These   are   generally   either   spatio-­‐temporal   relations,   of   continuity,   or   psychological   relations,   such   as   overlapping   memories.            Before   returning   to   these   standard   answers   I   shall   briefly   consider   more   generally   the   persistence   of   living   processes.      In   contrast   to   the   general   problem   noted   above   about   the   persistence   of   individual   substances   through   change,   the   persistence   of   processes   through   change   in   one   sense   is   not   a   problem   at   all.      Persisting   through   change   is   just   what   processes   do:   to   understand   a   process   is   to   understand   what   it   does   (how   it   changes)   to   maintain   its   identity   over   time.      The   problem   is   rather   that,   as   described   above,   life   consists   of   multiple   deeply   intertwined   processes,   and   it   is   often   difficult   to   decide   which   process   we   are   interested   in   the   persistence   of.      This   indeed   is   a   central   source   of   the   pluralism   that   has   been   so   prominent   in   recent   philosophy   of   biology   (Dupré   2012,   Chs.   4-­‐    20    5).      Distinguishing   some   subset   of   the   evolving   and   ecologically   intertwined   processes   that   we   think   of   as   interacting   organisms   as   a   species   can   be   done   in   various   ways   for   various   reasons   (Dupré   2002;   Ereshefsky   1992);   and   similarly   with   the   multiple   processes   that   motivate   the   distinction   of   some   part   of   the   genome   as   a   gene,   or   some   part   of   the   processes   that   constitute   a   living   system   as   an   organism.            These   concerns   relate   to   the   ontological   significance   of   individuating   a   particular   process;   they   do   not   suggest   that   there   is   any   difficulty   in   such   individuation.      So   the   human   cell   lineage   is   a   perfectly   well-­‐defined   process,   and   one   that   perhaps   quite   sufficiently   serves   most   of   the   purposes   for   which   we   individuate   persons6.      The   problem   is   only   why,   given   the   multiple   processes   that   are   involved   in   the   career   of   a   person—physiological,   psychological,   social—we   should   settle   on   this   one.      And   to   answer   this   we   must   be   clear   about   why   we   are   interested   in   distinguishing   persons.         There   are   numerous   familiar   answers   to   the   preceding   question.      Socially,   personal   identity   is   an   essential   background   to   issues   concerning   responsibility,   rights   and   duties,   praise   and   blame,   etc.      We   punish   criminals   or   exact   debts   because   we   believe   that   the   people   who   committed   the   crimes   or   incurred   the   debts   are   the   same   as   those   we   now   punish   or   charge.      Relations   of   love,                                                                                                                                                                           6   Though   note   that   this   does   not   work   for   all   organisms,   due   to   the   prevalence   of   asexual   and   vegetative   methods   of   reproduction.      It   is   of   limited   value   for   individuating   plants,   for   instance.      See   Clarke   2012   for   a   discussion   of   how   this   might   be   done.   And   monozygotic   twins   present   a   problem,   though   perhaps   one   that   can   be   solved   quite   simply   by   tracking   the   processes   from   a   little   way   past   their   inception.   Clarke   2013   presents   an   illuminating   general   account   of   the   individuation   of   organisms   that   addresses   many   of   these   issues.       21    friendship,   or   enmity   are   based   in   part   on   beliefs   about   past   interactions   with   the   same   people   we   now   feel   the   relevant   emotions   towards.      All   of   these   commonplace   aspects   of   human   ‘reactive   attitudes’   (Strawson   1962)   presuppose   that   individual   humans   have   some   continued   existence   through   time.         This   is   all,   I   hope,   pretty   much   common   sense.      The   debate   between   theories   that   ground   personal   identity   in   something   material   (spatio-­‐temporal   continuity;   animalism)   and   Lockean   theories   that   look   for   some   kind   of   psychological   continuity   can   be   seen   in   the   following   way:   while   the   latter   focus   on   the   reasons   why   we   want   to   trace   persons   over   time,   the   former   address   the   practical   ways   that   we   do   so.      From   the   processual   biological   perspective   I   have   outlined,   the   problem   with   the   materialist   answers   to   the   question   of   personal   identity   is   with   the   assumption   that   there   is   some   objective   answer   to   be   sought   in   the   material   world   as   to   what   persisting   entities   there   are   that   answer   to   our   conception   of   a   human   person.      Given   this   assumption   it   is   just   a   fortunate   contingent   fact   that   these   persisting   entities   answer   to   the   purposes   for   which   we   individuate   persons.      The   problem   with   the   Lockean   perspective   is   not   just   that   the   psychological   properties   it   stresses   are   ontologically   dependent   on   underlying   material   processes,   though   they   are,   but   also   that   there   is   no   reason   to   suppose   that   there   are   any   psychological   processes   that   have   the   persistence   we   require   to   track   a   person   over   the   time   scales   that   are   generally   required   of   this   concept.      The   two   perspectives   are   reconciled   if   we   see   the   latter   as   providing   the   motivation   for   the   concept   of   personal   identity,   and   the   former   as   providing   the   means   by   which   it   is   applied.          22    The   price   of   this   reconciliation   is   the   acknowledgement   that   there   is   no   unequivocal   material   reality   that   objectively   determines   the   existence   of   individual   persons.      A   fortiori,   this   is   not   to   be   found   in   a   better   understanding   of   biology.      However,   I   see   this   as   a   price   well   worth   paying   and   indeed   a   gain   rather   than   a   loss.      The   recognition   that   there   is   no   unique   answer   to   the   question   of   what   must   persist   for   the   human   animal   to   persist,   properly   redirects   our   attention   to   the   question   what   is   (or   are)   the   purpose(s)   for   which   this   persistence   matters.   Why   do   we   care   so   much   about   a   unique   and   definitive   answer   to   the   question   of   identity?      Part   of   the   answer   to   this   question   has   already   been   indicated,   and   of   course   it   is   an   answer   that   has   been   extensively   discussed   in   a   vast   body   of   philosophical   literature   on   personal   identity.      Many   social   relations   presuppose   the   continued   existence   of   persons   through   time,   and   would   be   impossible   without   such   continuity.      It   is   also   important   to   emphasize   a   broader   context   to   which   I   have   already   alluded.      Individualism   is   a   dominant   theme   in   much   of   modern   Western   thought.   I   do   not   propose   to   offer   here   a   normative   evaluation   of   individualism.      Many   believe   that   it   is   the   source   of   the   affluence   of   modern   life;   others   believe   that   it   is   the   central   cause   of   inequality   and   injustice.      Both   may   be   right.      I   will   make   just   three   final   points   on   this   general   topic.            First,   it   is   very   easy   to   take   individualism   from   its   home   in   social   and   political   philosophy   and   impose   it   on   our   thinking   about   biology.      Its   role   in   biology   may   then   be   taken   to   show   the   inevitability   of   its   place   in   our   social   and   political   life.      Indeed   such   arguments   abound   in   appeals   to   evolutionary   biology   to   support       23    competitive   individualism.   As   a   matter   of   fact,   however,   for   reasons   I   have   sketched   here   I   think   individualism   fits   rather   poorly   with   contemporary   biology.      Moreover   it   is   often   argued   that   contemporary   Western   individualism   is   historically   and   geographically   a   somewhat   anomalous   perspective,   which   make   its   grounding   in   biology   implausible   on   grounds   quite   independent   of   my   reading   of   contemporary   biology.      My   second   point   concerns   the   ideal   of   freedom.      The   major   attraction   of   individualism   for   many   is   its   connection   with   an   ideal   of   personal   freedom.      But   of   course   the   idea   of   freedom   is   a   perennial   problem   in   philosophy:   reconciliation   with   an   objective   causal   order   as   elaborated   by   the   sciences   is   notoriously   puzzling.      I   believe   that   a   processual   view   of   the   person   provides   resources   for   illuminating   this   issue.      First,   a   view   of   biological   systems   as   multiple   evolving   processes   fits   easily   with   a   non-­‐deterministic   metaphysics   in   which   an   unpredictable   future   is   constantly   being   created   by   both   evolutionary   and   intelligent   adaptation   to   a   changing   environment.      Human   intelligence   is   a   novel   feature   of   this   creative   process.      However,   human   creativity   builds   on   a   historical   background   and   depends   on   language,   an   essentially   social   phenomenon.      Freedom   as   a   creative   force,   therefore,   cannot   be   attributed   to   the   solitary   individual,   but   originates   only   from   the   relation   of   the   individual   to   a   past   and   present   social   context.      Thus,   I   argue,   the   belief   in   genuine   human   freedom,   far   from   requiring   the   ontologically   isolated   individual   person,   requires   that   persons   be   seen   as   deriving   their   most   important   capacities   from   their   relations   to   a   social   context.      A   view   of   the   social   as   no   more   than   the   sum   of   the       24    individuals   of   which   it   is   constituted   threatens   to   reduce   such   an   account   of   freedom   to   circularity.7      My   third   and   final   point   addresses   what   may   seem   to   some   the   impausibility   of   this,   admittedly   qualified,   skepticism   about   personal   identity.      I   do   not   deny,   of   course,   that   we   have   experience   that   is   structured   around   the   idea   of   ourselves   as   unique   individuals.      This,   I   take   it,   is   part   of   the   explanandum   in   discussions   of   personal   identity.   Nor   do   I   deny   that   many   of   our   social   practices   assume   the   continuity   of   persons   and   would   be   impossible   without   this   assumption,   nor   that   many   of   these   practices   are   important   and   well   worth   saving.      I   do   deny   that   there   is   some   objective   biological   fact   about   the   world   that   determines   who   are   the   persons   we   think   of   as   continuing   individuals.      Perhaps   this   will   seem   more   plausible   when   we   reflect   on   the   importance   of   duration   in   the   value   of   judgments   of   identity   to   the   practices   that   personal   identity   sustains.      I   have   no   doubt   that   I   am   the   same   person   that   I   was   yesterday   or   even   a   year   ago.      But   am   I   really   confident   that   I   am   the   same   person   as   some   infant   or   child   who   existed   several   decades   ago?      I   believe   that   there   are   biological   processes   continuous   with   some   such   child,   but   whether   these   constitute   personal   identity   is   precisely   the   question   at   issue.   It   is   also   the   case   that   my   connection   to   this   child   may                                                                                                                                                                           7   An   account   of   freedom   along   these   lines   is   spelled   out   in   much   more   detail   in   Dupré   2001,   ch.   7.      In   that   work   I   presented   the   view   as   a   variety   of   incompatibilism.      More   recently   I   have   preferred   to   present   the   idea   as   an   indeterministic   compatibilism,   where   compatibilism   is   not,   obviously,   compatibility   with   a   deterministic   causal   order,   but   with   the   causal   order   that   actually   obtains,   in   my   view   an   indeterministic   one   (Dupré   2012,   ch.   16,   afterword;   2013).      This   accords   with   the   idea   developed   in   the   earlier   work   that   rather   than   seeing   humans   as   exceptions   to   an   otherwise   seamless   causal   order,   as   is   often   the   view   of   incompatibilist   voluntarism,   humans   should   be   seen   as   dense   concentrations   of   causal   capacity   in   a   world   in   which   causal   order   is   the   exception   rather   than   the   rule.       25    entitle   me   to   certain   things,   such   as   inheritance.   Living   as   I   do   in   Great   Britain,   I   might   even   find   myself   entitled   to   call   myself   an   earl   or   a   duke.      Such   entitlements   ,   however,   are   neither   natural   nor   even   obviously   good.      They   require   justification   rather   than   providing   it.      That   I   might   find   myself   the   bearer   of   a   hereditary   title   on   the   grounds   that   I   had   received   a   brain   transplant   in   infancy   from   the   heir   to   a   dukedom   strikes   me   as   wholly   absurd.       Conclusion         The   core   argument   of   this   paper   is   that   while   animalism   is   undoubtedly   correct   in   supposing   that   humans   are   a   kind   of   animal,   the   implications   of   this   observation   are   far   less   clear   than   is   often   supposed.      Not   only   is   it   problematic   to   say   just   what   an   animal,   qua   individual   organism,   is,   but   there   are   respects   in   which   humans   are   quite   exceptional   animals.      With   regard   to   the   question   of   personal   identity   I   take   the   animalist   perspective   to   problematize   rather   than   solve   the   traditional   question   of   personal   identity.         A   central   premise   of   this   paper   is   that   humans,   as   animals,   should   be   seen   as   processes   rather   than   substances.      While   there   is   certainly   a   process,   the   multicellular   differentiated   cell   lineage   (MDCL),   that   tracks   the   material   entity   that   we   identify   and   re-­‐identify   as   a   human   process,   this   process   is   not   identical   with   what   we   call   an   animal   and   is   dependent   for   its   existence   as   the   kind   of   process   it   is   both   on   parallel   processes   with   which   it   interacts   and   on   larger   process   of   which   it   forms   part.      While   the   relevant   MDCL   serves   to   track   the   psychological   features   with   which   we   are   concerned   in   questions   of   personal       26    identity,   it   is   problematic   to   identify   this   process   with   the   human   animal.      Our   interest   in   the   continuity   of   these   psychological   processes   is   what   justifies   our   focus   on   this   process   rather   than   the   process   being   something   independently   given   that   happily   serves   this   function.      The   most   important   implication   of   this   argument   is   to   problematize   the   individualism   that   is   an   unstated   assumption   in   most   discussions   of   personal   identity.      I   do   not   mean   to   say   that   individualism   is   ontologically   confused   or   normatively   bad.      But   I   do   mean   that,   at   least   in   the   way   currently   understood   in   most   philosophical   thought,   it   is   an   optional   ontological   position.      It   is   a   position   sustained   by   our   concept   of   personal   identity   rather   than   an   objective   given   on   which   personal   identity   is   unavoidably   constructed.          References      Andersen,   Peter   Bøgh,   Claus   Emmeche,   Niels   Ole   Finnemann   and   Peder   Voetmann   Christiansen   (eds.),   Downward   Causation:   Minds,   Bodies   and   Matter.   Århus:   Aarhus   University   Press,   2000.       Campbell,      Donald.   “’Downward   Causation’   in   Hierarchically   Organized   Biological   Systems.”   In   Studies   in   the   Philosophy   of   Biology,   eds.   Francisco   Ayala   and   Theodosius   Dobzhansky.      London:   Macmillan   (1974).    Clarke,   Ellen.   “Plant   Individuality:   A   Solution   to   the   Demographer's   Dilemma.”       Biology   and   Philosophy   27   (2012):   321-­‐361    27    Clarke,   Ellen.   “The   Multiple   Realizability   of   Biological   Individuals.”   The   Journal   of    Philosophy   110   (2013):   413-­‐35.    Dupré,   John.      The   Disorder   of   Things:   Metaphysical   Foundations   of   the   Disunity   of    Science.   Cambridge,   MA:   Harvard   University   Press,   1993.    Dupré,   John.      Human   Nature   and   the   Limits   of   Science.   Oxford:   Oxford   University   Press,   2001.    Dupré,   John.   Humans   and   Other   Animals.   Oxford:   Oxford   University   Press,   2002    Dupré,   John.   Processes   of   Life:   Essays   in   the   Philosophy   of   Biology.      Oxford:   Oxford   University   Press,   2012    Dupré,   John.    “How Much of the Free Will Problem Does (the Right Kind of) Indeterminism Solve?”, Philosophical Inquiries 1 (2013): 79-92. Elder-­‐Vass,   Dave.   The   Causal   Power   of   Social   Structures   Emergence,   Structure   and    Agency.      Cambridge:   Cambridge   University   Press,   2011.         Ereshefsky,   Marc.   “Eliminative   Pluralism”,   Philosophy   of   Science,   59   (1992):   671-­‐690    Hull,   David   L.   “The   Effect   of   Essentialism   on   Taxonomy-­‐-­‐Two   Thousand   Years   of   Stasis.”   The   British   Journal   for   the   Philosophy   of   Science   15   (1965):   314-­‐326;   16:   1-­‐18.             28    Kripke,   Saul   A.      Naming   and   Necessity.      Cambridge   MA:   Harvard   University   Press,   1980.         Pradeu,   Thomas.   The   Limits   of   the   Self:   Immunology   and   Biological   Identity.   Oxford:   Oxford   University   Press,   2012.         Rescher,   Nicholas.   Process   Metaphysics:   An   Introduction   to   Process   Philosophy.   New   York:   SUNY   Press,   1996.      Riddihough,   Guy   and   Laura   M.   Zahn.   “What   Is   Epigenetics?.”   Science   330   (2010):   611.         Seibt,   Johanna.   "Process   Philosophy",   The   Stanford   Encyclopedia   of   Philosophy   (Fall   2013   Edition),   ed.   Edward   N.   Zalta.   URL:   http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/process-­‐philosophy/      Sober,   Elliott   and   David   S.   Wilson.      Unto   Others:   The   Evolution   and   Psychology   of    Unslefish   Behavior.      Cambridge,   MA:   Harvard   University   Press,   1998.      Strawson,   Galen.      “The   Self,”   Journal   of   Consciousness   Studies   4   (1997):   405-­‐28      Strawson,   Peter   F.   “Freedom   and   Resentment.”   Proceedings   of   the   British    Academy   48   (1962):1–25.             29    Whitehead,   Alfred   North.   Process   and   Reality.   New   York:   Macmillan,   1929.      Wilson,   Robert   A.   Species:   New   Interdisciplinary   Essays.   Cambridge,   MA:   MIT   Press,   1999.            Yu,   Neng,   Margot   S.   Kruskall,   Juan   J.   Yunis,   Joan   H.   M.   Knoll,   Lynne   Uhl,   Sharon   Alosco,   Marina   Ohashi,   Olga   Clavijo,   Zaheed   Husain,   Emilio   J.   Yunis,   Jorge   J.   Yunis,   and   Edmond   J.   Yunis,   “Disputed   Maternity   Leading   to   Identification   of   Tetragametic   Chimerism.”   New   England   Journal   of   Medicine   346   (2002):   1545-­‐1552.             