ABSTRACT: 
The topic of global trade has become central to debates on global justice and on duties to the global poor, two important concerns of contemporary political theory. However, the leading approaches fail to directly address the participants in trade and provide them with normative guidance for making choices in non-ideal circumstances. This paper contributes an account of individuals’ responsibilities for global problems in general, an account of individuals’ responsibilities as market actors, and an explanation of how these responsibilities coexist. The argument is developed through an extended case study of a consumer’s choice between conventional and fair trade coffee. My argument is that the coffee consumer’s choice requires consideration of two distinct responsibilities. First, she has responsibilities to help meet foreigners’ claims for assistance. Second, she has moral responsibilities to ensure that trades, such as between herself and a coffee farmer, are fair rather than exploitative. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper contributes anaccount of individuals’ responsibilities for global problems in general, anaccount of individuals’ responsibilities as market actors, and an extension of how these responsibilities coexist. The argument is developed through an extended case study of a consumer’s choice between conventional and fair trade coffee. My argument is that the coffee consumer’schoice requires consideration of two distinct responsibilities. First, she has duties to help meet foreigners’ claims for assistance. Second, she has moral responsibilities to ensure that trades, such as between herself and a coffee farmer, are fair rather than exploitative. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Sarah C. Goff Fair trade: global problems and individual responsibilities Article (Published version) (Refereed) Original citation: Goff, Sarah C. (2016) Fair trade: global problems and individual responsibilities. Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy . pp. 1-23. ISSN 1369-8230 DOI: 10.1080/13698230.2016.1252993 Reuse of this item is permitted through licensing under the Creative Commons: © 2016 The Author CC-BY-NC-ND This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/68285/ Available in LSE Research Online: November 2016 LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE Research Online website. Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttp://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fcri20Download by: [LSE Library Services] Date: 14 November 2016, At: 08:16Critical Review of International Social and PoliticalPhilosophyISSN: 1369-8230 (Print) 1743-8772 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fcri20Fair trade: global problems and individualresponsibilitiesSarah C. GoffTo cite this article: Sarah C. Goff (2016): Fair trade: global problems and individualresponsibilities, Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, DOI:10.1080/13698230.2016.1252993To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13698230.2016.1252993© 2016 The Author(s). Published by InformaUK Limited, trading as Taylor & FrancisGroupPublished online: 06 Nov 2016.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 40View related articles View Crossmark dataFair trade: global problems and individual responsibilitiesSarah C. Goff*Department of Government, London School of Economics & Political Science, London,United KingdomThe topic of global trade has become central to debates on global justiceand on duties to the global poor, two important concerns of contemporarypolitical theory. However, the leading approaches fail to directly addressthe participants in trade and provide them with normative guidance formaking choices in non-ideal circumstances. This paper contributes anaccount of individuals’ responsibilities for global problems in general, anaccount of individuals’ responsibilities as market actors, and an explana-tion of how these responsibilities coexist. The argument is developedthrough an extended case study of a consumer’s choice between conven-tional and fair trade coffee. My argument is that the coffee consumer’schoice requires consideration of two distinct responsibilities. First, she hasresponsibilities to help meet foreigners’ claims for assistance. Second, shehas moral responsibilities to ensure that trades, such as between herselfand a coffee farmer, are fair rather than exploitative.Keywords: fair trade; exploitation; responsibility; global justice; ethicalconsumerismThe topic of global trade has become central to debates on global justice andon duties to the global poor, two important concerns of contemporary politicaltheory. The leading approaches evaluate trade in terms of its impact upon theglobal poor (Pogge, 2002; Stiglitz & Charlton, 2005), or they view the traderegime as an important site of global justice (James, 2012; Risse, 2012,pp. 261–280). For a consumer choosing between a conventional coffee brandand a fair trade brand that costs a bit more, the moral signiﬁcance of herchoice is often understood in terms of its impact on global poverty or the real-ization of global justice. Peter Singer would advise the consumer to choose fairtrade coffee as a way to transfer resources to the global poor (2006). AndrewWalton argues that choosing fair trade coffee has expressive effects that canmotivate others to act on their duties of global justice (2012).The empirical literature also evaluates fair trade as a mechanism fortransitioning to a better world, whether this consists in a world without povertyor a just global order. Among scholars who evaluate fair trade as a means ofalleviating poverty (Arnould, Plastina, & Ball, 2009; Ruben, Fort, &*Email: s.goff@lse.ac.uk© 2016 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use,distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, trans-formed, or built upon in any way.Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, 2016http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13698230.2016.1252993Zúñiga-Arias, 2009), the current consensus is that fair trade’s effects tend to bepositive for participating farmers. However, these studies acknowledge that fairtrade’s impact tends to be modest and that its beneﬁts do not reach the poorestof the world’s poor. Other scholars evaluate fair trade as a political movement:The act of selling goods can be used as an opportunity to educate consumersabout the need to change an unjust international trading system, and as a vehiclefor demonstrating a practical alternative for trade that better serves the needs ofpeople in the global South. (Low & Davenport, 2006, pp. 315–316)These scholars tend to view fair trade as a political movement in crisis, due tothe fact that many retailers are de-emphasizing political messages in favor of‘mainstream’ marketing practices.In this paper, I will argue for a different understanding of the role of fairtrade in non-ideal theory. While others have argued that individuals arerequired to purchase fair trade products as a mechanism for transitioning to abetter world, this paper will argue that fair trade purchases are required inorder to respect a provisional duty of non-exploitation of their trading partners.I will argue that consumers have duties of fairness that are speciﬁc to theirroles as participants in global trade, given that their trading partners haveunmet claims under present non-ideal conditions. Taking the coffee consumeras an illustrative example of a participant in trade, my argument that sheshould purchase fair trade coffee will rely on evidence that the fair trade coffeeindustry tends to provide farmers with higher prices than conventional coffee.1The argument is restricted to trades that are mutually beneﬁcial, and not harm-ful overall for their participants. A trade that is beneﬁcial overall for a partici-pant can contain some harmful components, such as health risks from poorworking conditions. Participants in trade are individual or collective entitieswhose economic choices involve them in direct or indirect exchanges withother participants.Many persons, including coffee farmers, have claims for others to securetheir entitlements or to offer help in accordance with duties of humanity. Inmy view, all individuals have claims to enjoy membership in what I call ‘mini-mally just’ societies. When a society fails to meet standards of minimal justice,its members have claims to international action to address its deﬁciencies. Suchactions might include ﬁnancial transfers, service provision, or political pres-sure. When persons have unmet claims to enjoy membership in minimally justsocieties, this can increase their willingness to accept relatively unfavorableterms of trade. I take a Guatemalan coffee farmer as an illustrative example ofan individual with an unmet claim for membership in a minimally just society.My market-based standard for fair trade references the terms of trade thatboth parties would have freely accepted, in an idealized counterfactual marketin which no party’s claims to live in a minimally just society are unmet. If thiscounterfactual trade is more favorable to the party with an unmet claim, then2 S.C. Gofftheir actual trade is exploitative. I will argue that a participant in trade, such asthe coffee consumer, can be responsible for exploitative trade in two differentsenses. First, she can be responsible for helping to enable or facilitate the back-ground conditions under which exploitation can occur. Second, she can beresponsible for her own engagement in exploitative trade. While responsibilityfor facilitating exploitative trade can be discharged through various mecha-nisms, the latter responsibility can only be fulﬁlled through choices made as aparticipant in trade. The consumer ought to offer the coffee farmer fair termsof trade, which are the terms the farmer would have freely accepted underbackground conditions in which he enjoyed the beneﬁts of membership in aminimally just society.The paper provides a new way to understand exploitation in trade and itsrelationship to individuals’ responsibilities to non-compatriots, bridging a gapbetween consumer ethics and global justice.2 The argument proceeds as fol-lows. The paper will describe a Guatemalan coffee farmer as an illustrativeexample of an individual with an ‘unmet claim’ for international action to pro-mote institutional reforms to his society. Then the paper will describe tradebetween this individual and a far-away consumer, explain the impact of hisunmet claim on their terms of trade, and argue that their trade is exploitative.Subsequently, the paper will describe a coffee consumer’s responsibilities ingeneral and to a coffee farmer in particular. Finally, it will respond to fourobjections.Part 1: International action to promote minimally just societiesThe premise of my argument is that the background conditions of global tradeare characterized by a fundamental asymmetry. Some people live in minimallyjust societies, while other people have claims for international action to helpmake their societies minimally just or, failing that, to provide an approximationof the beneﬁts of membership in such societies. The idea that there is a duty toprovide international action to reform the basic structure of societies owes adebt of inspiration to John Rawls’ argument for a ‘duty of assistance’ in theLaw of Peoples (1999, pp. 105–120). I will suggest that my characterization ofthe background conditions of trade is not especially controversial when statedat an appropriate level of generality. There is an assumption that individualshave a responsibility to assist others, and I will argue that the duty to promoteinstitutional reforms to societies can be derived from this general view.Minimal justice and claims for international actionWhen an individual does not live in a minimally just society, he or she has aclaim for international action that is best understood as a human rights claim. Ifollow interpreters who have taken a practical approach to specifying the ideaof human rights, which encompass multiple conceptions of how to justify andCritical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 3specify the content of human rights (Beitz, 2009; Shue, 1980). The core ideais that individuals’ claims for respect of their human rights are addressed ﬁrstto their own societies, and that these societies should provide institutional pro-tections to secure their members’ rights against standard threats. Individualshave secondary claims for international action when societies fail to meet athreshold of respect for their members’ human rights.To meet human rights claims, international actors often try to inﬂuence andpressure societies to adopt reforms. In addition, international action to promoteminimally just societies can consist of ﬁnancial and technical assistance. Whilethe international actors that try to promote human rights will typically bestates, NGOs, or international bodies, these collective entities rely upon indi-vidual contributors. In this sense, claims for international action to promoteminimally just societies ultimately correspond, albeit imperfectly, to individualduty-bearers.A society’s capacitiesTo be minimally just, a society must have certain capacities, such that its insti-tutions are capable of performing a set of important basic functions. Thesestate-level functions include, among others, securing the rule of law, maintain-ing roads and a transportation network, and other public infrastructure andbasic public goods (Messner et al., 2015). My standard of capacity alsoincludes important basic functions of civil society, such as the maintenance ofpeaceful relations among diverse groups and the mutual social trust requiredfor economic market relations.Some of these functions are essential for the satisfaction of an individual’sclaim for justice, or an individual’s claim for respect of her human rights. It ishard to imagine how an individual can enjoy justice or respect for her humanrights when her society fails to secure the rule of law. The capacity to deliverbasic services is instrumental for satisfying individuals’ claims for greater well-being, for justice, or respect for human rights. Aid organizations often declaretheir intention to ‘build capacity’ within aid-recipient societies (OECD, 2005),and I suggest that these are ethically important contributions.A society’s inclusivenessWhen a society is structured so that all members share in the beneﬁts of thesociety’s use of its capacities and have some voice in its decision-making, thenthe society meets my standard of inclusiveness. Consider a hypothetical societythat has generally capable institutions, which includes an infrastructure capableof providing services for the populace’s health. Unfortunately, this society’shealth system fails to provide due consideration for the interests and concernsof people with serious mental health problems. The society has the capacity toprovide for its members’ well-being, but it is not structured to perform its4 S.C. Goffcapacities in a sufﬁciently inclusive way. While many real-life societies aredeﬁcient both in capacity and inclusiveness, this hypothetical society illustratesthat individuals can have speciﬁc claims for greater inclusion within an exist-ing institutional scheme.3Individuals’ claims for greater inclusion are primarily directed to their fel-low citizens, but they also can be directed to international actors. An interna-tional advocacy group might pressure a target society to improve its treatmentof a marginalized group, in order to meet this group’s claims for internationalaction. Alternatively, an international assistance program might provide thisgroup with services that approximate those it would receive within a minimallyjust society.When an individual’s society has insufﬁcient capacity or inclusiveness, shehas a claim to international action. I suggest we could ground this claim usingmultiple theories of global ethics, albeit most clearly using a Rawlsian theory ofglobal justice. Thomas Pogge, a leading cosmopolitan, has argued that the globalorder is not only problematic because it causes global poverty, but also becauseit undermines the prospects for democracy and good governance in developingcountries (2003). Peter Singer has stated, in response to criticism that his viewoverlooks the importance of institutions, that his argument would endorseany effective strategy for alleviating global poverty (2005, pp. 179–181).Methodologically speaking, the standard of a ‘minimally just’ society has thebeneﬁt of being ecumenical across these theories of global ethics.Part 2: Exploitation in the coffee tradeThis section describes trade between a coffee consumer and a Guatemalan cof-fee farmer. The farmer provides an illustrative example of an individual withan unmet claim for membership in a more capable and inclusive version of hissociety. I will ﬁrst explain how the consumer and farmer are engaged in a traderelationship of an indirect sort, then trace the impact of the farmer’s unmetclaim on his working conditions, and ﬁnally argue that the terms of their tradeare exploitative.The indirect agreement to tradeThis section elaborates an account of the two actors’ interactions within a glo-bal supply chain. I describe an indirect agreement between the coffee con-sumer and the coffee farmer, which explains the circumstances under which acoffee consumer can engage in exploitative trade with the coffee farmer.A coffee consumer typically buys retail coffee that has been grown,roasted, transported, packaged, marketed, and locally stocked – a multi-stageproduction process involving the farmer, roaster, transporters, packagers, mar-keters, and the retail store. The consumer’s choice to purchase coffee depends,whether she knows it or not, on a series of prior trades. The farmer would notCritical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 5grow coffee beans if he did not expect that he could sell them to a roaster,who in turn expects to sell them to retailers, and so on until a store managerexpects to sell them to the consumer. All of these actors make their choicesconditionally on their predictions of the choices of the other actors. Moreover,each actor’s pursuit of his self-interest has a predictable limiting impact on theother actors’ pursuit of their interests.An individual consumer can be understood as a participant in trade with acoffee farmer under two conditions: the consumer’s price sensitivity has bear-ing on the quality of a coffee farmer’s working conditions, and the consumerenjoys a lower price for her coffee when the coffee farmer’s workingconditions are worse. The difference between farmers’ take-home pay fromconventional and fair trade coffee production indicates that the consumer’sprice-sensitivity indeed does have an impact on farmers’ working conditions.4In addition, it is well known that consumers pay higher retail prices for fairtrade coffee than conventional coffee. Since both conditions hold, the coffeeconsumer and the coffee farmer are in an indirect agreement to trade.There are some intermediaries whose decisions and sensitivity to pricechanges may have an independent impact on farmers’ working conditions.Consider a coffee farmer who values having a reliable and long-term contractwith a roasting company, the buyers of his coffee beans. The coffee consumer,however, typically purchases coffee at the lowest retail price and this priceﬂuctuates with global markets. In view of the consumer’s expected behavior,the roaster offers farmers a contract to sell coffee beans at a given price (repre-senting the farmer’s Working Conditions). By predictably purchasing coffee atthe lowest retail price, the consumer has made an indirect agreement with thefarmer that provides him with unfavorable Working Conditions. Now considerif the roaster wished to provide farmers with more favorable Working Condi-tions*. If the roaster must pass the additional costs of providing Working Con-ditions* onto the consumer, then the roaster is merely an intermediary thatfacilitates the consumer’s trade with the farmer. However, if the roaster canabsorb some of the costs from its proﬁt margins and chooses not to do sowhen this is expensive, then the roaster meets the two conditions for being aparticipant in trade with the farmer. The roaster’s price sensitivity has bearingon the quality of a coffee farmer’s working conditions, and the roaster enjoysa lower price (higher proﬁt margins) when the coffee farmer’s working condi-tions are worse. While this paper’s argument mainly addresses consumers, italso describes the duties of intermediaries to trade fairly when they are notmerely facilitators for others’ agreements, but also participants in trade in theirown right.5The coffee farmer’s claim and its impactMany Guatemalans have unmet claims for international action that wouldpromote minimal justice in their society. Guatemala is a society deﬁcient in6 S.C. Goffinclusiveness, and the effects are evident in its high levels of inequality andthe severe poverty of its rural and indigenous populations. Economic inequalityand high rates of poverty at least partially attributable to the way Guatemala isorganized as a society; see, for instance, Guatemala’s low minimum wage rate,which recently has been criticized as inadequate for meeting the costs of living(United Nations Human Rights Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner, 2015). Somewould argue that the low minimum wage level merely reﬂects the low level ofeconomic development in Guatemala, and thus it fails to show that the soci-ety’s structure is deﬁcient in inclusiveness. Guatemala’s deﬁcits in capacity, asseen in its failures to enforce its own labor legislation, provide a moreconvincing test of the impact of its domestic institutions on workers.In response to Guatemala’s failure to enforce its own labor laws, the USrecently has taken the unprecedented step of bringing a labor rights complaintagainst Guatemala under the CAFTA-DR. Moreover, according to a recentreport, this failure to enforce the law impacts Guatemalan coffee farmers: ‘Oneof the biggest factors that impedes the government’s ability to protect coffeesector workers from exploitation is its deﬁcient labor inspections system. Prob-lems facing the Labor Inspectorate include a lack of staff and funding, the factthat inspectors sometimes have to pay for their own gas (which disincentivizesthem from visiting remote locations), the inability of inspectors to set ﬁnes,and labor inspectors’ fear of carrying out inspections in the agricultural sectordue to the high level of violence in Guatemala (Verité, 2012, p. 12). This evi-dence suggests that, were Guatemala to have greater capacity to enforce therule of law and protect its own labor inspectors against threats of retaliatoryviolence, coffee farmers would enjoy better treatment from their employers.These improved working conditions could include payment of the legally man-dated minimum wage, a working day limited to eight hours and/or overtimepay, receipt of paystubs, and other elements currently found to be lacking forGuatemalan coffee workers (Verité, 2012, p. 18).Dani Rodrik has argued that democracies’ legislation and public policiestend to favorably ‘affect the bargaining strength of labor and the value of outsideoptions available to workers and employers’ (1999, p. 731). In support of thisargument, Rodrik shows a positive correlation between higher scores on demo-cratic governance indicators and higher wages. Rodrik uses Freedom House’s1–7 ratings of civil liberties and political liberties and Polity III’s ratings of thecompetitiveness and openness of the political process (as well as the restraintson the executive branch) as his democratic governance indicators. These indica-tors provide ratings on a continuous scale of the openness of the political pro-cess, as well as the society’s protection of civil liberties, for both democraciesand non-democracies. I submit that these indicators provide a partial rating of asociety’s ‘capacity’ and its ‘inclusiveness.’ Rodrik’s ﬁndings thus provide sup-port to the following hypothesis: if Guatemala were minimally just, we couldexpect more favorable legislation and public policies to structure the domesticlabor market so as to better favor the bargaining position of workers.6Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 7To model this relationship, I designate Working Conditions to describe theterms of the farmer’s work. These terms include the price he receives for hisbeans and his employer’s adherence to labor standards, which will be treatedtogether as a single composite measure of the quality of his terms of work.Working Conditions* are the terms the farmer would have chosen in his coun-terfactual bargaining position. I have argued that Working Conditions* arelikely to be better than Working Conditions, due to the farmer’s more favorablebargaining position in the counterfactual. While I cannot specify Working Con-ditions* in detail here, a useful point of reference is the working conditions forcoffee farmers who live in societies that already approximate a ‘minimally justsociety,’ such as Costa Rica. I will describe Costa Rica’s legislation to regulatethe coffee industry in the ﬁnal section of the paper. So far, I have argued thatthe Guatemalan coffee farmer’s unmet claim to enjoy membership in aminimally just society is likely to have an unfavorable impact on his workingconditions.Why the trading relationship has unfair termsTrade occurs when two participants agree to exchange goods and services onterms that each participant views as beneﬁcial for himself. Trade has ethicalvalue when it reﬂects and manifests these individuals’ free choices to promotetheir mutual interests. When there are wrongful constraints upon one partici-pant’s free choice and no wrongful constraints upon the other’s, this canimpact the terms of trade. My ‘market-based standard of fairness’ referencescounterfactual terms of trade that both parties would have agreed to acceptunder different background conditions. Exploitation occurs when the actualterms of trade are less favorable to one party than in the counterfactual wherethat party already enjoyed the satisfaction of her claims.To illustrate the signiﬁcance of an unmet claim as a constraint on a person’sfree choice, consider an example of a trade in a domestic context. Alan offers tohire Sally for a low salary and Sally, viewing it as her best job offer, chooses toaccept. Perhaps Sally can only satisfy her occupational preference by acceptinga job with Alan and, due to this constraint, she accepts Alan’s low salary. I sub-mit that Sally’s occupational preference is ethically neutral or, at the very least,not the sort of thing that other people have duties to change. When Sally acceptsAlan’s offer, their trade simply reﬂects their free choices, bounded by constraintsthat are themselves ethically unproblematic. An argument that Sally’s low salaryis ‘unfair’ will only succeed, I suggest, if Sally has an unmet claim for someoneto remove the constraints upon her free choice.For an instance of such a constraint, consider if all employers in the labormarket informally excluded Sally from opportunities to perform ‘men’s work.’I submit that Sally has a claim for her fellow citizens to remove this constraint,because pervasive discrimination in the labor market undermines the inclusive-ness of their society. When Sally has an unmet claim and Alan does not, it is8 S.C. Goffappropriate to ask if trade on Alan’s proposed terms would be unfairlyexploitative. We might reason that, in a counterfactual in which she had notexperienced exclusion from opportunities to perform ‘men’s work,’ Alan wouldhave agreed to hire Sally for a higher salary. To show that Alan would haveagreed to a higher salary, we need to reference the prices in a counterfactuallabor market that does not arbitrarily exclude women from opportunities. Inconstructing this counterfactual, it is important to change only individuals’unmet claims and consider all the plausibly unrelated conditions of the actualmarket as ﬁxed points, including Alan’s company and Sally’s occupationalpreferences. Starting from the fact that Sally has an unmet claim (alongsideother women), we can construct a counterfactual market in which employersdo not arbitrarily exclude women from opportunities.7It is illuminating to compare my market-based standard to two distinctkinds of exploitation theories from which my argument has drawn inspiration.The ﬁrst is Alan Wertheimer’s view that equilibrium prices in a perfectly com-petitive market are non-exploitative, because at this price neither party takes‘unfair advantage’ of the other (1996, p. 232). I agree with Wertheimer thatexploitation only occurs when a participant actually receives unfavorable termsof trade, not whenever background conditions make her vulnerable to suchtreatment (Wertheimer, 1996, pp. 298–299). I endorse Wertheimer’s view thatfair terms of trade are the prices participants would accept within a hypotheti-cal market, but I do not view a perfectly competitive market as the correcthypothetical. When there is a perfectly competitive market for a good or ser-vice, the terms of trade are exactly the same for all participants, and onWertheimer’s view this means that no party takes ‘special’ unfair advantage ofany other party (Wertheimer, 1996, pp. 230–236). In my view, a more appeal-ing ideal is a counterfactual market that is closely modeled on both parties’actual bargaining conditions, except for the fact that neither party has an unmetclaim for membership in a minimally just society. The prices within this coun-terfactual market are fair because the participants freely accept their terms oftrade, not because the prices are the same for all parties.8For a second group of theorists, exploitation can only occur if a distinctivemoral wrong is present in the background conditions of trade. On RuthSample’s theory of exploitation, a person must be vulnerable, due to herunmet basic needs or her experience of injustice, in order for trade to degradeher (2003, pp. 74–75). Steiner (1984) argues that exploitation can only occurwhen a person has suffered a rights-violation. Exploitation occurs when thisrights-violation has knock-on effects upon a subsequent trade, although neitherthe rights-violator nor the person who suffers the rights-violation must be par-ticipants in this trade (Steiner, 1984, pp. 232–233). I agree with the generalposition, taken by both Sample and Steiner in their respective arguments, thatexploitation can only occur when someone has been non-compliant with moralrequirements. My own view is that non-compliance poses constraints on partic-ipants’ freedom to trade, which makes it possible for their trades to be unfair.Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 9In my view, the enabling conditions for exploitation to occur are presentwhen a participant in trade has an unmet claim to enjoy membership in a mini-mally just society, and it actually occurs when the participant’s unmet claimhas an unfavorable impact on her terms of trade. By contrast, Sample’s theoryincludes cases in which a person’s vulnerability does not produce worse termsof trade. For instance, a person with neglected basic needs could require morefavorable terms of trade than he would otherwise, so that he is not exploited(Sample, 2003, pp. 73–75). Thus, Sample collapses two responsibilities that inmy view are best kept separate: the general responsibility to meet foreigners’claims and the speciﬁc responsibility to trade fairly. For Steiner, the exploitedparty is not necessarily the same person whose rights have been violated, butsimply a person whose trade has been inﬂuenced by the violation. By contrast,my market-based standard requires us to begin with a person with an unmetclaim and then evaluate, through construction of a counterfactual market,whether this same person actually suffers from exploitation in his trades.To follow this procedure with our coffee farmer, we begin with the factthat the coffee farmer has an unmet claim. Under different background condi-tions, the coffee farmer would enjoy the beneﬁts of membership in a minimallyjust society. Under those conditions, he would have the freedom to trade hiscoffee at the market prices in this counterfactual, Working Conditions*. In hisactual circumstances, however, the coffee farmer remains wrongfully con-strained in his choices. Due to this wrongful constraint, the coffee farmeraccepts the market price for coffee that prevails in his actual circumstances.This market price, which we have called Working Conditions, represents lessfavorable terms of trade for the coffee farmer. These terms are more favorableto the coffee consumer, and she accepts them freely. In sum, the counterfactualmarket price, Working Conditions*, is fair to the coffee farmer. The actual mar-ket price, Working Conditions, is unfair because it reﬂects and manifestswrongful constraints upon his freedom.Part 3: The coffee consumer’s duties and responsibilitiesThis section explains the normative signiﬁcance of the preceding argument,speciﬁcally how it addresses the coffee consumer. I will describe a coffee con-sumer’s duty to foreigners in general, her responsibilities to her trading part-ners in particular, and how these relate to one another.An individual’s duty to foreigners and others’ non-fulﬁllment of their dutiesI have argued that, on several different theories of global ethics, foreignershave claims to international action to improve the capacities and inclusivenessof their societies. If an individual has a responsibility to assist foreigners ingeneral, a foreigner’s claim to enjoy membership in a minimally just societyshould fall within the scope of his concern. Here I will argue that many10 S.C. Goffindividuals in relatively wealthy, liberal societies are not adequately fulﬁllingtheir duties to meet foreigners’ claims in general. As a result of this wide-spread dereliction of duty, there are many unmet claims for internationalaction, including but not limited to action promoting institutional reforms tosocieties. In this section, I describe the fact of dereliction and suggest that thisfact is relevant for specifying what any particular individual is required to doin order to fulﬁll her duties to help far-away foreigners.For the moment, set aside my argument that foreigners have a claim tointernational action that aims at institutional reforms to their societies. Considerinstead the less controversial view that foreigners have claims to receive emer-gency relief from natural disasters, as well as claims for assistance after experi-encing displacement caused by violence and persecution. In 2015, the UNconsolidated appeals process estimated 89 million people in need of assistancefrom natural disasters, 65 million displaced persons, and an overall fundingshortfall of 45% (Global Humanitarian Assistance, 2016, pp. 6–7). It is appar-ent that many individuals are not fulﬁlling their duties, either through privatephilanthropy or the contributions of their governments. What are the duties ofany individual to the millions in need of emergency assistance?Consider the example of Paul Farmer, an individual who has made excep-tionally large contributions to foreigners’ well-being. Dr. Farmer is a physicianand scholar who has worked to improve access to health serivces for very poorpeople through his research and fundraising, direct provision of health services,efforts to build clinics in poor areas, and public advocacy (Farmer, 2003).Even after doing all this, however, presumably it is still feasible for Dr. Farmerto donate additional money for emergency relief. I think it is a very commonintuitive judgment that Dr. Farmer lacks a duty to donate to this speciﬁc cause.It would be supererogatory for him to perform this speciﬁc action, in additionto what he already does to improve health services for very poor people. Theexample indicates the very general point that there is the need for a limit oneach individual’s duty to foreigners. I believe that Dr. Farmer is not obligatedto donate to emergency relief given how many capable duty-bearers have notcontributed anything. Dr. Farmer has already contributed far more than others,and many more people have not made their contributions to meeting foreign-ers’ claims for international action.Many other persons are derelict duty-bearers, and I suggest that this facthas two distinct implications for Dr. Farmer and how he should fulﬁll his ownduties to assist foreigners. On the one hand, it is difﬁcult for Dr. Farmer to cal-culate the precise amount he should contribute. Since he lacks detailed knowl-edge of other people’s contributions and capacities, he can make merely avague estimate of how much he is personally required to do. For a person whomight wish to do his duty and make no further contributions, this vaguenesscould be a burden. On the other hand, the dereliction of other duty-bearers hasa more positive implication: Dr. Farmer has greater latitude to choose how hemakes his contribution to meeting foreigners’ claims. If Dr. Farmer prefers toCritical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 11meet some claims rather than others, then, as long as he still capably fulﬁllshis own duty, I suggest that he has some latitude to follow his preferences.I have argued that each individual’s duty to take action is limited, and thelimit for each person should be speciﬁed by reference to the potential contribu-tions of other duty-bearers. My arguments fall into the broad category of ‘fairshare’ views, which state that individuals are not required to fully ‘pick up theslack’ when others are derelict of their own duties (Miller, 2011; Murphy,2003). Fair share views have been criticized for making insufﬁcient demandson compliant duty-bearers when claimants are in great need (Singer, 2009,pp. 144–146). I cannot defend the ‘fair share’ view here; however, this is alsonot necessary for the paper’s purposes, as there are alternative ways to specifythe limits of each individual’s duties that are also compatible with this section’smost important point. The point is that Dr. Farmer is not required to make hiscontributions in any speciﬁc way (as long as his way is reasonably effective),or to direct his contributions to any particular foreigners (as long as he choosesforeigners with unmet claims).In sum, an individual has latitude to choose how she makes her contribu-tion to international action on behalf of foreigners in general. If she has notmade this contribution, however, she shares responsibility with other derelictduty-bearers for the persistence of many foreigners’ unmet claims.Responsibility for facilitating the occurrence of exploitationI have argued many foreigners have unmet claims to enjoy the beneﬁts ofmembership in minimally just societies, and that this makes it possible fortrade to be exploitative. When an individual is derelict of his duty to make afair share contribution to help meet foreigners’ claims in general, this individ-ual is subject to moral criticism for two reasons. First, he has failed to meetforeigners’ valid claims for action, a failure in his responsibility to assistothers. Second, he is morally responsible for the persistence of conditionsunder which it is possible that foreigners will be exploited in trade. It is notnecessarily wrong to create (or fail to reform) conditions in which it is possiblefor a wrongful act to occur, since it may be easy for others to avoid wrongdo-ing. However, when conditions are such that others face substantial difﬁcultiesin avoiding exploitative trade, an individual who has responsibility for theseconditions has some responsibility for exploitation as well.To illustrate this point, consider an individual who does not drink coffee orpurchase it for anyone else, and who has not contributed anything to help meetforeigners’ claims. We can call this person the ‘tea drinker.’ The tea drinkershares moral responsibility for the fact that many foreigners, including theGuatemalan coffee farmer, have unmet claims for international action. Alongwith many other derelict duty-bearers, the tea drinker shares moral responsibil-ity for the conditions that enable exploitation in trade. Therefore, even thoughthe tea drinker purchases no coffee himself, the tea drinker shares some12 S.C. Goffresponsibility for the exploitative character of the Guatemalan coffee trade.The tea drinker and other derelict duty-bearers share responsibility with people,i.e. coffee drinkers, who personally engage in exploitative trade in coffee.The tea drinker, of course, is not the decisive cause of the fact that the cof-fee farmer’s claim remains unmet. An ordinary individual’s powers are far toolimited to bring about major institutional reforms in Guatemala, or in any othercountry. If the tea drinker had acted on his duty to foreigners, moreover, hemight have directed his efforts to meeting other claims that fall within thescope of his responsibilities to assist others. As his ‘fair share’ contribution,the tea drinker might have donated to an NGO that reduces malnutritionamong subsistence farmers in Bangladesh. This donation would not meet anyforeigners’ claim to enjoy the beneﬁts of membership in a minimally justsociety, nor would it have any bearing upon exploitative trade in Guatemala,Bangladesh, or elsewhere. Thus it is not due to any causal impact on theGuatemalan coffee trade that the tea drinker’s action has moral signiﬁcance.The tea drinker’s donation is signiﬁcant insofar as it fulﬁlls his ‘fair share’contribution to meeting foreigners’ claims in general, thereby eliminating hisown responsibility for exploitative trade.Responsibility for participating in exploitative tradeIn this section, I describe a person’s responsibility for participating in exploita-tive trade, and how this is distinct from the responsibility for enabling itsoccurrence. To do so, I consider an individual who is personally engaged inexploitative trade, but who is not responsible for enabling the generaloccurrence of exploitation in trade.Consider again the example of Dr. Farmer. Since he has made his ‘fairshare’ contribution, he is not responsible for the fact that some foreigners haveunmet claims to enjoy membership in minimally just societies and therefore heis not responsible for the persistence of conditions under which exploitationmay occur. Now let’s imagine Dr. Farmer makes a coffee purchase. The coffeefarmers who grow the beans do not enjoy membership in minimally just soci-eties and, as a result, Dr. Farmer receives more favorable terms of trade. Thus,Dr. Farmer personally engages in an exploitative trade. He bears some moralresponsibility for his personal engagement, insofar as he freely chooses to tradeon terms that manifest deﬁciencies in the freedom of the other participants.However, responsibility for this exploitative trade is shared between Dr. Farmerand those who enable the occurance of exploitative trade.There may be excusing conditions for Dr. Farmer’s participation inexploitative trade, in virtue of the fact that his choices to trade on exploitativeterms are highly constrained. Constraints upon his knowledge and upon hisability to act otherwise, due to limited fair trade retail options, are not them-selves the objects of his responsibility. Indeed, the non-compliance of otherCritical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 13individuals with their own responsibilities can explain conditions of epistemicopacity and limited options to trade fairly.I offer these rough guidelines for individuals’ action, taking into accountthat widespread non-compliance can limit their knowledge and scope of feasi-ble options. First, when individuals know that they have options to make pur-chases that are non-exploitative trades, they should take these options ratherthan engaging in exploitative trades. Second, when individuals have reason tobelieve that one option is signiﬁcantly more likely to have unfair terms, theyshould choose one of their other options. These two guidelines follow from acommon principle that individuals should avoid exploitation and its likelihoodto the best of their knowledge. Third, when the only options are likely to havesubstantially unfair terms, and the foregone beneﬁts of trade for foreigners arelarge, individuals should consider their capacity to offer compensatory target-ing of assistance to the persons who would suffer from the loss of exploitativetrade (a possibility I describe more fully in the next section).Part 4: Defending the argument and its assumptionsHere I describe four challenges to the paper’s argument, and I offer responsesdefending its theory of exploitation, its empirical basis, and its guidelines forindividuals faced with conﬂict between their two responsibilities.Challenge 1: The premise of a responsibility to assistThis paper’s theory of exploitation is distinctive in its reliance on the premisethat individuals have a responsibility to assist others, including assistance tohelp others enjoy membership in minimally just societies. In comparison toother theories of exploitation, the premise of this paper’s argument may seemexcessively controversial. Vulnerability theories of exploitation provide a pointof sharp contrast. On these theories of exploitation, a coffee farmer can beexploited in global trade, due to the farmer’s condition of vulnerability. Thepremise that the farmer is vulnerable seems much easier to accept, since it is adescriptive evaluation of the farmer’s condition, rather than an ethical view thatthe farmer has claims on others to help improve his condition. The advantageof the vulnerability theorist’s approach is that it can address an audience whodeny that there is a responsibility to assist others, and make the case to themthat it is wrong to exploit a person in a state of vulnerability.In my view, the evaluation that a person is vulnerable is not so easily sepa-rated from an ethical stance about the claims he can make on others, and thisis especially true for cases of global trade. Cases of global trade, when raisedas potential instances of exploitation, most frequently include individuals suf-fering from poverty or a lack of human rights protections. While it seemsuncontroversial that an individual is vulnerable when he is poor or lacks secureenjoyment of his human rights, the intuitive wrongness of exploiting an14 S.C. Goffindividual who experiences these conditions is at least partially attributable tothe fact that, for many people, these conditions also activate ethical concern.Unless the vulnerability theorist clearly denies that a person suffering frompoverty or a lack of human rights protections is owed ethical concern, thecommon intuition will persist and may play an implicit role in the vulnerabilitytheorist’s argument.9 By contrast, this paper makes explicit use of the commonintuition with its premise that there is a primary responsibility to assist otherswho do not live in minimally just societies. The explicit acknowledgment ofthis premise avoids confusion. While this paper’s argument cannot hope toconvince an audience who denies there is a responsibility to assist others, thepremise allows the argument to do the work of distinguishing between the pri-mary wrong suffered by persons with unmet claims, and the secondary wrongof exploitation experienced by a subset of the ﬁrst group.Challenge 2: The impact of minimal justice on wagesOn this paper’s argument, a Guatemalan coffee farmer is exploited in tradebecause he would enjoy better wages and working conditions if his societywere minimally just. Guatemala is a society that is deﬁcient in capacity andinclusiveness, and its coffee farmers suffer from ineffective enforcement oflabor laws and low minimum wages. Here, I provide further evidentiary sup-port for the paper’s counterfactual claim that the farmer would be better off ina minimally just society. I present Costa Rica as a case of a society thatapproximates minimal justice, and explain how its domestic legislation helps toincrease Costa Rican farmers’ share of global market price of coffee. Bydemonstrating that coffee farmers are better off in a society that approximatesminimal justice, I provide support for the proposition that Guatemalan coffeefarmers would be better off in a minimally just version of their own society.Compared with other countries in Central America, Costa Rica is notablefor its high rates of public spending and high degree of economic equality.Costa Rica has unusually high minimum wage levels, and these have beenshown to have a positive effect on the actual wages received by its workers(Gindling & Terrell, 2005). Costa Rica engages in extensive regulation of thecoffee industry, particularly to ensure that domestic processing mills do nottake an excessively high share of coffee revenues at the farmers’ expense. Law2762 in Costa Rica empowers the Instituto del Café de Costa Rica (ICAFE), aresearch institute, to determine the price domestic mills can charge for theirservices. ICAFE ensures Costa Rican farmers receive the global market pricefor coffee beans, minus a ﬁxed cost for domestic processing, and this systemhas been shown to be effective in limiting the mills’ earnings to ‘strictlynormal economic proﬁt’ (Ronchi, 2006, pp. 21, 22).Costa Rica provides a clear case of a society’s use of domestic legislationto improve conditions for coffee farmers. In my view, Costa Rica’s regulationof the coffee industry reﬂects the values of an inclusive society. The aim ofCritical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 15regulation is not merely to meet the farmers’ basic needs, which might havebeen accomplished through a guarantee of a minimal price for their labor.Instead, Costa Rican farmers are provided with the balance of the global mar-ket price for coffee, after ICAFE subtracts a ﬁxed processing cost for the mills.This safeguards farmers’ relative share of the value of domestic coffee produc-tion, and in my view this reﬂects Costa Rica’s inclusion of farmers and theirinterests in its distributional scheme. Moreover, this domestic regulation toimprove inclusiveness is compatible with participation in globally competitivemarkets: farmers enjoy higher prices for their beans, while Costa Rica followsthe price for coffee as set in the global market.The case also highlights the range of groups and non-state actors that canhelp a society achieve good levels of capacity and inclusiveness, and thereforeprovide fair terms of trade for its workers. ICAFE, a domestic research insti-tute, provides crucial information and technical support to extend the state’sregulatory capacity over the coffee industry. In other societies, labor unionsmay pressure the state to maintain its inclusiveness and its regulatory capaci-ties. In Guatemala, however, the labor union movement is very weak, due inpart to the high murder rate for the leaders of labor unions (Verité, 2012,p. 39). The state must be willing and able to cooperate with non-state actors,as in the case of ICAFE in Costa Rica, or to provide minimal forms of sup-port, such as protection against retaliatory violence for labor unionists in thecase of Guatemala. While a variety of non-state groups can provide assistancegiven adequate cooperation and support, capable and inclusive publicinstitutions are the fundamental requirements of a minimally just society.Challenge 3: The extent of conﬂict between the two responsibilitiesI will argue here that several common concerns about fair trade are based uponquestionable empirical assumptions. Thus, cases of conﬂict between individu-als’ responsibilities to assist and their responsibilities to avoid exploitation ariseless frequently and are less difﬁcult to manage than is often believed.One concern is that encouraging consumers to purchase fair trade couldcause trade diversion from poor countries. A primary aim of fair trade is toprovide workers with a ‘premium’ above market rates, not to relocate produc-tion to societies with higher labor costs. However, it may be hypothesized thatfair trade purchases will tend to shift production to middle-income countries,where it may be easier to meet standards for fair trade certiﬁcation. Economistsgenerally argue that trade with poor countries is essential for poverty reductionin the long run. Agricultural exports from poor countries are particularlyimportant for alleviating poverty, because agricultural production employs lowskilled workers in rural areas (Winters, McCullouch, & McKay, 2004, p. 100).If fair trade shifts coffee production to middle-income countries, this mayreduce trade’s contribution to poverty alleviation, particularly by reducing itspotential to increase employment among low-skilled agricultural workers.16 S.C. GoffHowever, one study found no statistically signiﬁcant differences betweencoffee producing countries that exported to TransFair USA in 2005–2007 andthose that did not, either in the countries’ real GDP per capita or in the incomeshare of the poorest 20% of the populations (Stoddart, 2011, p. 133). Thisindicates the fair trade industry is neither more nor less likely than theconventional coffee industry to purchase beans from poor countries. Whilemiddle-income countries are not presently over-represented in the fair tradeindustry, it could be further objected that consumers may preferentially selectproducts from middle-income countries as a strategy to avoid exploitativetrade. I suspect that preferentially selecting products from middle-incomecountries is unlikely to be an effective strategy for avoiding exploitative trade,although I am unable to evaluate its effectiveness here.10 Instead, I will ques-tion the view that trade diversion to middle-income countries reduces the cof-fee trade’s potential to alleviate poverty. One reason to question this view isthe relatively new fact that a majority of the global poor are now living inmiddle-income countries (Sumner, 2012). Furthermore, Smith (2009, p. 30)notes that critics of fair trade have highlighted the industry’s presence in Mex-ico, a relatively developed country, but overlooked severe poverty among cof-fee farmers in Mexico’s region of Chiapas. Since there is no scarcity of poorfarmers in middle-income countries, and poor coffee farmers generally stand tobeneﬁt from increased employment, it is not clear that shifting coffee produc-tion from poor to middle-income countries would have a signiﬁcant effect oncoffee farmers’ poverty.Another common concern is that fair trade industries undermine efforts toalleviate global poverty, because they misalign incentives for poor countries’economic development (Kurjanska & Risse, 2008, pp. 45–49). Kurjanska andRisse argue that fair trade industries improve the attractiveness of economicactivity at the bottom of the global value chain, speciﬁcally agricultural pro-duction, and thereby discourage more productive investments. However, theobjection fails to take account of the non-ideal conditions of poor economies,speciﬁcally low-skilled workers’ high rates of unemployment. Given highunemployment, fair trade industries are unlikely to absorb workers who wouldotherwise seek out opportunities in a ‘new, more proﬁtable, less volatile sector’(Kurjanska & Risse, 2008, p. 46). Thus, the argument that fair trade coffee dis-torts incentives is undermined by its idealizing assumption that coffee produc-ing societies already have full employment economies (Hayes, 2008, p. 2959).As poor societies develop their economies and transition to more ideal circum-stances, fair trade industries might become inappropriate at the same time thatthey become unnecessary.A ﬁnal concern has to do with moral psychology, namely, whether individ-uals who purchase fair trade will do less to fulﬁll their responsibilities to aidothers. However, survey evidence indicates that consumers who purchase fairtrade goods view them as complementary to their participation in other ethicalactivities, such as donations to charity (Langen, 2011). In addition,Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 17Kathryn Wheeler’s studies of fair trade supporters and consumerism in the UK,USA, and Sweden illustrates that there are multiple coexisting modes ofengagement with fair trade organizations. Fair trade provides opportunities forsome people to become engaged supporters of fair trade organizations’ politicalactivism, thereby enabling them to fulﬁll their ﬁrst-order responsibilities tocontribute toward transitioning to a better world. For fair trade consumers whoare not politically active in fair trade organizations, their purchases do notseem to induce a false sense of satisfaction that they have already made ade-quate contributions to their ﬁrst-order responsibilities:When asked about fair-trade, the majority of non-fair-trade supporters could rec-ognize the moral value of trying to help producers receive a fair price for theircrop; they were, however, often quite critical of the suggestion that consumingfair-trade was the only way to be a responsible citizen and skeptical that chang-ing their individual consumer habits would have much impact upon poverty inthe developing world. (2012, pp. 9–10)Challenge 4: The problem of limited optionsThis paper has argued that consumers should choose fair trade coffee over con-ventional brands, because consumers are more likely to avoid personal engage-ment in exploitative trade when they purchase fair trade coffee. However, sincethe empirical evidence is not conclusive, the options currently provided by thefair trade industry are not assured to represent fair terms of trade. In view ofthis limitation, consumers might adopt a policy of avoiding trade with mem-bers of societies that are not minimally just. If members of relatively wealthy,liberal societies adopt a policy of avoiding trade with unjust societies, manymutually beneﬁcial trades will be foregone, including many trades that wouldnot have been exploitative. The attitude adopted toward moral risk, a topic thatcannot be addressed in this paper, is important for evaluating the policy ofcomplete avoidance of potentially exploitative trades. Setting aside the attitudetoward moral risk, it may be objected that the paper’s argument provides a rea-son in favor of adopting the policy of avoidance, because the policy wouldeliminate exploitative trades.The value of avoiding exploitation must be weighed against the substantiallosses of trade for members of unjust societies. The loss of trade for membersof unjust societies is ethically signiﬁcant insofar as it sets back efforts to allevi-ate their poverty. The paper’s argument can take account of the ethical impor-tance of poverty alleviation, because a duty to alleviate poverty can be derivedfrom the responsibility to assist foreigners in general. The avoidance policy putsthe responsibility to avoid exploitation into conﬂict with the responsibility toassist, so it is worth noting how the paper’s argument views the two responsibil-ities as distinctive. On this paper’s theory of exploitation, it is unfair to trade onunfavorable terms that the other participant agrees to accept because she has anunmet claim to enjoy membership in a minimally just society. This theory of18 S.C. Goffexploitation depends on the premise that there is a responsibility to assist, whichexplains why foreigners’ claims are a matter of ethical concern. However, thewrongness of exploitation does not derive solely from the failure to assist for-eigners with their claims, but also from a deﬁciency in the respect participantsin trade owe one another for their freedom to trade. A participant in an exploita-tive trade fails to respect the other participant, whose unmet claim diminishesthe freedom she ought to have when agreeing to the terms of their trade. Sincethe responsibility to trade fairly is not reducible to the responsibility to meet for-eigners’ claims, the paper’s argument recognizes the value in fair trades that aremutually respectful of the participants’ freedom to trade and the distinct valuein trades that promote the aim of poverty alleviation.To evaluate the relative weights of these values at stake in the avoidancepolicy, it is important to take note of its implications for different groups.Employment is a good that is particularly valuable for workers who are poor,because it directly addresses their condition of economic need. All else beingequal, the poorest workers are the group that will beneﬁt the most fromemployment. If an individual makes his trading decisions a site of action forpoverty alleviation, his optimal strategy is to seek out trades with the poorestworkers to direct employment opportunities to them. If this same individualhas the additional aim of avoiding any risk of personal engagement in exploita-tion, his modiﬁed strategy is to seek out trade with the poorest workers wholive in minimally just societies and to avoid trade with workers in unjust soci-eties. As a result of this modiﬁcation, the poorest workers who live in mini-mally just societies will have more employment and the poorest workers wholive in unjust societies will have less.Reasoning through this modiﬁcation in strategy has shown that a justiﬁca-tion is potentially owed to the group of the poorest workers who live in unjustsocieties, in case this paper’s argument for fair trade has a tendency to reduceemployment for this group and thereby increase its poverty. An increase in thisgroup’s poverty constitutes a setback to efforts to meet their claims for assis-tance, and thus it would be appropriate to give priority to this group when act-ing on the responsibility to assist. Monetary aid and direct service provisionare some of the many possible ways to act on the responsibility to assist for-eigners, and in these priority can be given to the poorest workers in unjustsocieties above the poorest in minimally just societies. In case it is true thatefforts to trade on fair terms will have the tendency to divert trade to mini-mally just societies, this paper’s argument supports the following guidelines:choose fair trades over exploitative trades and, when acting on the responsibil-ity to assist, give priority to the poorest workers in unjust societies.ConclusionMy argument has offered normative guidance to individuals as they makechoices about how to act upon their duties to foreigners in general, and how toCritical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 19act upon their responsibilities to the particular foreigners with whom theytrade. The argument is meant to address a broad set of readers, who may holddivergent views about the extent of individuals’ duties to foreigners in general.Some readers will view individuals’ duties to foreigners as relatively weak.When these readers consider ‘international action’ to help foreigners, theymight envision small ﬁnancial transfers or liberalizing reforms to the migrationand trade regimes. Their reading of my argument will indicate that most tradeshave fair terms, and that individuals have limited responsibilities for enablingthe conditions of exploitative trade. Other readers will believe that there aresevere problems with the institutions of the global order and that individualshave strong duties to promote reform. Their reading of my argument will indi-cate that many trades are unfair, and that individuals have signiﬁcant responsi-bilities for enabling the conditions of exploitative trade. This paper has notintended to resolve disagreements about the severity of global problems andthe allocation of ﬁrst-order responsibilities for addressing them. Instead, theaim has been to provide a general framework for understanding how partici-pants in trade should trade fairly while global problems persist.AcknowledgmentsAn early draft of this paper was written while I was a postdoctoral fellow at JustitiaAmpliﬁcata, Centre for Advanced Studies, Goethe University Frankfurt. I thank theprogram for its support. I am also grateful to Chuck Beitz, Tom Christiano, BenLauderdale, Steve Macedo, Annie Stilz, and two anonymous reviewers for their veryhelpful comments.Disclosure statementNo potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.Notes1. Jeremy Weber calculates an average premium of 12.8 cents per pound for fair tradeorganic growers in southern Mexico (2011).2. Fairness in trade as an element of corporate social responsibility also falls withinthe scope of the argument but, unfortunately, I cannot discuss corporations fullyhere. See this paper’s discussion of domestic businesses in Costa Rica as(surmountable) obstacles to farmers’ enjoyment of fair terms of trade.3. A society is inclusive when it is structured for the beneﬁt of all its members, evenif some members have unsatisﬁed needs. Health provision is a useful example forshowing this difference: even while enjoying the beneﬁts of a fully capable andinclusive health system, inevitably some people will remain unhealthy.4. See note 1.5. When the consumer and the roaster are both participants in trade with the farmer,each trading relationship has its own separate impact on the farmers’ workingconditions. While I cannot do so in this paper, one could compare the relativesigniﬁcance of (1) the consumer’s indirect agreement with the farmer and (2) the20 S.C. Goffroaster’s direct trading relationship with the farmer, for determining the farmer’sworking conditions.6. Amartya Sen’s well-known ﬁnding that there have been no famines in democraciesalso supports a relationship between the inclusiveness of the political process and asociety’s protections for its poor (1999, pp. 182–188).7. See Goff (2016) on the ideal of a labor market in which employers do not discrimi-nate against female job seekers. Employers discriminate in the sense that they makesimilar errors in judgment about women’s qualiﬁcations, and these errors can beexpected to constrain women’s opportunities.8. To identify fair terms of trade for imperfectly competitive markets, it is necessaryto model the inﬂuence of one party’s unmet claim on prices. This is a less reliablemodeling exercise than in cases of perfectly competitive markets, but it is neverthe-less possible to produce a range of possible values.9. Vulnerability theorists are unlikely to wish to deny this. Ruth Sample (2003) viewsvulnerability as a condition for global exploitation. She deﬁnes vulnerabilitydescriptively, in terms of basic needs, and in terms of a person’s experience ofinjustice. Robert Goodin (1987) has a descriptive account of a person’s vulnerabilityto exploitation; however, he also argues for a duty to protect the vulnerable.10. In future work I intend to assess whether there is a correlation between a society’seconomic development and whether it is minimally just.Notes on contributorSarah C. Goff is postdoctoral fellow in Government at the London School ofEconomics & Political Science. She works on topics in economic justice, including gen-der discrimination in the labor market and fairness in international trade reported by theauthor.ReferencesArnould, E. J., Plastina, A., & Ball, D. (2009). Does fair trade deliver on its core valueproposition? Effects on income, educational attainment, and health in three coun-tries. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 28, 186–201.Beitz, C. R. (2009). The idea of human rights. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Farmer, P. (2003). Pathologies of power: Health, human rights, and the war on thepoor. Berkeley: University of California Press.Gindling, T. H., & Terrell, K. (2005). The effect of minimum wages on actual wages informal and informal sectors in Costa Rica. World Development, 33, 1905–1921.Global Humanitarian Assistance Report. (2016). Global Humanitarian Assis-tance. Retrieved from http://www.globalhumanitarianassistance.orgGoff, S. C. (2016). How to trade fairly in an unjust society: The problem of gender dis-crimination in the labor market. Social Theory and Practice, 42, 555–580.Goodin, R. (1987). Exploiting a situation and exploiting a person. In A. Reeve (Ed.),Modern theories of exploitation (pp. 166–200). London: Sage.Hayes, M. G. (2008). ‘Fighting the Tide: Alternative Trade Organizations in the Era ofGlobal Free Trade’ – A comment. World Development, 36, 2953–2961.James, A. (2012). Fairness in practice: A social contract for a global economy. Oxford:Oxford University Press.Kurjanska, M., & Risse, M. (2008). Fairness in trade II: Export subsidies and the fairtrade movement. Politics, Philosophy & Economics, 7, 29–56.Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 21Langen, N. (2011). Are ethical consumption and charitable giving substitutes or not?Insights into consumers’ coffee choice. Food Quality and Preference, 22, 412–421.Low, W., & Davenport, E. (2006). Mainstreaming fair trade: Adoption, assimilation,appropriation. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 14, 315–327.Messner, J. J., Haken, N., Taft, P., Blyth, H., Lawrence, K., Graham, S. P., Umaña, F.(2015). The failed state index. Washington, DC: The Fund for Peace Publication.Miller, D. (2011). Taking up the slack? Responsibility and justice in situations of partialcompliance. In C. Knight & Z. Stemplowska (Eds.), Responsibility and distributivejustice (pp. 230–245). Oxford: Oxford University Press.Murphy, L. (2003). Moral demands in nonideal theory. New York, NY: Oxford Univer-sity Press.Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. (2005). OECD. Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/34428351.pdfPogge, T. W. (2002). World poverty and human rights: Cosmopolitan responsibilitiesand reforms. Cambridge: Polity Press.Pogge, T. W. (2003). The inﬂuence of the global order on the prospects for genuinedemocracy in the developing countries. In D. Archibugi (Ed.), Debating cosmopoli-tics (pp. 117–140). London: Verso.Rawls, J. (1999). The law of peoples. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Risse, M. (2012). On global justice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Rodrik, D. (1999). Democracies pay higher wages. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-nomics, 114, 707–738.Ronchi, L. (2006). ‘Fairtrade’ and market failures in agricultural commodity markets.World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 4011, 1–63.Ruben, R., Fort, R., & Zúñiga-Arias, G. (2009). Measuring the impact of fair trade ondevelopment. Development in Practice, 19, 777–788.Sample, R. (2003). Exploitation: What it is and why it’s wrong. New York, NY: Row-man & Littleﬁeld.Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Shue, H. (1980). Basic rights: Subsistence, afﬂuence, and U.S. foreign policy. Princeton,NJ: Princeton University Press.Singer, P. (2005). Poverty, facts, and political philosophies: A debate with AndrewKuper. In A. Kuper (Ed.), Global responsibilities: Who must deliver on humanrights? (pp. 173–184). New York, NY: Routledge.Singer, P. (2006). Why pay more for fairness?. Project Syndicate. Retrieved fromhttps://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/why-pay-more-for-fairnessSinger, P. (2009). The Life you can save: How to do your part to end world poverty.New York, NY: Random House.Smith, A. (2009). Evaluating the criticisms of fair trade. Economic Affairs, 29, 29–36.Steiner, H. (1984). A liberal theory of exploitation. Ethics, 94, 225–241.Stiglitz, J. E., & Charlton, A. (2005). Fair trade for all: How trade can promote devel-opment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Stoddart, P. (2011). Development through fair trade: Candour or deception? EconomicAffairs, 31, 131–134.Sumner, A. (2012). Where do the poor live? World Development, 40, 865–877.United Nations Human Rights Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner. (2015). Guatemalanminimum wage ‘setback on sustainable development’-UN Human Rights experts.Retrieved from http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=15575&LangID=E22 S.C. GoffVerité. (2012). Research on indicators of forced labor in the supply chain of coffee inGuatemala. Retrieved May 16, 2016, from http://www.verite.org/sites/default/les/images/Research%20on%20Indicators%20of%20Forced%20Labor%20in%20the%20Guatemala%20Coffee%20Sector__9.16.pdfWalton, A. (2012). Consequentialism, indirect effects and fair trade. Utilitas, 24, 126–138.Weber, J. G. (2011). How much more do growers receive for fair trade-organic coffee?Food Policy, 36, 678–685.Wertheimer, A. (1996). Exploitation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Wheeler, K. (2012). Fair Trade and the citizen-consumer: Shopping for justice?.Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Winters, L. A., et al. (2004). Trade liberalization and poverty: The evidence so far.Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 72–115.Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 23