ABSTRACT: 
Hysteria, first performed in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 2001, was assembled from oral histories, medical cases, records, and remnants documenting the lives of Brazilian women from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries who were incarcerated in Rio de Janeiro's Pedro II Institute. Its UK premiere in 2008, performed by the all-female cast of the Brazilian Grupo XIX de Teatro, included a setting of the show in the old Victoria Baths in Manchester. In this article Elaine Aston identifies ways in which Hysteria keeps open or re-opens the question of feminist liberation. Exploring the show's critique of Western feminism's claims to independence and liberation, her analysis moves towards a mode of interdependent feminist thinking through which liberation might be realized. Elaine Aston is Professor of Contemporary Performance at Lancaster University and editor of Theatre Research International. Her most recent publications include Feminist Views on the English Stage (2003); Feminist Futures: Theatre, Performance, Theory (edited with Geraldine Harris, 2006); Staging International Feminisms (edited with Sue-Ellen Case, 2007); and Performance Practice and Process: Contemporary, (Women) Practitioners (with Geraldine Harris, 2008). 
 
PREDICTION: 
Hysteria, first performed in So Paulo, Brazil, in 2001, was assembled from oral histories, medical cases, records, and remnants documenting the lives of Brazilian women from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries who were incarcerated in Rio de Janeiro’sPedro II Institute. Its UK premiere in 2008, performed by the all-female cast of the Brazilian Grupo XIX de Teatro, included a setting of the show in the old Victoria Baths in Manchester. In this article Elaine Aston identifies ways in which Hysteria keeps open or re-opens the question of feminist liberation. Exploring the show’s critique of Westernfeminism’s claims to independence and liberation, her analysis moves towards a mode of interdependent feminist thinking through which liberation might be realized. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155PICTURE THIS. An indoor, public bathingpool dating back to 1906 stands empty. Semi-decayed, semi-restored, the pool is breath -takingly awesome. Clinical, cream, ceramictiles that are stained with age and disuse linethe sides of the empty pool. Grass-greenstriped tile insets draw the eye downwardsfrom the shallow to the deep end. The ceilingis high and vaulted, lets in light throughglass panels, and distorts voices into echoesand after-word babbles of sound. A stainedglass window to one apex suggests a church,but instead of pews there are viewing bal -conies, and, at ground level, two ranks ofindividual, blue changing cubicles.It is by the side of this empty pool, one ofthree pools housed in the Victoria Baths inManchester (North-West England), that theaudience gathered for the UK premiere ofHysteria in June 2008 by the Brazilian theatrecompany Grupo XIX de Teatro from SãoPaulo.1 The Victoria Baths was one of twoperformance sites for the company’s visit,2and for some local audience members gain -ing access to the baths (restricted during thecurrent restoration works to the building) wasarguably a huge attraction. In my own case, Iwas interested in seeing how a performancedrawn from women’s oppression in Brazil,where sex and race discrimination have beenthe focus of feminist and other social protestgroups,3 would play in a UK context wherefeminism can no longer claim to be a high-profile movement and where feminist theatreis, as one Guardian article and theatre blogheadlined around the time of Hysteria’s UKvisit, a ‘scarce commodity’.4In the early 1990s, Janelle Reinelt sug -gested how a ‘feminist critique’ is a ‘secondskin, which goes everywhere’ and is, there -fore, something that ‘cannot be put on andtaken off again like a critical coat every timethe scholar goes calling on a new topic’.5However, as a ‘second skin, which goes every-where’ feminism arguably needs to shed andgrow new layers – most especially, perhaps,in the current climate of a post-feminismback lash which threatens to skin feminism ofits political bite;6 makes it difficult to re-create attachments to feminism as a political38 ntq 26:1 (february 2010) © cambridge university press doi:10.1017/S0266464X10000047Elaine AstonSwimming in Histories of Gender Oppression: Grupo XIX de Teatro’s HysteriaHysteria, first performed in São Paulo, Brazil, in 2001, was assembled from oral histories,medical cases, records, and remnants documenting the lives of Brazilian women from thelate nineteenth and early twentieth centuries who were incarcerated in Rio de Janeiro’sPedro II Institute. Its UK premiere in 2008, performed by the all-female cast of theBrazilian Grupo XIX de Teatro, included a setting of the show in the old Victoria Bathsin Manchester. In this article Elaine Aston identifies ways in which Hysteria keeps openor re-opens the question of feminist liberation. Exploring the show’s critique of Westernfeminism’s claims to independence and liberation, her analysis moves towards a mode ofinterdependent feminist thinking through which liberation might be realized. Elaine Astonis Professor of Contemporary Performance at Lancaster University and editor of TheatreResearch International. Her most recent publications include Feminist Views on theEnglish Stage (2003); Feminist Futures: Theatre, Performance, Theory (edited withGeraldine Harris, 2006); Staging International Feminisms (edited with Sue-Ellen Case,2007); and Performance Practice and Process: Contemporary (Women) Practitioners (withGeraldine Harris, 2008).http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155movement; and renders feminist theatre ‘ascarce commodity’. Given all this, the purpose of this article isto examine in what ways and on what termsHysteria, sourced as it is from histories ofBrazi lian women’s oppression, intersects withcontemporary women’s (and men’s) lives inan English performance context and is ableto reignite a community of feminist ideasand interests.Methodologically, this involves a return toa style of ‘feminist critique’ that was instru -mental in shaping the first wave of feminismand theatre scholarship, where theatre andperformance were looked to as a means of‘doing’ or ‘creating’ feminist ideas and ideasabout feminism. At the same time, this modeof enquiry is renewed and reinvigoratedthrough Hysteria’s border crossings betweenthe show’s Brazilian origins and English stag-ing. Ultimately it serves to critique Westernfeminism’s claims to independence and liber-ation, and to advocate feminisms of interdep -endence as the ‘skins’ of differently locatedwomen’s experiences, lived and imagined,past and present, touch, affect, and interactwith each other.Hysteria in its Manchester SettingBack at the poolside it is explained to theassembling audience that the performancewill take place further into the buildingcomplex. In its day the Victoria Baths was ahuge public facility, housing not just thethree pools but also wash baths (very fewordinary homes had their own baths in theearly 1900s), Turkish baths, and laundryamenities. Looking through the windows offthis first pool, which afforded glimpses ofother parts of the building, combined withreading up on the baths and checking outtheir website, I was able to clarify that thepool by which we entered was the gala/first-39Setting in the Victoria Baths, Manchester, for Grupo XIX de Teatro’s production of Hysteria. Photo: Adalberto Lima.http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155class pool for men, and the performance site,lying beyond this, was in what was origin -ally the men’s second-class pool, flooredover in the 1980s, and far less lavish than thefirst-class pool. Each pool had a separateentrance so at the point of entry swimmerswere segregated by sex and, in the case of themen, also by class. Women, as it were, wereclassed as one ‘race’. Mixed bathing was onlyintroduced in 1914 and ‘with great caution’.7Waiting at the poolside before the showbegins, the space works its own magic – itsown punctum. Empty of water, the bathsevoke a pool of emotions and memories;imaginings of what it must have been like tobe there or, for some, memories of havingbeen there.8 Public (museum) memories ofthe baths are also on display, making visiblethe gendered histories of the building. Forexample, the grand staircase to the first-classpool for men is visible through a viewingpanel, while collected in one corner of thebaths are memorabilia from the wash housethat was run by women.9This sex-segregated public bathing his toryis evoked in the opening ritual of Hysteria inwhich the audience, much like earlier gener -ations of bathers, are divided into men-onlyand women-only groups (to the visible con -sternation of some mixed couples). Takingcharge of the audience, a nurse ushers themen into the performance space before thewomen. When the women get to enter, themen are already seated together and aresepar ated off from the main performance areain a conventional, end-on viewing arrange -ment. Four performers, playing the female in -mates of a nineteenth-century asylum, are inposition, ‘locked up’ in the space, and helpthe nurse to cajole and manoeuvre the womeninto a circular arrangement around the mainacting area in the centre of the floored-overpool. The performance then proceeds tounfold in an interactive mode as fragmentsfrom the lives of the female ‘hysterics’ areshared with responses, experiences, andstories drawn from the women, but never themen, in the audience. Silencing the men and empowering womento give voice to inequalities arguably origin -ated in the company working out of Brazi lianhistories of sex discrimination that wouldspeak to their audiences in São Paulo. Perfor -ming Hysteria outside of Brazil, however,assumes that a hierarchical gender divide ofmale supremacy and female subordinationwill be effective and affective in other nationalcontexts. Hysteria’s style of interaction (towhich I shall return in some detail later on) iscrucial to dialoguing with women who arelocal to the performance, wherever it is sited.This allows them, their lives and experi -ences, to become a part of show, rather thanrisk a colonizing set-up in which the perfor -mance is perceived to be about the sufferingof some distant, ‘primitive’, ‘others’. At the40Photos: Adalberto Lima.http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155same time, siphoning archival traces of femalesuffering into the figure of the hyst eric is astrategy that points to the hierarchical, male–female divide as a widely occurring, globalphenomenon. Iconography of the HystericA familiar figure in women’s theatre in theWest,10 the hysteric functions as a univers al -izing container for the repressed, silencedhistories of female suffering. The body of thehysteric is a repository of trauma, a ‘foreignbody’ that medical male others have soughtto read and to colonize.11 As part of theirdevising process, Grupo XIX researchedmaterial on la grande hystérie of Charcot’sSalpêtrière clinic in nineteenth-century Paris,where female hysterics re-presented thesymp toms of what Elaine Showalter hastermed their ‘female malady’.12 Drawing onCharcot’s treatment of the ‘female malady’as a point of reference for their work, thecompany developed a performance registerrooted in the iconography of la grande hys -térie: a corporeal language of female suffer -ing that affords a visual translation of genderoppression.13While the corporeal iconography of hys -eria also translates or ‘speaks’ across culturalcontexts, performing the female hysteric can,then, run the risk of re-presenting the hys tericas a universalizing stand-in for all wrongs orharms done to women, or of re-creating thehysteric as a spectacularized and fetishizedobject of curiosity. As feminist and post-colonial theorist Sara Ahmed cautions, totransform a hurt or ‘wound into an identityis problematic’ on account of the ways inwhich this risks cutting ‘the wound off froma history of “getting hurt” or injured’, or ofsensationalizing stories of pain into a ‘mediaspectacle’.14Countering this risk in Hysteria was thegroup’s shift away from the focus on a singlefigure of a named ‘star’ hysteric and theircreation of an ensemble performance of hys -teria histories.15 Further, locked up in theshow’s grand narrative of ‘female malady’were the histories of hysterias local to theBrazilian context of the show’s making; thesourcing of the performance from oral his -tories, medical cases, records, and remnantsdocumenting the lives of Brazilian womenfrom the late-nineteenth and early-twentiethcenturies incarcerated in Rio de Janeiro’sPedro II Institute.16De-fetishizing the body of the hystericfrom its ‘treatment’ within the male medicalgaze, presenting hysteria across multiplebodies rather than contained within one,famous case-study-body, Hysteria recovers,remembers the histories of ‘wounding’ doneto the Brazilian asylum community; it createsthe possibility for these stories to be heard.The show’s spectrum of collective hystericalsuffering is wide-ranging, encompassing thelives of those oppressed by domestication,those who suffered from a lack of education,or those women classed as ‘deviant’ on41http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155account of their desires to live social, cultural,and sexual lives outside the terms whichmen dictated to them. Trawled from history,these life stories speak to a contemporarymachismo that in turn resonates beyond aSouth American context.Opening up these hysteria-histories of‘getting hurt’ creates, in sum, a politicizingspace in the performance for making connec -tions to the symptoms or ‘wounds’ of gen -der. As previously explained, substitutingthe Manchester Baths for the original site ofincarceration in Brazil means that the per -formance also swims in local histories ofclass and gender. And standing empty anddisused, the baths atmospherically conjure aheightened sense of clinical incarceration.A Pre-Feminist SpaceAll of this works to foster the idea of a non-liberated or pre-feminist space. The nine -teenth-century Brazilian asylum setting andthe space of the baths both strip its women’saudience of privilege, freedom, or liberation.As female spectators join with the femaleperformers, all women are locked in togetherand colonized as the abject other, subjectedand subjugated to male systems of powerand surveillance. No woman can leave. Nowoman is liberated. As the feminist ground slips awaybeneath my feet, I am forced to reflect on justhow far Western feminism has succeeded inliberating women from the systems of maleprivilege and power it set out to transform. If‘feminism begins with a keen awareness ofexclusion from male cultural, social, sexual,political, and intellectual discourse’, as JillDolan argues, ‘and ends’, as Janelle Reineltadds, ‘with a resolve to radically changethose circumstances’, just how far has femin -ism succeeded in its critique, challenge, andtransformation of ‘those circumstances’ ofmale privilege?17 Just how liberated are ‘we’?If I ask this question of young women inmy theatre classes today they are generallyin very little doubt that they are truly lib er -ated from the past oppressions of maleprivilege. More often than not their initialresponse to feminism tends to be: ‘We arepast, post, all that. That was your time, notours; your struggle, not ours. Feminism willnot get under this skin. We are beyond allthat.’18 What this kind of response endorsesis a buying into the idea that feminism is nolonger needed. As Ahmed explains:the feminist hope for a gender-free world hasbeen cruelly translated into a post-feminist visionof a present in which gender has been overcome,a neo-liberal vision in which it is assumed thatgender, as with other forms of power, no longermakes a difference. In this vision of the present,women are not oppressed; feminism is no longernecessary; and so on.19However, the declaration of ‘independence’– in Ahmed’s words of a ‘post-feminist visionof a present in which gender has been over -come’ – is one that Hysteria contests. Invitingus to think otherwise, it finds perfor mancestrategies designed to keep open the ques -tion of women’s liberation in and for the con -temporary moment. In this regard Hysteria’s situating of themen in the audience as an absent-presentviewing body serves to mark the socio-symbolic sight/site of privileged male look -ing in which the female is relegated to abject,objectified other. As men have no choice butto take up this viewing position, with what -ever discomfort or disquiet this creates, justas the female spectators have no choice butto be ‘locked up’, they are forced to occupythe position of male privilege. Here, too, the baths play a part. For whilethe baths provided a public facility of benefitto working-class households, at the sametime, as an opulent, lavish ‘water palace’, itstood as a monument to civic pride, nationalprosperity, and empire-building.20 For thesemi-detached, on-looking men in the audi -ence to feel the effects of the historical powerof class and sex privilege pressing on theshow’s critique of male supremacy, is toopen up the space for critical reflection onpast-present gender oppression. As one malereviewer described, ‘We men are not reallypresent, we are spectators on sufferance.’The experience ‘for the watching males’involves a ‘questioning’ of men’s ‘attitudestoday’.2142http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155As there are no male oppressors in theshow itself – no Augustine’s Charcot, noDora’s Dr Freud22 – the male viewers arestand-ins for the patriarchal regulation ofwomen’s lives. However, also standing in foror occupying the site of male authority is thefigure of the nurse. The performance strategyof having a female figure occupy andattempt to uphold the regime of male power(‘attempt’, because the nurse often fails tokeep the women under control and is alsopushed towards a self-critical interrogationof the role she occupies) warns of the oppres -sive roles women may play in upholdingsystems of male power and privilege. This point is forcefully made in a one-to-one moment of performance contact. Thenurse, circling the women in the audience,checks for head lice. As she works aroundthe outer circle of women where I am seated,I know that she is coming to me, and years ofthose regular primary school head checks fordreaded infestations have left their mark.The nit nurse is a personal childhood terror.My turn comes and it is an intimate momentof contact as my skin, my head, is touched. The hands on my scalp surprise me by atouch that caresses rather than castigates.Whispered into my ear is the news that I amclean, not infected. I have been touched bywhat feels like affection but my body hasalso been surveyed and judged in that act oftouching. It is a visceral moment of reckon -ing in which I am made to feel the damagingeffects of women’s complicity in upholdingthe discourses of male privilege and of howthis, in turn, negates the contact womenmight find through or with each other. Moreover the performers’ mix of skincolours – those playing the hysterics appearto be lighter skinned than the nurse, areminder of the complex histories of racialdiscrimination and categorization in Brazil –also suggests how working through the dif -fer ences between women in the interests ofbreaking the hegemonic hold on male sup -rem acy represents a challenge.23 Attention tothis comes in another one-on-one moment ofcontact as one of the hysterics chooses awoman from the audience to be her specialfriend. This is an improvised ‘act’ of friend -ship where similarities and differences arean unknown quantity and are mutually ex -plored in the moment of befriending per -formed to the onlooking audience of womenand men.To be liberated from oppressive genderregimes requires, then, the negotiation of dif -ferences between women and the partici pa -tion of both sexes.24 Further, in the interestsof what Sue-Ellen Case describes as feministtheatre’s capacity to create a ‘subject who isliberated from the repressions of the past andcapable of signalling a new age for bothwomen and men’, it is necessary, Hysteriasuggests, to keep open the histories of gen -der oppression as a means of exploring thecontemporary conditions of women’s social,sexual, cultural, and political marginaliz -ation, and of interrogating the idea thatWestern feminism has fulfilled, rather thanhas yet to fulfil, its promise of women’sliberation.25Evidencing this claim was an article pub -lished a week after the Manchester perform -ances of Hysteria in which Kira Cochrane,women’s editor for the Guardian, chimes withHysteria’s contestation of liberation, writing‘that [feminist] arguments we thought werelong-won have been reopened, rights wethought were settled are suddenly underthreat’. Backing up Cochrane’s article arenumerous statistics and reports that vari -ously testify to male acts of violence againstwomen in the UK, including, for instance,the fact that ‘three of the most importantwomen’s charities in the UK’ dedicated tothe support of female victims of violence‘have a combined income considerably lowerthan that of the Donkey Sanctuary’.26From Independence to InterdependenceAbsorbing the fact that I would be bettercared for as a donkey (presumably of eithersex) than if I were a woman in urgent need ofprotection from male violence in the UK,I return to Hysteria’s strategies for critiquingpost-feminism’s claim to oppressive genderregimes as already undone or overcome. Asthe show performs an idea of gender wrongsas yet to be righted, it moves to explore what43http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155kinds of feminist attachments are needed tobring about an end to gender oppression. Eschewing the ‘de-gendering’ politics of1970s and 1980s feminism, which Ahmeddescribes as ‘at best naive’,27 and side step -ping the liberal, liberationist style of Westernfeminism, exposing its failure to fulfil the pro-mise of liberation, Hysteria gestures towardsthe idea that feminist liberation, previouslydeclared as a state of ‘independence’ (fromoppressive gender regimes), might insteadbe (re)conceived as an interdependent movetowards others (against oppressive genderregimes). Here too Ahmed’s explanations ofthe conditions under which a ‘feminist “we”becomes affective’ is helpful:Through the work of listening to others, of hear -ing the force of their pain and the energy of theiranger, of learning to be surprised by all that onefeels oneself to be against; through all of this, a‘we’ is formed, and an attachment is made. This isa feminist attachment and an attachment to femi -n ism. . . . One moves towards others, others whoare attached to feminism, as a movement awayfrom that which we are against. Such move mentscreate the surface of a feminist community.28The feminist community that Hysteria mightsimilarly be said to create in the space of theperformance is arrived at by the ‘movestowards others’ as moves away from genderoppression, presented as that which is yet tobe undone. Although ‘moves towards others’ can ofcourse be claimed for the ‘de-gendering’activities of second-wave feminism (andfemi nist theatre), what was not then signifi -cantly addressed was the way in whichWestern feminism moved towards somewomen more than others; established itsown apartheid of ‘first’ and ‘third’ worldfeminisms; created its own centre and peri -phery in which, as Ahmed explains in StrangeEncounters, ‘third-world women come todefine not simply what Western women arenot (and hence what they are), but also whatthey once were, before feminism allowedWestern women to be emancipated’.29In its evocation of a pre-emancipated statein which all women are required to inhabitthe asylum space of the colonized femaleother, Hysteria removes the Western feminist‘sight’ of privilege from which it is possibleto look down on as-yet-to-be-liberated femaleothers; it refuses the idea of ‘primi tive’ statesas yet-to-become feminist. Moving awayfrom the colonizing impulse of an ‘us andthem who might become us’ sort of feminism,Hysteria instead proposes a mode of non-hierarchical, improvised participation betweenwomen as performers and as spectators thatfigures the way in which feminism needs tobe an open rather than a closed ‘text’ createdby all others, rather than being predeter -mined, pre-scripted in its Western form orimage.Susan Leigh Foster, in her article ‘Improv -ising/History’, explains how the practice ofimprovisation draws viewers into what Roland Barthes hascalled a ‘writerly’ relationship to the performancetext. No longer the passive consumers of what ispresented as performance, they become engaged,along with the performers in developing the formof the event.30In the moment of improvisation, Fosterelaborates, ‘the fact that performers don’tknow what they are going to do next drawsthe viewers’ attention to their decision-makingprocess. It encourages viewers as well as per -formers to reflect on, at the same time thatthey attend to, what they are doing’. ‘Viewers’along with the performers are ‘open to theflow of events and also critically engage withthat going’.31A Writerly RelationshipBy analogy, Hysteria’s interactive, semi-improvisatory mode is one that takes up a‘writerly’ relationship to questions of genderoppression, and encourages performers andspec tators ‘in developing the form’ futurefemi nisms might take. Feminism is not thenpre-scripted; it lies in the domain of the yet tobe ‘written’, or perhaps, more accurately, inthe collaborative task of the yet to be ‘re-written’.Given that Hysteria is constructed to allowfor women spectators to take an active partin the performance – for instance, to be inter -rogated (nicely) about their personal lives by44http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155the performers – this means that each inter -acts with and observes the stories ofthe other. The conventional theatre-viewingarrange ment in which the actor performs forthe spectator is rearranged (between women)so that the female spectator who views isencouraged to become a participant (to speak),while, at other times, the female performerswitches to the role of observer (of listener).The boundaries, so clearly demarcated in thetheatre of hysteria between physician andpatient, are blurred, at the same time as thisundoes Western feminism’s tendency to givevoice to one, universalizing feminist subjectempowered to speak for all non-liberated,female ‘others’. ‘One’ does not presume tospeak for the ‘other’: each listens and eachspeaks. Although the hierarchy of performer andspectator is not strictly undone, given theneed for the performers to stay in control ofthe show which is partly scripted, never the -less, the performed mutuality of particip ationand observation, of speaking and listening,between women performers and spectatorssuggests a collaborative, interactive mode inwhich self-discovery is not independent ofthe other, but is interdependently exploredwith and through others.As Hysteria draws its female spectatorsinto acts of improvisation, it encouragesrebellious behaviour – acts of breaking out ofthe male rules and regulations governing thespace. For example, the nurse’s authority ischallenged as her diary (asylum notebook)gets stolen by one performer and is passed toa spectator who, complicit in the rebellion,keeps the book hidden. Other moments ofdisobedience are characterized by a morecelebratory mode as women spectators arecaught up with the performers in momentsof forbidden laughter or dance. In This TogetherSuch moments are not only markers of theutopian – ‘What if we were free, liberatedfrom systems of the governance of malepower and privi lege?’– but also reminders ofan idea of liberation premised not on indi -45From Grupo XIX de Teatro’s production of Hysteria. Photo: Adalberto Lima.http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155vidual self-empowerment, but as a collectivefeminist politics and praxis of being in andgetting out of this together.As the show locks the lives of the womenfrom its contemporary Manchester audienceinto the Brazilian stories of oppression, itunderlines the idea that ‘we’ are all in thistogether. A crucial question which Ahmedasks, however, is what kind of encounter ittakes to build a feminist community that isnot a ‘new “community of strangers”’ – onein which some women are still marked asstranger than others?32 For Ahmed theanswer lies in the necessity of working to getcloser to others, even while ‘pure proximity’is unattainable: It is through getting closer, rather than remaining ata distance, that the impossibility of pure proxi m itycan be put to work, or made to work.33In this respect, Hysteria’s practice of politic -izing the act of translation is one that can beargued as embodying the labour of a femi nistcommunity-in-the-making. The lived reali tiesof nineteenth-century Brazilian women outof which the performers shape their charac -ters are delivered in English which is not thenative language of the performers. Portugu -ese-speaking, the company spent a yearlearning English for their UK performances;and before the performance begins we areinstructed that if we know some Portuguesewe are not to help the performers out byusing this to assist them in a moment whenthey may not fully understand a responsefrom the audience. The effect of this is toemphasize the labour involved in working toget closer to others, whilst allowing for theidea that a complete understanding is animpossibility. The Portuguese-speaking performer speak-ing in English importantly marks her racialdifference from the hegemonic hold of theEnglish language – the language in which shemust speak to be heard outside her nationalcontext. Speaking English, she ‘foreignizes’,makes strange, the anglo phone-dominatedsystems of international communication bymarking her different relationship to it. Inturn this demands an act of careful listening.English reviewers of the show, however,frequently complained of an inability tounderstand the accented English of the‘other’. However, this imperialist criticism of‘incredibly thick accents’, which judges theperformers’ ability to speak ‘proper’ English,is deaf to the way in which the act of trans -lation sets up important, ideological markersof difference.34 This kind of response beliesthe politicizing affects of a careful listeningin which otherwise it is possible to hear, feel,and be moved by the accented voice whichspeaks: ‘I cannot become you; “we” are not“one”. There can be no “pure proximity”.The distance between you and me cannot becompletely removed. In your language, cul -ture, I cannot be fully understood by you.But as I move closer to you and you listen,labour carefully towards understanding me,we may not be so very far apart.’ Or to putthis in Ahmed’s terms, this figures a trans -national feminist encounter in which, impor -t antly, it is not about confirming communityor commonality, but of ‘remaking what it isthat we may yet have in common’.35To ‘Perform with Love’Exploring gender oppression in the spirit offriendly enquiry, seeking to know ratherthan presuming to know others, Hysteriaworks to avoid the dangers of creating a newcommunity of strangers and moves towardsa community of renewed feminist interests.There is one further tactic in this renewalof feminist attachments and attachments tofeminism that deserves a final comment. Pro -moting the company’s visit to the UK, PaulHeritage, director of the People’s Palace Pro -jects at Queen Mary, University of Londonand responsible for initiating the UK pre -miere of Hysteria, explains how the company‘perform with love’.36 He makes this obser -va tion as a corrective to the idea that ‘didac -tic or divisive’ might inform expec tations ofthe performance, given the show’s subjectmatter, the all-female cast, and the muchpublicized male/female audience divide.37But to ‘perform with love’ also signalsaffec tion as important to the feminist attach -ment-making process. It would be naive to46http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155interpret this as love being, in the words ofthe Beatles song, ‘all you need’ to overcomethe gender inequalities and social injusticeswhich Hysteria marks as in need of radicaltransformation. However, while contestinglove as ‘the foundation for political action’,Ahmed admits that ‘love might come tomatter as a way of describing the very affectof solidarity with others in the work that isdone to create a different world’.38In the case of Hysteria, the ‘affect ofsolidarity’ resides in the show’s affectionate,attachment-making labour that is intimatelytied to the vision of a less gender ‘divisive’future. As the show keeps open, or reopens,the histories of past oppressions, it per su -ades of the need for both sexes to love thevision of a ‘different [less oppressive] world’,and challenges the post-feminist vision of‘independence’ as it gestures towards aninterd ependent mode of feminist politicsthrough which such a vision might berealized. It is then, and only then, Hysteriasug gests, that feminism’s promise of liber -ation may yet be fulfilled.Notes and ReferencesWith thanks to Carl Lavery for sharing thoughts onHysteria, to Mark O’Thomas for assisting with the scriptand with Portuguese, and to Paul Heritage for nego ti at -ing the photographs. 1. Hysteria was first performed in São Paulo, Brazil,in 2001. Since then it has been regularly revived in Braziland in other countries, including Portugal, France, andAfrica (Cape Verde). The theatre company grew out ofthe Centre for the Performing Arts at the University ofSão Paulo. 2. The other venue was the Great Hall at StBartholomew’s Hospital in London.3. For an overview, see, for example, Peggy A.Lovell, ‘Gender, Race, and the Struggle for Social Justicein Brazil’, Latin American Perspectives, XXVII, No. 6(Novem ber 2000), p. 85–103.4. See <www.guardian.co.uk/ stage/ theatre blog/2008/ jun/04/feministtheatreisascarcec>.5. Janelle Reinelt, in Reinelt and J. R. Roach., ed.,Critical Theory and Performance (Ann Arbor: University ofMichigan Press, 1992), p. 227.6. The decline of feminism as a movement and thepost-feminist backlash is widely rehearsed in a range ofcritical literatures. For an overview in a feminist theatrecontext see Janelle Reinelt, ‘Navigating Postfeminism:Writing Out of the Box’, in Elaine Aston and GeraldineHarris, ed., Feminist Futures? Theatre, Performance, Theory(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006), p. 17–33.7. See <www.victoriabaths.org.uk/history.htm>. TheVictoria Baths website offers an illustrated history of thebaths and panoramic images of the baths as they aretoday. 8. On open days, when it is possible to visit theBaths during the restoration works, visitors are invitedto leave a note of their memories for archival purposes.9. Originally the wash house was designed forlaundering the towels at the Baths but later served as apublic laundry for local working-class women.10. See Christina Wald, Hysteria, Trauma, and Melan -cholia: Performative Maladies in Contemporary AnglophoneDrama (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).11. See Elisabeth Bronfen, The Knotted Subject:Hysteria and its Discontents (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni -versity Press, 1998), Chapter 4, ‘Jean-Martin Charcot’sVampires’, p. 191.12. Elaine Showalter, The Female Malady: Women,Madness and English Culture, 1830–1980 (London: ViragoPress, 1985).13. See Showalter, The Female Malady, Chapter 6,‘Feminism and Hysteria’, for illustrations and discus -sion of la grande hystérie.14. Sara Ahmed, The Cultural Politics of Emotion(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2004), p. 32.15. Several of Charcot’s female patients becamecelebrity figures, including, for example, Blanche Witt -mann, ‘Queen of the Hysterics’, or the ‘most frequentlyphotographed’ Augustine (see Showalter, p. 148, p.152).In turn, these and other famous female hysterics havebeen chosen as subjects in feminist theatre such asPortrait of Dora (Hélène Cixous, 1979); Dr Charcot’sHysteria Shows (Lenora Champagne, 1987–9); Augustine(Big Hysteria) (Anna Furse, 1991).16. Of the four female hysterics, Maria Tourino(played by Sara Antunes) and ‘M J’ (played by JulianaSanches), are characters based on the lives of twowomen documented in the archives from the asylum.Further, Grupo XIX’s policy is to make shows that detailthe lives of ordinary women and men from differenthistorical periods.17. Janelle Reinelt, Critical Theory and Performance,p. 225. Dolan is quoted by Reinelt at the same point ofreference.18. On younger women’s negative responses tofeminism see also Janelle Reinelt ‘Navigating Feminism:Writing Out of the Box’, in Aston and Harris, Feminist Fut -ures?, p. 17–33 (p. 20), and in the same collection, LeslieHill and Helen Paris, ‘Curious Feminists’, p. 56–70 (p. 57). 19. Ahmed, The Cultural Politics of Emotion, p. 186.20. In 1906, the year in which the Victoria Baths wereopened, for example, details of the 1901 census of theBritish Empire were published showing that Britainruled approximately one-fifth of the world.21. Howard Loxton, Hysteria review, The BritishTheatre Guide <www.britishtheatreguide. info/ reviews/hysteriaHL-rev.htm>.22. A juxtaposition of the famous print of Charcotpresenting and lecturing on the female hysteric to anaudience of men with production photographs ofHysteria which capture the female audience’s gaze onthe actress-hysterics makes for an insightful point ofcomparison, marking the male, medical gaze as anabsent presence critiqued by the presence of watchingwomen.23. See Lovell, ‘Gender, Race, and the Struggle forSocial Justice in Brazil’, p. 90, on how branco (white),pardo (brown), and preto (black) are used to construct47http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 29 May 2012 IP address: 148.88.176.155‘social definitions of skin colour’, and her overview ofhow the protests against sexism and racism that emergedin Brazil in the late 1970s sought to find common cause(p. 87). 24. The show’s concern to involve both sexes in aresistance to women’s oppression may arguably havea bearing on the way in which Hysteria, while an all-women performance, has a male director, Luis Fer nandoMarques. In the UK context of second-wave feministtheatre and performance this would have been widelyregarded as an inconceivable directorial choice.25. Sue-Ellen Case, Feminism and Theatre (Basing -stoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 1988, reissued edition 2008),p. 132.26. Kira Cochrane, Guardian, 1 July 2008 <www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/jul/01/gender.women>.27. Ahmed, The Cultural Politics of Emotion, p. 186.28. Ibid, p. 188.29. Ahmed, Strange Encounters: Embodied Others andPost-Coloniality (London: Routledge, 2000), p. 165.30. Susan Leigh Foster, ‘Improvising/History’, inW. B. Worthen and P. Holland, ed., Theorizing Practice:Redefining Theatre History (Basingstoke: Palgrave Mac -millan, 2003), p. 196–212 (p. 196).31. Ibid. My emphases. 32. Ahmed, Strange Encounters, p. 6.33. Ibid., p. 157.34. See Andrew Haydon’s review at <www.culturewars. org.uk/2008-06/hysteria.htm>. 35. Ahmed, Strange Encounters, p. 181. Emphasis inthe original.36. Quoted in Nigel Wrench, ‘Brazil. Theatre. A Hos -pital’, <www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/ pm/2008/06/ brazil_theatre_a_hospital.shtml>.37. Ibid.38. Ahmed, The Cultural Politics of Emotion, p. 140.48