ABSTRACT: 
· The Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund (JCF) launched the Impact Grants Initiative (IGI), a model of grant making based on venture philanthropy, but offering high engagement opportunities for previously unaffiliated local donors and community leaders. · Before adopting the IGI model, the JCF used a community-participatory grantmaking approach that had become stale in engaging its donors, community leaders, and professional staff. Younger existing and potential donors were developing interests in documented outcomes, metrics, and impact, and those interests did not align with JCF’s grantmaking approach. · IGI builds on the concepts of venture philanthropy, combining theories and techniques used in venture capital and corporate business with philanthropic practice, provides a platform to highly engage donors, and results in strategic and tactical community investments. It focuses extensively on generating measurable results that are realistic and attainable and allows for the periodic reallocation of resources based on evolving priorities and goals. · Participation in IGI grant rounds has more than doubled the number of community members engaged in philanthropy through the JCF. 
 
PREDICTION: 
In 2010 the Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund launched an ambitious pilot to revolutionize its grantmaking efforts. Known as the Impact Grants Initiative (IGI), this new model, based on venture philanthropy, offered high engagement opportunities for previously unaffiliated local donors and community leaders while identifying high-performing nonprofits capable of making significant impact on local Jewish communities. The community-participatory grantmaking model has since expanded to include 10 active grant rounds with 156 unique community participants and another six planned for implementation over the next 12 months. In the process the IGI has seed-funded in-novative startups, renewed the image of the JCF in its community, sparked novel and international partnerships, cultivated new community leaders and philanthropists, generated more charitable contributions, and helped make the JCF not just a philanthropic catalyst but also a learning organization and emerging center for philanthropic education and training. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 IntroductionIn 2010 the Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund ( JCF) launched an ambitious pilot to revolutionize its grantmaking efforts. Known as the Impact Grants Initiative (IGI), this new model, based on venture philanthropy, offered high engagement opportunities for previously unaffiliated local donors and commu-nity leaders while identifying high-performing nonprofits capable of making significant impact on local Jewish communities. The community-participatory grantmaking model has since expanded to include 10 active grant rounds with 156 unique community participants and another six planned for implementation over the next 12 months. In the process the IGI has seed-funded in-novative startups, refreshed the image of the JCF in its community, sparked novel and international partnerships, cultivated new community leaders and philanthropists, generated more charitable contributions, and helped make the JCF not just a philanthropic catalyst but also a learning organiza-tion and emerging center for philanthropic educa-tion and training.The JCF, established in 1910, is one of the old-est federations in the federation movement. Its purpose, like the other 152 Jewish federations and more than 300 “network” communities (volunteer-driven federations), is to raise funds and distribute resources among programs serving the Jewish community. Each year, the federation movement raises and distributes “more than $3 billion annually for social welfare, social services and educational needs,” placing it among “the top 10 charities on the continent” in terms of grant-making ( Jewish Federations of North America, 2013). In the Bay Area, the JCF covers approxi-doi: 10.9707/1944-5660.1208THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 7The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTSmately 2,400 square miles that encompass all of Sonoma, Marin, San Francisco, and San Mateo counties and a significant portion of Silicon Valley (Atherton, Menlo Park, Palo Alto, Los Altos, and Mountain View). It provides both funding and direct programming to Jewish communities in the Bay Area as well as communities in Israel, the former Soviet Union, and Hungary. In the fiscal year ending June 2013, the JCF awarded more than 8,800 separate grants total-ing $176 million through the combined resources generated from its annual development efforts, donor-advised funds, supporting foundations, and endowment funds. The bulk of its discretionary grants, amounting to approximately $14.3 million, originate from its annual fundraising appeal, which raised $18.9 million in the same year.The ProblemBefore adopting the IGI, the JCF used a commu-nity-participatory grantmaking approach that had become stale in engaging its donors, commu-nity leaders, and professional staff. The JCF had impaneled 11 standing committees that involved nearly 200 people in making grant decisions. These committees maintained a consistent level of expertise on several areas of focus including education, health and social services, and Jewish culture. The grantmaking approach used by the com-mittees, however, had devolved into a primarily reactive mode in which community members made funding decisions without engaging in more proactive efforts to learn about emerging issues or pressing needs. It thwarted their efforts at insightful assessments and evaluations of the funded projects and organizations with an eye to realigning financial resources. Because committee members did not turn over consistently, opportu-nities to recruit new community members were equally limited. The JCF had few avenues to en-gage community members and minimal capacity to best align its financial resources with organiza-tions able to create the most disproportionate community impact relative to the investments. Challenges with the grantmaking approach were compounded by several external factors. The organization had struggled to maintain consistent professional leadership, had poorly managed its position in the local Jewish community, and had failed to sufficiently cultivate the emerging gen-erations of philanthropists that could take up the mantle of supporting the Jewish community as older generations of Jewish philanthropists (e.g., Richard and Rhoda Goldman) passed. Coupled with the economic recession that began in 2008, the JCF was reeling from a significant drop in its annual donor base (from 10,000 to 6,500) and significant reduction in its annual fundraising proceeds (from $25 million in 2007 to $18 million in 2010). A public perception developed that the organization lacked the wherewithal to award its grantmaking resources effectively, especially in times of reduced resources. Moreover, the JCF was struggling to attract new donors and commu-nity leaders willing to engage with the organiza-tion.The JCF was struggling simultaneously, like other philanthropies and public charities dependent on donor contributions, with a donor base that had become much more interested in providing philanthropic support directly to nonprofits imple-menting well-thought-out plans. Consistent with studies published recently on donor behavior, the JCF became aware that its existing and poten-tial donor bases wanted to get more involved at the personal level, to see the tangible impact of donations, and to take a hands-on approach to grantmaking. The JCF learned that younger The JCF had few avenues to engage community members and minimal capacity to best align its financial resources with organizations able to create the most disproportionate community impact relative to the investments. Miller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman8 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSexisting and potential donors were developing interests in documented outcomes, metrics, and impact, and that those interests did not align with its grantmaking approach. These conclusions find reinforcement from recent studies1 such as the report “Next Gen Donors: Respecting Legacy, Revolutionizing Philanthropy” ( Johnson Center & 21/64), which concluded that donors ages 21 to 40 “want to do their research, to create results that can be measured, to take risks on new approaches to persistent problems, and to give more than just money” (Goldseker & Moody, 2013). The internal and external factors weighing down the JCF’s grantmaking approach led its staff and community leadership to conclude that the organization would continue to struggle to grow its donor base until it could present itself as an effective funder capable of identifying community needs, laying out key priority areas, planning and developing appropriate strategies, and aligning its philanthropic resources to those ends. The JCF needed to find new ways to grow its donor base and to personally engage the next generation of philanthropists and community leaders. It also needed to empower them to realize the com-munity changes they wanted to create. Last, it needed to truly partner and collaborate with the organizations it funded, by dampening the power 1 Additional relevant studies include the yearly Millennial Impact Report funded by the Case Foundation and published starting in 2009 by Achieve (http://www.themillennialimpact.com).dynamics between funder and grantee and elevat-ing the opportunity to institutionalize new, more equal types of relations. The Opportunity and Expected OutcomesIn 2010 the JCF – hampered by the economic recession and a downturn in its yearly donations – set on a path to revitalize its business model and community engagement. It launched a strategic-planning process in 2011 that culminated with new organizational priorities that repositioned the JCF’s programs and activities in three new strategic roles:1. strategic investments through grantmaking,2. nonprofit capacity building, and3. supporting emerging community leaders and philanthropists. The JCF also restructured and consolidated its grantmaking operations, and designed and launched the IGI as a new grantmaking tactic. A joint partnership between community leaders and JCF staff created this new tactic with the explicit intent of offering high-engagement opportunities to donors and community members while also identifying high-performing nonprofits to sup-port (Stannard-Stockton, 2009).2 The community leaders and JCF staff positioned the IGI model as a new approach to harness people’s time and talents, and to attract to the JCF younger donors interested in participating in meaningful grant-making. This new approach – a wholesale redefinition of how the organization would provide meaningful 2 High-performing nonprofits – distinct, for example, from the high-impact nonprofits profiled in “Forces for Good: The Six Practices of High-Impact Nonprofits” (Crutchfield & Grant, 2007) – are those organizations that have strong internal leadership, well-defined missions with effective and aligned programs, financial health, and the ability to learn and adjust as they evolve. They represent organizations positioned to generate impact. In reviewing proposals, the IGI grant com-mittees emphasized an applicant’s leadership, mission-aligned programs, and learning culture as major criteria for selecting the final grantees. A strong record of financial health was de-emphasized, especially in those grant rounds that sought to fund and scale up emerging organizations through capacity-building support.The community leaders and JCF staff positioned the IGI model as a new approach to harness people’s time and talents, and to attract to the JCF younger donors interested in participating in meaningful grantmaking.THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 9The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTSgrantmaking experiences – was positioned as a key way to increase community engagement and provide advanced learning and leadership oppor-tunities. The JCF’s community and staff leaders viewed the IGI as a means to:• engage a higher number of new community members engaged in the JCF’s efforts,• build more thoughtful interactions between community members and community organi-zations through the new grantmaking tactic, • fund new organizations vital to the local Jewish ecosystem, and • generate greater excitement in the community about the JCF’s grantmaking efforts. The organization’s leaders theorized that a proac-tive focus on enhanced engagement and leader-ship opportunities offered by the IGI grantmaking approach would engender more philanthropic charitable giving, notably in the form of dona-tions to the JCF. Further, by engaging new donors and re-engaging donors who had become frus-trated with the JCF, the leadership also believed that this new approach would help generate goodwill for the organization that would translate into more active volunteers reflective of the new generations of emerging philanthropists in the Jewish community.The Venture-Philanthropy ModelThe community leaders and JCF staff modeled the IGI on the concepts of venture philanthropy, which combines theories and techniques used in venture capital and corporate business with phil-anthropic practice, provides a platform to highly engage donors, and results in strategic and tactical community investments. It focuses extensively on generating measurable results that are realistic and attainable and allows for the periodic realloca-tion of resources based on evolving priorities and goals. Venture philanthropy generally structures funding as multiyear grants, ranging from a minimum of three years up to seven or more. The approach also actively engages donors by involving them in establishing funding priorities, identifying possible grant recipients, vetting and approving propos-als, and aligning their expertise and interests with specific grantee organizations. This partnership aspect requires that the donors also take an active liaison role in helping organizations implement their grants and generate the expected measur-able results.Venture-philanthropy models exist throughout the country. Prominent models include organizations such as Social Venture Partners in Seattle (http://www.svpseattle.org/), Venture Philanthropy Part-ners in Washington, (http://www. venturephilanthropypartners.org/), and New Profit in Cambridge, Mass. (http://www.new-profit.com/). The Bay Area is home to two other prominent venture-philanthropy models: REDF (http://www.redf.org/) and SV2 (http://www.sv2.org/). Each leverages its donors’ expertise and resources to strengthen local nonprofits for maximum community impact. Applying the Venture-Philanthropy ModelRepositioning the JCF and its grantmaking tactics The approach also actively engages donors by involving them in establishing funding priorities, identifying possible grant recipients, vetting and approving proposals, and aligning their expertise and interests with specific grantee organizations. This partnership aspect requires that the donors also take an active liaison role in helping organizations implement their grants and generate the expected measurable results.Miller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman10 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSfirst involved establishing the venture-philanthro-py model and launching a pilot grant round in Fall 2010. But the JCF’s leadership understood that building an exact replica of other venture-philanthropy models, especially with the expecta-tion that donors raise and pool their own financial resources, would not build strong momentum for engaging its community members. As such, the JCF’s community leadership approved launching the grant round with $1 million of community funds to award through three-year grants. Working with JCF staff, the community leaders also agreed on three measures of success that have been carried forward to subsequent grant rounds: 1. Align funding with innovative program approaches at new or established organiza-tions while also supporting the development of more engaged partnerships between the funded organizations and the JCF.2. Increase the number of community leaders engaged with the JCF and build continued pathways for their further engagement with the organization.3. Increase participants’ philanthropic activities, including charitable donations to the JCF. Last, the community leadership and JCF senior staff adopted basic principles for the pilot round that have continued to find application in subse-quent grant rounds: • The broad theme of each grant round – such as advancing young-adult engagement in Jewish life – would be established by the JCF’s commu-nity leaders and senior staff. But the community members of each grant round would determine the specific goals and outcomes that relate to the broad theme (i.e., an informal theory of change). In the case of the pilot, JCF lay leader-ship requested that the grant round focus on funding innovative approaches engaging adults ages 21 to 45 in Jewish life.• Each grant round should include a balanced mix of community representatives, including individuals who have consistently engaged with the JCF, those who were engaged in the past but ceased their involvement, and those who are new to the organization. • The group of community representatives engaged in a grant round should also reflect a diverse mix of annual financial contributions to the JCF. Intentionally, the pilot grant round, followed by subsequent grant rounds, did not require an upfront minimum contribution to participate (i.e., the concept of “pay to play”). The Pilot IGI Grant Round BlueprintIn advance of the launch of the pilot grant round, JCF staff worked with venture-philanthropy ex-perts to define and establish the overall blueprint. The focus was on creating a supportive environ-ment for the community members and develop-ing an education curriculum to build participants’ grantmaking skills. The curriculum focused on:• understanding contemporary philanthropy ap-proaches,• identifying community needs and allocating resources,• vetting nonprofits’ ideas,• analyzing proposals and conducting due dili-gence,The broad theme of each grant round – such as advancing young-adult engagement in Jewish life – would be established by the JCF’s community leaders and senior staff. But the community members of each grant round would determine the specific goals and outcomes that relate to the broad theme (i.e., an informal theory of change).THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 11The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTS• monitoring grant implementation,• assessing grant implementation, and• evaluating and measuring success. The curriculum also anticipated providing training to future grant-round leaders in order to strengthen their ability to manage the grant rounds effectively.Using SV2 and other social ventures as models, the IGI pilot envisioned a grant round that would involve five or six monthly meetings of communi-ty members involved in the grantmaking process. The six-month time frame for the pilot, which has remained consistent in subsequent grant rounds, runs counter to general philanthropy conventions that grant processes should take less time. The longer time frame, however, aligned intention-ally with one of the JCF’s new strategic roles, namely to support emerging community leaders and philanthropists. Research published by Hope Consulting earlier in 2010 had documented that only a small portion of donors (32 percent) had conducted any research about nonprofits and even fewer (21 percent) had researched nonprofit performance (Hope Consulting, 2010). The longer time frame of the IGI grant round would provide an important opportunity for JCF staff and com-munity leaders to teach philanthropic best prac-tices and research to the participating emerging philanthropists. The six-month time frame would also permit the grant-round participants to spend more time learning about the community issues they aim to address before requesting proposals from the field. Through these monthly meetings, the com-munity members would refine the grant round’s intended focus area through an intensive overview of the priority issues, promising and best prac-tices, and review of potential grantee organiza-tions. At least two meetings would involve outside speakers and experts who would expand the community members’ knowledge of the intended focus area.After refining the focus area and learning more about the funding opportunities, the community members would define the expected outcomes of the grant round, work with JCF staff to develop the Request for Proposal guidelines, and assist in outreach to potential applicants. Upon receipt of the proposals, the community members would shift to a due diligence review of the organiza-tions to identify which of the applicants represent high-performing nonprofits that would most ben-efit from additional philanthropic support while also maximizing measurable community impact from the JCF investment. The IGI blueprint specified that community par-ticipants would also conduct site visits or in-depth interviews of applicants. In-person presentations to the full grantmaking committee were anticipat-ed as a final step before the community members finalized their grant recommendations. At the conclusion of the grantmaking process, commu-nity members in the grant round would have the opportunity to shift into a liaison role between the JCF and a funded organization. In this role, liaisons would check in grantees throughout the grant period to monitor progress toward goals. They would report back to the larger grant-round committee and help determine if their respec-tive assigned organization warranted continued The six-month time frame for the pilot, which has remained consistent in subsequent grant rounds, runs counter to general philanthropy conventions that grant processes should take less time. The longer time frame, however, aligned intentionally with one of the JCF’s new strategic roles, namely to support emerging community leaders and philanthropists. Miller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman12 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSfunding. Ultimately, the liaison would help JCF staff evaluate the effectiveness of the grant at the conclusion of the grant period.The final element envisioned was that the success of the initial IGI grant round would also present opportunities to further leverage resources to support the organizations funded by the JCF. For example, community members with donor-ad-vised funds could be invited to provide additional match support to grow the funds and leverage the combined resources of an IGI grant round to further impact the community. The Pilot IGI Grant Round ImplementationThe pilot grant round engaged 26 community members in an intensive process over six months to vet and identify organizations with innova-tive approaches to engage adults ages 21 to 45 in Jewish life. The organizations that were awarded funding represented emerging organizations with strong social entrepreneurs at the forefront of engaging young adults through new and innova-tive efforts.Over six months, the community members par-ticipated in a highly engaged process that culmi-nated with the recommendations to award grants to seven nonprofits with demonstrated ability to impact the local community. In that time frame, the community members:• refined the focus area of the pilot grant round,• identified the outcomes the grant recipients were expected to generate,• developed specific grant application guidelines for the grant round,• reviewed proposals from 34 organizations, and• conducted site visits with 13 organizations. None of the seven organizations that received funding had been previously funded by the JCF. Of the 26 community members engaged in the pilot grant round, 19 volunteered to continue to participate in the process as liaisons between the JCF and the funded organizations. In their respec-tive roles, the liaisons continue to check in with the grantees to assess progress toward the ex-pected outcomes. The liaisons also work with the JCF to evaluate the effectiveness of the grantees at the conclusion of the grant period.In general, the pilot grant round adhered to the blueprint developed for the IGI. A few key elements, such as the in-person presentations to the full grantmaking committee, were not implemented. Nevertheless, the success of the pilot grant round persuaded JCF staff to anticipate and embrace variations on the blueprint in future grant rounds in order to maximize the effective-ness of the experience. The design of the IGI has allowed the JCF to maintain its focus on the three measures of success initially defined by its com-munity and staff leaders. Subsequent grant rounds have placed more emphasis on one or more of the three measures, but all have been a mainstay of each grant round.Expanding the IGI ModelBuilding on the success of the pilot grant round, the JCF expanded the IGI approach in 2012. Two separate grant rounds engaged committees of young adults and Russian-speaking Jews. The Young Funders IGI granted $228,000 over two years to programs working to engage its cohort (ages 21-28). The grant round provided an im-mersive experience for participants and culmi-nated with a large-scale community celebration of approximately 500 young adults to showcase the Over six months, the com-munity members participated in a highly engaged process that culminated with the recommendations to award grants to seven nonprofits with demonstrated ability to impact the local community.THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 13The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTSagencies and projects receiving funds, and to high-light the importance of young-adult philanthropy. The Russian-speaking Jews grant round intention-ally tested the proposition that the IGI process could also effectively work to fund minigrants. In this case, the grant round committee awarded seven minigrants totaling $24,000. The grants ad-dress a wide range of needs for young adults and Russian-speaking Jews in the community. The IGI approach was further incorporated into the JCF’s renewed regional grantmaking efforts (suspended in 2010). The regional grantmaking efforts have engaged new donors in the funding process while also providing higher levels of fund-ing through multiyear grants to local organiza-tions. Two donor committees were formed in the communities south of San Francisco encompass-ing San Mateo County and significant portions of Silicon Valley. The committees identified and addressed key regional issues through grantmak-ing aligned with the JCF’s overall goals. Collectively, the regional committees awarded nearly $850,000 over three years to support five local organizations tackling the large issue of engaging families in Jewish life. New regional grant rounds south of San Francisco, in San Ma-teo County and the northern portion of Silicon Valley, were launched in spring 2013. The JCF also extended the IGI approach to Marin County (north of San Francisco).Finally, the IGI approach was adopted for an in-novative partnership with the Israel Venture Net-work (IVN) with a funding pool up to $1 million. This grant round launched in January 2013 and engaged local community members in a unique collaboration with Israeli colleagues to identify and co-fund high-performing social ventures in Israel. Both the partnership model and the focus on social ventures were new facets for the IGI approach. Through the partnership with IVN, the JCF did extensive training for IGI participants on social enterprises and what it means to fund social enterprises as opposed to nonprofits. The IGI culminated in a weeklong trip to Israel to visit the seven finalists and make final funding decisions onsite. The grant-round committee ultimately decided to fund three enterprises. Total funding under the IGI model increased from an initial outlay of $877,700 in the JCF’s fiscal year 2012 to $1.72 million in fiscal year 2013 with a budgeted $1.92 million expected this fiscal year. That figure represents more than 13 percent of the discretionary funds available to the JCF to grant. (See Figure 1.) $877,700 $1,723,132 $1,925,000  $‐ $500,000 $1,000,000 $1,500,000 $2,000,000 $2,500,000FY12 FY13 FY14*Annual Grant Funds Awarded Through IGIAnnual Grants Funds Awarded Through IGI * BudgetedFIGURE 1 Annual Grant Funds Awarded Through IGIMiller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman14 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSSuccess Outcomes and EvaluationsThe implementation and expansion of the IGI model directly correlated with the three primary success outcomes established by JCF’s community and staff leaders. The seven grant rounds com-pleted to date aligned funding with 28 innova-tive program approaches at new or established organizations. Of those, nearly 50 percent (13 organizations) had never received funding from the JCF. Collectively, the current IGI grantees engage more than 25,000 people each year. In several cases, the funded organizations leveraged their JCF grants to attract other institutional support and individual donors. That trend should continue with completion of an additional nine grant rounds in fiscal year 2014, in which an anticipated 34 organizations will receive funding from the JCF, approximately 30 percent of the total number of organizations funded by the JCF through its discretionary funds. (See Figure 2.)Engaging New Community Members and Young AdultsParticipation in IGI grant rounds has significantly increased the number of community members engaged in philanthropy through the JCF. The IGI grant rounds completed and underway have engaged 156 unique community members. Of these, 71 were already engaged with the JCF in some form when they joined their respective IGI grant round. A larger contingency of 85 com-munity members, however, was unengaged or had previously ended its involvement with the JCF. Notably, of the total number of community members engaged, 27 have participated in more than one grant round and several have taken on leadership roles in their respective second grant rounds. The new grant rounds of fiscal year 2014 are expected to engage another 65 community members. (See Figure 3.) The combined total of IGI participants will exceed the number of com-munity members engaged through the previous grantmaking approach deployed the JCF before 2010.Importantly, the IGI approach has also served as a major engagement tool for young adults, or “next gen” donors, and as a springboard for broader affiliation with the JCF through volunteer leader-ship. For example, none of the 17 participants in the first Young Funders IGI round took an active volunteer role at the JCF before their participation in the grant round. One year later, nine commu-nity members now participate in the JCF’s Young Funder’s Network, a cohort group of people in their 20s and 30s from major local philanthropic families. Others have joined other JCF volunteer and grantmaking committees ranging from the 11467 340510152025303540FY12 FY13 FY14Grants to Current Grantees Grants to New Grantees Projected GrantsGrants Issued to New and Current GranteesFIGURE 2 Grants Issued to New and Current GranteesTHE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 15The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTSJCF’s Young Adult board to its board of governors and the finance and administration committee.Developing Community LeadershipMirroring the young-adult engagement, other community members from IGI grant rounds have continued to develop their own volunteer and leadership paths with the organizations. Many have continued to serve as liaisons to grantees (on average, each organization works with a team of two liaisons). As liaisons, they monitor the grant-ees and assess their progress toward the expected outcomes. The liaisons also work with the JCF to evaluate the effectiveness of the grantees in meet-ing their stated objectives.Participation in an IGI grant round is now seam-lessly incorporated into JCF’s larger cycle of leadership development. JCF staff works closely with grant-round participants and cultivates inter-ested community members as leaders for rounds; several participants in first rounds are now chair-ing successive IGI rounds. Staff also works with JCF’s leadership-development division to identify individual participants’ strengths and interests and match them with further leadership opportuni-ties. After participating in an IGI, community members have gone on to join JCF’s young-adult engagement and philanthropy division and pro-gramming, serve on a JCF governing or non-IGI grantmaking committee, join the JCF board of governors, and more. The IGI thus has created strong affinity for the JCF even as it fosters leader-ship and philanthropy in the Jewish community.Overall, the JCF has seen great leaps in IGI partici-pation in terms of engagement. IGI participants go on to other JCF programs, activities, commit-tees, and leadership pathways.Impact on Philanthropic BehaviorParticipation in an IGI grant round has increased community members’ awareness of the rich-ness as well as financial need in the local Jewish nonprofit ecosystem. In looking to establish and expand the IGI model, the JCF’s community and staff leadership intended for participants to increase their philanthropic activities, especially through charitable donations to the JCF. To date, participation in an IGI grant round has also mod-erately increased financial donations to the JCF. In terms of financial donations to the JCF, for example, 10 young-adult IGI participants made 2677 8065020406080100120140160FY12 FY13 FY14Confirmed AnticipatedNumber of IGI Grant Round ParticipantsFIGURE 3 Number of IGI Grant Round ParticipantsMiller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman16 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSgifts, for a total of $8,150. In this way, the IGI became a vibrant access point for young adults in the community to enter the JCF “family” and assume volunteer leadership positions with the organization. Demographic research shows that Jewish young adults in the Bay Area, in keeping with general trends of the millennials, tend to be unaffiliated, nondenominational, and challenging for established community institutions such as federations or synagogues to interest and retain as committed stakeholders. As such, the success of the IGI in engaging young adults is a prized outcome for the JCF.Donations to the JCF from the entire cadre of 156 IGI grant-round participants grew at a modest 4 percent in the years prior to their involvement. After their participation in an IGI grant round, however, the JCF documented a much larger increase – of 18 percent – in charitable dona-tions to the organization this past fiscal year as a result of gaining donations from individuals new to the JCF as well as increasing donations from participants already giving to the organization. (See Figure 4.) Overall, community members who were previously uninvolved, unaware, or uninter-ested in supporting the JCF have changed their minds and begun contributing, in levels that may prove especially significant if participants become perennial donors over the long term.Apart from the immediate dollars raised, the JCF now sees improved relationships with the donors who participate in the IGI, many of who find re-newed inspiration and meaning in supporting the JCF. For example, one community member who participated in a regional IGI grant is a member of a very involved family and has long been a donor to the JCF, but appreciated the organization mostly in the abstract. Following her participation in the IGI grant round, she said that this year, for the first time, she really understands the work of the JCF, sees its impact in her geographic region (a priority of hers), and can connect her gift to the benefit endpoints. She said her family conversa-tion about charitable donations was a lot easier this year as a result. Her story underscores that even regular donors to the JCF may only partially value the organiza-$291,451 $306,253 $319,272 $377,451 $0$50,000$100,000$150,000$200,000$250,000$300,000$350,000$400,000FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13Donations to JCFDonations to JCFFIGURE 4 Donations to JCFTHE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 17The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTStion or truly understand the scope and range of its work in the community – yet would appreciate the JCF even more with greater exposure. In this regard, the IGI model has become a potent tool in relationship building, and the benefits of hav-ing constituents more personally connected and invested in the organization are both a wonderful outcome alone and can potentially lead to greater fundraising possibilities with participants and their social and professional networks.Formal EvaluationBeyond tracking the three success measures defined by its community and staff leadership, the JCF has also advanced an evaluation framework for the organizations funded through the first regional grant rounds. In this context, the shared outcomes were established by the five grantees. The organizations now work with an indepen-dent evaluator to both assess the impact of their individual grants and their shared efforts in order to assess the broader impact of their collective efforts. Separately, with the benefit of two-year imple-mentation experience, the JCF staff is now center-ing on developing more formal ways to track how participation in the IGI grant rounds impacts these important consequences for the organiza-tion:• dollars raised,• number of donors,• engagement of community members/volun-teers,• development of community leadership,• perception or public image of the organization (helped by IGI participants becoming ambas-sadors), and• philanthropic education (and whether par-ticipation has helped educate people to make meaningful philanthropic decisions). Lessons Learned and Implications for Other FundersWhen originally designed, JCF staff leaders expected the model to help inform other funders that make up the federation movement. Many federations across the United States face simi-lar challenges in seeking out ways to improve engagement of local community members, especially younger philanthropists skeptical of the federated approach to philanthropy. By success-fully adopting a venture-philanthropy approach, the JCF expected that other federations would implement similar efforts in order to reshape their grantmaking efforts. However, the IGI model also has relevancy to community foundations and other funders that seek to engage community members in participatory grantmaking. The fol-lowing summarizes the lessons distilled from the IGI grant rounds looking to replicate this venture-philanthropy approach.A philanthropic endeavor that builds the edu-cational, community-relations, and leadership capacity of committee volunteers, the IGI model requires heavy time and staff resources. Examples of some of the ways the JCF has learned to ef-fectively deploy its resources are provided below. Some of these points are a work in progress, as the JCF continues to refine best practices around the IGI.Effective Use of StaffIn practice, the JCF program officers who staff grant rounds have played multifaceted roles beyond those of the traditional program offi-cer. These have included roles of administrative support, recruitment chief, philanthropic expert, and charity vetter as well as community liaison, philanthropic curriculum writer and educator, and representative voice of the JCF to local nonprofits and to applicants for IGI funding. In any given A philanthropic endeavor that builds the educational, community-relations, and leadership capacity of committee volunteers, the IGI model requires heavy time and staff resources.Miller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman18 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSIGI round, program officers are accountable to the JCF and the IGI community members. In addition, at any given time, IGI program officers are expected to be eloquent advocates of the IGI funding priorities when speaking to JCF’s donors and stakeholders. The JCF has deepened its understanding that IGI program officers must not only be effective in their traditional roles, but also expert educators, trainers, and facilitators who play a major role in developing both the intellectual content for the IGIs and the community members who become strategic philanthropists as part of their IGI expe-rience. In order to facilitate a series of regional IGI grant grounds, the JCF hired two full-time program officers to facilitate these opportunities. These program officers joined existing program staff also assigned to lead grant rounds. Additional staff, especially from our development and marketing departments, have been assigned to work with the program officer leading each grant round. The IGI grant rounds have involved a team of four program officers, two program directors, and two development specialists. The associated staff ex-penses reflect a significant portion of the respon-sible department’s current operating budget. But those associated expenses are also not deducted from the grantmaking budget for each grant round and are positioned as expenses necessary to bring the grant rounds into fruition. Operating as a community of practice, the entire IGI team meets weekly to discuss the status of grant rounds and work through implementation issues. The team also uses the weekly meetings to discuss how to best support community members leading their grant rounds, and to share informa-tion about grantee organizations that have re-ceived grants through multiple IGI grant rounds. Collectively, the team also works to refine and update the internal materials developed to guide each grant round and to review which donors to recruit for participation in future grant rounds.Engaging and Positioning Community MembersAn IGI grant round runs most smoothly with thoughtful attention paid to the experience of community members at all stages of the process, f rom initial recruitment to follow-up after their grant round concludes.At the recruitment stage, it has proven somewhat easier to attract volunteers with a preselected theme established by the JCF’s community leaders and senior staff, rather than to obtain commit-ment to participate without an issue focus, and then guide members through the issue area selec-tion process as part of the committee work. It may require months to recruit committee chairs, and this process should begin several months before each grant round begins.Community members need to robustly engage in the process of helping to deploy funds to local organizations that fall within an IGI-identified theme, while in no way compromising their pos-Community members need to robustly engage in the process of helping to deploy funds to local organizations that fall within an IGI-identified theme, while in no way compromising their possible philanthropic relationships with some of the same organizations that might apply for IGI grant funds. With this in mind, staff have found it helpful to formulate a policy on conflict of interest very early in the IGI process, potentially even discussing possible conflicts at the recruitment stage.THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 19The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTSsible philanthropic relationships with some of the same organizations that might apply for IGI grant funds. With this in mind, staff have found it help-ful to formulate a policy on conflict of interest very early in the IGI process, potentially even dis-cussing possible conflicts at the recruitment stage. For example, a community member who became a leader of one of the regional IGI grant rounds was also a major donor to several of the nonprofit applicants based in that region applying to the IGI for funding. Formulating expectations in advance on whether and in what circumstances members need to recuse themselves from the grantmaking process would have smoothed out and stream-lined decision-making.Once the IGI grant round is formed and com-munity members begin meeting, sufficient time needs to be built in to train the group to be savvy funders, learn about and choose a funding ap-proach, prepare Requests for Proposals, and make and monitor grants. The original IGI blueprint can quickly become extended, becoming a six- to nine-month endeavor, in order to do justice to the in-depth work that community members enthu-siastically undertake. This time frame provides ample time to meet the objectives of doing excellent grantmaking, engaging volunteers with content that is of great interest and viewed as very important to the life of the Jewish commu-nity. In addition, it allows community members to deepen their level of philanthropic education, develop a detailed sense of the microregional needs in their communities, build partnerships with regional organizations, and, through a sense of deep interest and mission passion, enhance their own relationship with both philanthropy and serving the Jewish community. The IGI process requires expert leadership from committee chairs, particularly in the beginning, and the chairs need to be trained accordingly to effectively recruit other participants and lead their IGI grant round. For example, while most chairs are excellent at recruiting community mem-bers from their social circles, they have to reach beyond to connect with members of the commu-nity who might not yet be formally connected to mainstream community organizations such as the JCF. The JCF has also found it useful to be flexible in the area of committee structures, supporting IGI grant rounds that choose a facilitator rather than chair – as seen with the Israel/IVN IGI grant round, which utilized a professional facilitator. In that case, the flat committee organizational struc-ture of the Israel/IVN IGI and lack of participant hierarchy worked very well.Overall, the JCF has learned to consider variables including individual, group, leadership, regional, and organizational dynamics in defining the lead-ership structure of each IGI committee. While there are general structures parallel in all IGI grant rounds, committee leadership approaches should not be one size fits all. Similarly, approach-es to decision-making must be specific to the structures and dynamic of each IGI grant round. While the spirit of collaboration, cooperation and transparency are essential to making good decisions, determining whether a decision-making process will be consensus based, consultative, ma-jority rules, or even oligarchic is specific to each grant round and its leadership structure. Community members can be very engaged and energized by being positioned as experts and being tasked with interviewing community lead-Overall, the JCF has learned to consider variables including individual, group, leadership, regional, and organizational dynamics in defining the leadership structure of each IGI committee. While there are general structures parallel in all IGI grant rounds, committee leadership approaches should not be one size fits all.Miller, Gollub, Kaufman, and Epelman20 THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3RESULTSers, applicants, and other nonprofits. They gain exposure in the community and deepen their engagement with IGI proceedings by reporting back to their committees. And having participants serve as grantee liaisons through the duration of the multiyear grants is a great model for continu-ing engagement and impact. It has been challeng-ing for IGI staff to monitor the depth of liaison relationships with grantees and organizations, and JCF is working on ways to foreground it.After a grant round concludes, members have typically bonded socially with one another, found meaningful connection with the mission of the IGI, and expressed a desire to continue the work, either as a committee or in some new way. The JCF is working to develop engagement paths, and plans to support those paths with staff and dedi-cated financial resources. In addition, the JCF is fo-cusing more energy on follow-up with individuals, bringing in its leadership-development division to help identify the best fit for each person’s continu-ing volunteer path with the agency.The JCF is also observing how the relatively short-term, immersive experience of the IGI model changes participants’ engagement as volunteers and leaders with the Jewish com-munity. New questions include how the addi-tion of community-member mentorship and other focused community-member development activities would provide a “tipping point” toward long-term sustainable volunteerism and engage-ment. Alternately, the agency and the community may want to recalibrate expectations of volunteer engagement and notions of what success looks like in this arena. The question remains of the rate at which continued member engagement in any capacity after the IGI rounds ends should be considered a positive outcome – or whether the type of engagement also needs assessment.Furthering the JCF’s MissionDeveloping Jewish leaders and philanthropists re-mains central to the JCF’s mission, and as such the IGI model meets that objective. Always striving for programmatic excellence, however, JCF staff identified two main areas where IGI content could be strengthened to further the mission.Jewish ContentJCF staff learned to incorporate Jewish material deliberately into the general educational content being taught to community members in IGI grant rounds. Tightening this focus strengthens partici-pants’ understanding of the history and context of Jewish philanthropy, which by extension grounds them in the formative Jewish texts that lay the broad basis for the cultural value of giving back. This focus ties directly to the JCF core values, one of which is Tzedakah, or charity.Philanthropic Educational ContentEach IGI includes educational content on strategic philanthropy, including how to assess nonprofits, read Form 990 tax forms, create Requests for Pro-posals, evaluate proposals, reflect on performance metrics, and judge where it is possible to make the most outsize impact with grant funding. IGI rounds also include educational content on the issue area the committee will fund (such as distin-guishing between social enterprises and nonprof-its, in the case of the Israel/IVN grant round, or Staff has realized the need to step up efforts at focused philanthropic education for each new group. Participants are not necessarily versed in strategic philanthropy. Focusing on the educational content more closely, and formalizing a basic curriculum and centralized list of excellent expert speakers, will enable the JCF to hone in on this somewhat under-realized aspect of the process.THE FoundationReview 2014 Vol 6:3 21The Impact Grants InitiativeRESULTSlearning about the barriers of Jewish young adults to accessing community programs). Assessing grant rounds that have occurred in the last two years, however, staff has realized the need to step up efforts at focused philanthropic educa-tion for each new group. Participants are not necessarily versed in strategic philanthropy. Focus-ing on the educational content more closely, and formalizing a basic curriculum and centralized list of excellent expert speakers, will enable the JCF to hone in on this somewhat under-realized aspect of the process.Future DirectionsThree years into the IGI approach, the JCF’s com-munity and staff leadership has concluded that the model works. The IGI model reflects the JCF’s move toward more results-oriented grantmak-ing and better positions the organization to meet the challenges and opportunities of the future. It provides grants for a longer duration: typically, a three-year period in order to provide organiza-tions with the funding commitment needed to achieve their long-term goals. It empowers com-munity members by making them active partici-pants in the grantmaking process, enabling them to feel they have significantly contributed to their community and creating a more in-depth experi-ence with the JCF. Last, it requires focused results that support innovative thinking in both program delivery and leadership. Other funders, especially those philanthropies looking to heighten community participation in grantmaking efforts, can easily replicate the IGI approach. The flexibility and adaptability of the IGI model can also reflect the geographic focus areas of a grant round or the population subsets involved in the process. For instance, having successfully mapped the IGI model with funding social enterprises in Israel, the JCF has now begun to determine how to build a grant round that will engage community members in international grantmaking. Broader field adoption within the philanthropic sector – especially by those institu-tional actively engaging and cultivating donors – could significantly elevate communal philan-thropic practices and impact. ReferencesCrutchfield, L., & Grant, H. M. (2007). Forces for good: The six practices of high-impact nonprofits. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Goldseker, S., & Moody, M. (2013, May 19). Young wealthy donors bring taste for risk hands-on involvement to philanthropy [Web blog post]. Retrieved from http://www.nextgendonors.org/young-wealthy-donors-bring-taste-for-risk-hands-on-involvement-to-philanthropy/Hope Consulting. (2010). Money for good: The U.S. market for impact investments and charitable gifts from individual donors and investors. San Francisco: Author.Jewish Federations of North America. (2013). About us. Available online at http://www.jewishfederations.org/about-us.aspxJohnson Center for Philanthropy & 21/64. (2013). Next gen donors: Respecting legacy, revolutionizing philanthropy. Available online at http://www.gvsu.edu/cms3/assets/C6EE62EC-E0C1-54F2-D0212D5174A27DAF/nextgen_donor_brochure_6.pdfStannard-Stockton, S. (2009, July 31). High performance vs. high impact nonprofits [Web blog post]. Retrieved from http://www.tacticalphilanthropy.com/2009/07/high-performance-vs-high-impact-nonprofits/ Adin C. Miller, M.P.A., is senior director of community impact and innovations at the Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Adin C. Miller, Jewish Com-munity Federation, 121 Steuart Street, San Francisco, CA 94105 (email: adinm@sfjcf.org).Elisa Gollub, Ph.D., is grant writer and women’s fund direc-tor at the Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund.Ilana Kaufman, M.A., is program officer with the Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund. Adina Danzig Epelman, M.A., is program officer with the Jewish Community Federation and Endowment Fund.