ABSTRACT: 
One of the most creative theories advanced about legislative organization in recent years is Katz and Sala\u27s linkage of the development of committee property rights in the US House of Representatives to the introduction of the Australian ballot. Katz and Sala argue that the Australian ballot – a government-printed ballot cast in secret that replaced a party-produced ballot that was cast in public – gave members of the House an incentive to pursue personal constituency votes. This, in turn, led to the rise of committee property rights as members sought to keep their committee assignments from term to term because of the potential electoral benefits they derived from them. In this Note we use the state legislative committee membership dataset collected by Hamm and Hedlund and their colleagues to test whether committee property rights appeared in American state legislatures at roughly the same time as Katz and Sala find they emerged in the US House. State legislatures were, of course, exposed to the same electoral innovation at the same time. But, while in some ways state legislatures were much like Congress as organizations, in other ways they were very different. Our cross-sectional data and the variance in important institutional variables they provide allow us to test a critical proposition about the importance of membership stability rates in mediating the rise of committee property rights. We also go beyond Katz and Sala\u27s analysis by testing to see if differences in Australian ballot design (office column and party bloc) across the states influenced the behaviour of legislators in the way their theory suggests. 
 
PREDICTION: 
One of the most creative theories advanced about legislative organization in recent years is Katz and Sala's linkage of the development of committee property rights in the US House of Representatives to the introduction of the Australian ballot. Katz and Sala argue that the Australian ballot – a government-printed ballot cast in secret that replaced a party-produced ballot that was cast in public – gave members of the House an incentive to pursue personal constituency votes. This, in turn, led to the rise of committee property rights as members sought to keep their committee assignments from term to term because of the potential electoral benefits they derived from them. In this Note we use the state legislative committee membership dataset collected by Hamm and Hedlund and their colleagues to test whether committee property rights appeared in American state legislatures at roughly the same time as Katz and Sala find they emerged in the US House. State legislatures were, of course, exposed to the same electoral innovation at the same time. But, while in some ways state legislatures were much like Congress as organizations, in other ways they were very different. Our cross-sectional data and the variance in important institutional variables they provide allow us to test a critical proposition about the importance of membership stability rates in mediating the rise of committee property rights. We also go beyond Katz and Sala's analysis by testing to see if differences in Australian ballot design (office column and party bloc) across the states influenced the behaviour of legislators in the way their theory suggests. We find little evidence that committee property rights appeared in state legislatures at the same time as they took root in the US House of Representatives. The introduction of the Australian ballot in any of its forms was not related to committee retention rates in the states. Instead, committee membership retention rates were driven by chamber membership return rates, which in turn were largely a function of differences in legislative salaries. We argue that these findings have implications for our understanding of the forces leading to the rise of committee property rights in the House. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Boise State UniversityScholarWorksPolitical Science Faculty Publications andPresentations Department of Political Science1-1-2005Electoral Reforms, Membership Stability and theExistence of Committee Property Rights inAmerican State LegislaturesPeverill SquireUniversity of IowaKeith E. HammRice UniversityRonald D. HedlundNortheastern UniversityGary MoncriefBoise State UniversityThis document was originally published by Cambridge University Press in British Journal of Political Science. Copyright restrictions may apply. DOI:10.1017/S0007123405000086B.J.Pol.S. 35, 169–181 Copyright © 2004 Cambridge University PressDOI: 10.1017/S0007123405000086 Printed in the United KingdomNotes and CommentsElectoral Reforms, Membership Stability and the Existence ofCommittee Property Rights in American State LegislaturesPEVERILL SQUIRE, KEITH E. HAMM, RONALD D. HEDLUND A N DGARY F. MONCRIEF*One of the most creative theories advanced about legislative organization in recent years is Katzand Sala’s linkage of the development of committee property rights in the US House ofRepresentatives to the introduction of the Australian ballot.1 Katz and Sala argue that the Australianballot – a government-printed ballot cast in secret that replaced a party-produced ballot that wascast in public – gave members of the House an incentive to pursue personal constituency votes. This,in turn, led to the rise of committee property rights as members sought to keep their committeeassignments from term to term because of the potential electoral benefits they derived from them.In this Note we use the state legislative committee membership dataset collected by Hamm andHedlund and their colleagues to test whether committee property rights appeared in American statelegislatures at roughly the same time as Katz and Sala find they emerged in the US House.2 Statelegislatures were, of course, exposed to the same electoral innovation at the same time. But, whilein some ways state legislatures were much like Congress as organizations, in other ways they werevery different. Our cross-sectional data and the variance in important institutional variables theyprovide allow us to test a critical proposition about the importance of membership stability ratesin mediating the rise of committee property rights. We also go beyond Katz and Sala’s analysis bytesting to see if differences in Australian ballot design (office column and party bloc) across the statesinfluenced the behaviour of legislators in the way their theory suggests.We find little evidence that committee property rights appeared in state legislatures at the sametime as they took root in the US House of Representatives. The introduction of the Australian ballotin any of its forms was not related to committee retention rates in the states. Instead, committeemembership retention rates were driven by chamber membership return rates, which in turn werelargely a function of differences in legislative salaries. We argue that these findings haveimplications for our understanding of the forces leading to the rise of committee property rights inthe House.* The authors are in the Department of Political Science at the University of Iowa, Rice University, NortheasternUniversity and Boise State University, respectively. This is a substantially revised version of a paper deliveredat the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Atlanta, Ga., 2000.1 Jonathon N. Katz and Brian R. Sala, ‘Careerism, Committee Assignments, and the Electoral Connection’,American Political Science Review, 90 (1996), 21–33.2 State legislative committee data used in this Note were gathered through the support of two National ScienceFoundation Grants (SES-8411353 and SBR-9511518) and by Northeastern University and Rice University.Acquiring historical data such as these is difficult. Historical studies of state legislatures are rare. As a consequence,basic information on members and committees has generally not been collected. Moreover, no single facilityhouses all of the relevant information. Hamm and Hedlund acquired these data through visits to a variety of researchsites (e.g., Wisconsin Historical Society), state capitols and the Library of Congress. Data for some legislativechambers proved impossible to locate.170 Notes and CommentsT H E K A T Z A N D S A L A T H E O R Y A N D I T S A P P L I C A T I O N T O A M E R I C A N S T A T EL E G I S L A T U R E SKatz and Sala present a very clear explanation of their theory linking electoral reforms to the riseof committee property rights:This is our argument in a nutshell: The ballot changes raised the interest of members of Congress ininstitutional arrangements that would help them build personal reputations. Stable committeeassignments give members the leeway and confidence they need to become policy experts within theircommittee jurisdictions. Policy experts are better equipped to claim credit and are more noteworthyposition takers on policies within their committee’s jurisdiction than are randomly selected members ofCongress. Hence, a ‘norm’ of reappointing incumbents to their same committees would be consistentwith a widespread desire for building a personal reputation.3Could this theory apply to state legislatures as well? At the time of the Australian ballot reform,state legislatures were important institutions in American political life. Politics at the state levelmattered as much, or perhaps even more, to the average voter than did politics at the national level.4This was true because state legislatures made most of the policy decisions that influenced daily life.In addition, at this time state legislators elected US senators and many state legislative conteststurned on the question of which senate candidate the state legislative candidate would support.5Newspaper coverage provides some evidence of the relative importance of state legislativeelections. In 1908, for example, the New York Times printed thirty-two stories on US Housecampaigns in New York, eighteen stories on races for the lower house of the New York statelegislature, and thirty-nine stories on New York state senate elections.6 All of this gives us somereason to think that state legislators might have had the same electoral incentives to claim committeeproperty rights as members of Congress did.But is it really fair to compare the US House with state legislatures as legislative organizationsat the beginning of the twentieth century? One the one hand, there were important similarities.Members of both institutions operated in the same electoral context, facing the same voters in thesame elections backed by the same political parties. In addition, standing committee systems existedin both sorts of legislatures and those systems were similarly stable. During the time period examinedby Katz and Sala the standing committee system in the US House was reasonably steady, with afew committees being added each session.7 The same was true of standing committees in statelegislatures. Over 96 per cent of the committees in the state legislative chambers we examine in thisstudy carried over from one session to the next. So state legislators had the same stable committeestructures in which they could assert committee property rights, as did their counterparts in the USHouse.83 Katz and Sala, ‘Careerism, Committee Assignments, and the Electoral Connection’, p. 23.4 Ballard C. Campbell, Representative Democracy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990),p. 2; and Paul S. Reinsch, American Legislatures and Legislative Methods (New York: The Century Co., 1907),p. 127.5 William H. Riker, ‘The Senate and American Federalism’, American Political Science Review, 49 (1955),452–69, pp. 463–5.6 These data were collected from The New York Times Index for the Published News of 1908 (New York: NewYork Times, 1976). The relative importance of state politics is further demonstrated by the fact that the New YorkTimes ran 335 stories on the race for governor in 1908.7 Christopher J. Deering, and Steven S. Smith, Committees in Congress, 3rd edn (Washington, D.C.: CQ Press,1997), p. 27; George B. Galloway, ‘Development of the Committee System in the House of Representatives’,American Historical Review, 65 (1959), 17–30, pp. 17–21; and George B. Galloway, A History of the House ofRepresentatives (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1961), pp. 64–7.8 Concerns may be raised that the adoption of the Australian ballot was exogenous to the US House but itwas endogenous to state legislatures. The fear is that state legislators may have enacted the reforms for their ownstrategic electoral reasons, thus accounting for any differences in the appearance of committee property betweenthe House and state legislatures. We do not find this concern to be compelling for two reasons. First, the historicalrecord of the battles over the Australian ballot in the states shows that there was a range of motives on the partNotes and Comments 171On the other hand, there were some significant differences between Congress and the statelegislatures. Most notably, although Congress may not have been the career body it is now, itsmembers had greater salary incentives to continue service than any state legislators. Thus, Congressenjoyed greater membership stability than most state legislatures. But it is critical for our study tonote that financial incentives and membership stability rates varied greatly among the statelegislatures. This variation provides us the statistical leverage needed to investigate the crucialrelationship between chamber membership stability rates and committee retention rates.C O M M I T T E E M E M B E R S H I P R E T E N T I O N R A T E S A C R O S S S T A T E L E G I S L A T I V EC H A M B E R SThe crux of Katz and Sala’s test of their theory is the change or lack thereof in committeemembership retention rates from session to session. They note that the major increase in US Housecommittee reappointments occurred in the 1890s. Their committee membership retention data show‘Fewer than half of all assignments held by returning members were retained by those members inthe next House during 1877–90, whereas nearly three-quarters were retained by incumbents between1896 and 1910.’9 This latter time period is after the introduction of the Australian ballot in moststates.Using state legislative committee membership data compiled by Hamm and Hedlund and theircolleagues, we can look to see if there is any evidence of comparable retention rates among statelegislatures.10 The data we have are for sixty-nine state legislative chambers in the 1907 to 1909(F’note continued)of its backers. See Peter H. Argersinger, ‘ “A Place on the Ballot”: Fusion Politics and Antifusion Laws’, AmericanHistorical Review, 85 (1980), 287–306; Peter H. Argersinger, ‘Regulating Democracy: Election Laws and DakotaPolitics, 1889–1902’, Midwest Review, 5 (1983), 1–20; Charles D. Farris, ‘The Re-Enfranchisement of Negroesin Florida’, Journal of Negro History, 39 (1954), 259–83; William H. Glasson, ‘The Australian Ballot – Why NorthCarolina Should Adopt It’, South Atlantic Review, 8 (1909), 132–42, pp. 140–1; and J. Morgan Kousser,‘Post-Reconstruction Suffrage Restrictions in Tennessee: A New Look at the V. O. Key Thesis’, Political ScienceQuarterly, 88 (1973), 655–83, pp. 665–8. Moreover, the reform enjoyed bipartisan support in most states. SeePhilip Loring Allen, ‘The Multifarious Australian Ballot’, North American Review, 191 (1910), 602–11; LionelE. Fredman, The Australian Ballot: The Story of an American Reform (East Lansing: Michigan State UniversityPress, 1968), p. 32; and Erik Falk Petersen, ‘The Struggle for the Australian Ballot in California’, CaliforniaHistorical Quarterly, 51 (1972), 227–43, p. 239. Moreover, as Reynolds and McCormick observed, ‘TheAustralian ballot … won support from groups having different, even contradictory, goals and expectations. Noneof them anticipated the political patterns that finally emerged from “reform,” and none was fully satisfied withvoting behavior in the new era.’ See John F. Reynolds and Richard L. McCormick, ‘Outlawing “Treachery”: SplitTickets and Ballot Laws in New York and New Jersey, 1880–1910’, Journal of American History, 72 (1986),835–58, p. 838. While state legislators probably contemplated the reform’s potential impact on their politicalparty’s prospects, there is no evidence that they anticipated that it would have any consequences on the internalworkings of their legislature. Secondly, committee property rights in the US House did not appear immediatelyafter the adoption of the Australian ballot by the states. There was a time lag as members presumably figured outhow to adapt to the reform. Moreover, the Australian ballot was adopted in different states in different years. Thetime lag and different years of adoption greatly muddle the endogenous/exogenous picture because of substantialmembership turnover in both US House and state legislatures. The state legislatures examined here wereoverwhelmingly composed of members who were not in those institutions when the Australian ballot reform wasinstituted. So it does not seem to us that questions about whether the reforms were endogenous or exogenous arerelevant to this study.9 Katz and Sala, ‘Careerism, Committee Assignments, and the Electoral Connection’, p. 24.10 See Keith E. Hamm and Ronald D. Hedlund, ‘The Development of Committee Specialization in StateLegislatures’ (paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Chicago,1995); Keith E. Hamm and Ronald D. Hedlund, ‘Tapping the Talents of Legislators: Constructing Committeesin State Legislatures During the Twentieth Century’ (paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the SouthernPolitical Science Association, 1995); Keith E. Hamm, Ronald D. Hedlund and Stephanie Post, ‘CommitteeSpecialization in State Legislatures During the Twentieth Century: Do Legislatures Tap the Talents of Their172 Notes and Commentstime period (occasionally 1906 to 1908 where appropriate because of election cycles), a point atwhich the ballot reform had been in place in most states for well over a decade and committeeproperty rights were entrenched in the US House.The overall mean committee membership retention rates for returning legislators in sixty-sevenof those state legislative chambers is 44.3 per cent, breaking down to 49.6 per cent for the statesenates and 39.2 per cent for the lower houses.11 The range of committee retention rates is huge,from 12.5 per cent retention in the Georgia state senate to 98.2 per cent retention in the Virginiastate senate. In only eight of the sixty-seven chambers, however, did the committee retention ratemeet or exceed the 75 per cent figure for the US House. And the high rates for these eight chambersare somewhat deceptive; four of them are state senates either with a four-year term or where onlya portion of the legislators stood for re-election in 1908. More significantly, in only nineteen of thesixty-seven cases is the committee reappointment rate equal to or greater than 50 per cent. Thus,in 1907–09, at a time by which committee property rights were firmly established in the US House,most state legislatures still had committee retention rates around the much lower figure posted bythe US House before the Australian ballot reform was introduced.E L E C T O R A L R E F O R M A N D S T A T E L E G I S L A T I V E C O M M I T T E E R E T E N T I O N R A T E SThe critical relationship posited by Katz and Sala is between the introduction of the Australian ballotand committee retention rates. But in their analysis, Katz and Sala treat the Australian ballot as beinguniform across the states that adopted it. There were, however, variations in the design of theAustralian ballot that have significant implications for their theory. When a state took responsibilityfor producing an official ballot, it had to decide how names, contests and party labels on the ballotwould be organized. Most, but not all, of the first states that adopted the Australian ballot opted forthe office bloc design, also known as the Massachusetts or blanket ballot. The office bloc ballot isdesigned so that the names of candidates are grouped together under the title of the office they arecontesting. Most of the states that adopted the reform in later years organized their ballots usingparty columns, which came to be called the Indiana ballot.12 Party column ballots place the namesof candidates for various offices in a column under their respective party name.13 Ultimately, theparty column ballot became much more popular than the office bloc ballot across the states becauseit was more like the old party produced ballots and thus favoured by party organizations.Politicians and knowledgeable observers at the time clearly understood the electoral conse-quences of the Australian ballot’s different variations.14 Ludington, for example, observed,Since the chief object of the ‘party column’ ballot is to facilitate the voting of a ‘straight ticket,’ while(F’note continued)Members?’ (paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Washington,D.C., 1997); and Ronald D. Hedlund and Keith E. Hamm, ‘The Evolution and Role of Committee Specializationin the Legislative Process: Developing and Testing a Cross-System Model’ (paper presented at the XVth WorldCongress, International Political Science Association, Berlin, 1994).11 No legislator was re-elected to the Vermont Senate and only one was re-elected to the Delaware House.Committee retention rates are meaningless for these chambers and were not calculated. The difference betweenthe chambers approaches statistical significance, p0.055 two-tailed. A table giving the retention rate in eachchamber for which we have data is available from the authors.12 Arthur Ludington, ‘Present Status of Ballot Laws in the United States’, American Political Science Review,3 (1909), 252–61, p. 260.13 Once chosen, a state’s ballot design was not necessarily fixed. Indeed, by 1905 six states that first employedthe office bloc ballot had switched to the party column design, while four states had changed to the office blocballot from the party column ballot. Nebraska went back and forth, first adopting the office bloc ballot in 1891,then switching to the party column ballot in 1897, and returning to an office bloc ballot in 1899. See Ludington,‘Present Status of Ballot Laws in the United States’, p. 260; and Arthur Ludington, American Ballot Laws,1880–1910 (Albany: University of the State of New York, 1911).14 See, for example, Allen, ‘The Multifarious Australian Ballot’.Notes and Comments 173that of the ‘Massachusetts’ ballot is to make the voters stop and think about each office in turn, it is naturalthat most of the States which have the former type of ballot provide specifically for the ‘straight ticket’voting and that most of those which have the latter do not.15Analysis of voting behaviour data from 1890 to 1908 confirms that ballot type differences influencedvoting behaviour.16 This difference is crucial to the Katz and Sala theory because only the officebloc ballot easily allowed for split-ticket voting, thus giving legislators substantial incentive topursue committee property rights as a way of distinguishing themselves before the voters. Incontrast, party column ballots, which made it much more difficult to split-ticket vote, gave legislatorslittle reason to differentiate themselves from their parties and each other.We know what ballot type was used in each state during the 1907 to 1909 period from datacompiled at the time by Allen and Ludington.17 A party column ballot was used in twenty-five states.Another thirteen states used office bloc ballots. The other reform states used party strip ballots,considered by Allen a variation on the party column ballot because of the difficulty of voting forcandidates from different parties with them.18 We categorize them as party column ballots. Theeffect that Katz and Sala were looking to find should be found in states with office column ballots,not those with party column ballots.19As of 1909, five states had yet to adopt the Australian ballot in any form.20 Of these states, four(Connecticut, Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina) are in our study and one (New Jersey)is not included because of a lack of committee retention data. If the Australian ballot produced theeffect suggested by Katz and Sala’s theory, the committee retention rate for the legislative chambersin reform states, particularly those using office column ballots, should be significantly higher thanthat found in the non-reform states.2115 Ludington, ‘Present Status of Ballot Laws in the United States’, p. 259.16 Philip Loring Allen, ‘Ballot Laws and Their Workings’, Political Science Quarterly, 21 (1906), 38–58; andJerrold G. Rusk, ‘The Effect of the Australian Ballot Reform on Split Ticket Voting: 1876–1908’, AmericanPolitical Science Review, 64 (1970), 1220–38, p. 1235.17 Allen, ‘Ballot Laws and Their Workings’, and Ludington, American Ballot Laws, 1880–1910.18 Allen, ‘Ballot Laws and Their Workings’, p. 42.19 Katz and Sala, ‘Careerism, Committee Assignments, and the Electoral Connection’, p. 24, make a passingreference to this important difference, ‘A system that allows voters to evaluate and vote for candidates on anoffice-by-office, case-by-case basis encourages incumbents to invest more in their personal reputations than whenvoters cannot discriminate between individual candidates on a partisan slate.’ They did not, however, distinguishbetween the two variations of the Australian ballot in their analysis.20 It is widely agreed which states had not adopted the Australian ballot at this point in time. But, the ballotdesigns used in the non-reform states were not all the same. See Ludington, ‘Present Status of Ballot Laws in theUnited States’, pp. 255–6.21 The late adopting states did not systematically differ from the states that adopted the Australian ballot. Alleventually adopted the reform: Connecticut in 1909, New Jersey in 1911, Georgia in 1922, North Carolina in 1929and South Carolina in 1950. See Spencer D. Albright, The American Ballot (Washington, D.C.: American Councilon Public Affairs, 1942), pp. 28–9; V. O. Key Jr, Politics, Parties, and Pressure Groups, 5th edn (New York:Crowell, 1964), p. 640; and Arthur Ludington, ‘Ballot Laws’, American Political Science Review, 4 (1910), 63–8,pp. 63–4. One plausible difference between the non-reform states and the other states might be the nature of theirparty systems. There is no evidence, however, that the party systems across these five states were similar to eachother and different from the rest of the states. See Paul T. David, Party Strength in the United States, 1872–1970(Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1972), pp. 41–54; and J. Morgan Kousser, The Shaping of SouthernPolitics: Suffrage Restrictions and the Establishment of the One-Party South (New Haven, Conn.: Yale UniversityPress, 1974), pp. 182–3, at p. 211. In addition, Merriam’s study of a number of state party central committeesfound nothing out of the ordinary about the party committees in Connecticut and North Carolina. See C. E.Merriam, ‘State Central Committees’, Political Science Quarterly, 19 (1904), 224–33. And, of course, partyorganizations controlled nominations in almost every state during the time examined here, including all fivenon-reform states. See C. Edward Merriam, Primary Elections (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1908);Charles Edward Merriam and Louise Overacker, Primary Elections (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1928),pp. 61–2.174 Notes and CommentsOther institutional differences among state legislative chambers might have influenced committeeretention rates, as well. It is conceivable that committee retention rates are related to legislativechamber and membership size. The former is strongly suggested by the mean retention ratedifferences between upper and lower chambers reported earlier. The difference between chambersis likely to be the product of different term lengths – most, but not all, state senates had four-yearterms, while most, but not all, lower houses had two-year terms.22 Membership size is a relatedvariable. Most state senates have half the number of members of the lower houses, almost all ofthe rest a third or fewer. If we assume that for all intents and purposes state senates and lower housesface the same workload, senates have far fewer members to handle it, meaning, of course, that eachmember has to shoulder a heavier load. This typically translates into more committee assignmentsper member compared to the lower house. Working from the relationship found in Congress, asmembers take on more committee assignments the value of each assignment declines. (This is, ofcourse, the traditional view of the relative value of committee assignments to US representativesand senators.) Thus, we might hypothesize that as the size of a legislature increases, the value ofeach committee assignment increases because there are fewer of them per member. As the valueof an assignment increases, the desire to retain the appointment may also increase. Indeed, Basehartreports some evidence that committee membership stability in state legislatures increases with thesize of the legislative chamber.23A series of regression equations with committee retention rate as the dependent variable and ballotreform types and other variables as controls are presented in Table 1. Most notably, all of thecoefficients for the Australian ballot types are substantively small and statistically insignificant.T A B L E 1 Electoral Reforms and Committee Retention RatesVariable Equation 1 Equation 2 Equation 3Legislative chamber† 14.005* 14.140* 14.076*(5.980) (6.136) (6.089)Chamber membership size 0.045 0.048 0.047(0.047) (0.048) (0.047)No Australian ballot reform‡ 2.089 7.928 3.157(7.396) (15.517) (7.670)Office bloc ballot§ 8.500(14.639)Party column ballot 5.047(14.237)Party column and party strip†† 3.700(5.530)Constant 61.609*** 55.721*** 64.182***(7.798) (15.700) (8.833)Adjusted R2 0.05 0.02 0.03N 67 66 66*p0.05, **p0.01, ***p0.001, two-tailed tests.†Dummy variable, 1 lower chamber, 0 senate.‡Dummy variable, 1 legislative chambers in non-reform states (Connecticut, Georgia, NorthCarolina, South Carolina), 0ballot reform states.§Dummy variable, 1 state with office bloc ballot, 0 state with other ballot design.Dummy variable, 1 state with party column ballot, 0 state with other ballot design.††Dummy variable, 1 state with party column or party strip ballot, 0 state with office blocballot.22 A few state legislatures at this point in time had one-year terms for one or both houses, while Alabama andMississippi had four-year terms for both houses.23 Hubert Harry Basehart, ‘The Effect of Membership Stability on Continuity and Experience in U.S. StateLegislative Chambers’, Legislative Studies Quarterly, 5 (1980), 31–68.Notes and Comments 175Moreover, retention rates in the eight chambers in states without the ballot reform are not statisticallydifferent from those that adopted the reform. Only the coefficient for legislative chamber isstatistically significant, with committee retention rates being 14 per cent higher in state senates thanin lower houses.24 Clearly, the introduction of the Australian ballot did not lead to committeeproperty rights emerging in state legislatures.M E M B E R S H I P S T A B I L I T Y A N D C O M M I T T E E R E T E N T I O N R A T E SWhy did committee property rights fail to appear in state legislatures following the introduction ofthe Australian ballot as they had in the US House? One important difference between the Houseand state legislatures in the first decade of the twentieth century was membership stability. It seemsreasonable to expect that committee retention rates vary with the membership stability. Indeed, theincreasing retention rates in the US House reported in Katz and Sala appear to track well with thatbody’s increasing membership stability. This is not surprising because as turnover decreases andmembers begin to accumulate seniority there is incentive for them to increase the certainty of howtheir careers within the legislature will unfold, one aspect of which might be the assertion ofcommittee property rights.25 In less stable institutions members have fewer reasons to retainassignments from session to session because the continual departure of members opens otheropportunities.26The rate at which members returned to their legislative chambers varied dramatically across thestates and between state legislatures and the US House at this time. In 1909, 23 per cent of US Housemembers were starting their first term, a much lower figure than in almost any state legislative24 Katz and Sala tested their theory using a longitudinal design in one legislative chamber. Given the differencesin the Australian ballot design across the states and the significant variation in other key independent variables,particularly percentage of members returning to the chamber, we opted for a test using cross-sectional data. Wedoubt that time-series data for state legislative chambers during this period would document a rise of committeeproperty rights for two reasons. First, in 73 per cent of the legislative chambers we studied committee retentionrates were well under 50 per cent, meaning that legislators were more likely to take on new committee assignmentsthan to keep old ones. Thus, any movement towards committee property rights in these chambers prior to 1909would necessarily have been a very weak one at best. Secondly, even decades after the adoption of the Australianballot the evidence for committee property rights in state legislatures is thin. Basehart, ‘The Effect of MembershipStability on Continuity and Experience in U.S. State Legislative Chambers’, for example, found little membershipcontinuity on committees in fifteen state legislative chambers between 1963 and 1977. Squire’s study of three statelegislative chambers in the late 1970s found low committee retention rates in the California and Connecticut lowerhouses. Only the New York Assembly, which enjoyed an unusually high chamber membership retention rate, hadcommittee retention rates similar to those in the US House. See Peverill Squire, ‘Member Career Opportunitiesand the Internal Organization of Legislatures’, Journal of Politics, 50 (1988), 726–44, p. 739.25 See Nelson W. Polsby, ‘The Institutionalization of the U.S. House of Representatives’, American PoliticalScience Review, 62 (1968), 144–68; Squire ‘Member Career Opportunities and the Internal Organization ofLegislatures’, and Peverill Squire, ‘The Theory of Legislative Institutionalization and the California Assembly’,Journal of Politics, 54 (1992), 1026–54.26 Note that the concern with committee retention rates is driven by an assumption that committees play animportant role in the legislative process. While this assumption has long been true in the US House, it has notalways been the case in some state legislative chambers. During the first decade of the twentieth century, forexample, rules in both houses in Massachusetts, the senate in Rhode Island, and the lower houses in Maine,Vermont and New Hampshire required that every bill referred to committee be reported back to the full chamber.See Reinsch, American Legislatures and Legislative Methods, p. 169. Where committees exercise no gate keepingpower we would assume there would be little incentive to continue membership on any particular committee. Thisassumption may be drawn into question, however, by the fact that the committee retention rate in the Rhode IslandSenate was comparable to that of the US House at the time, while the figure for the lower houses in Maine andNew Hampshire exceeded the mean for all lower chambers. Only in the Vermont House did very few committeemembers retain their assignments.176 Notes and Commentsbody.27 Among the chambers in our study first-term members constituted a mean of 75 per cent ofthe membership of state lower houses and 54 per cent of state senates in 1909.28 The variation acrossthe states was phenomenal. Every member of the Vermont state Senate was new in 1909; a figureapproached in the Georgia state Senate and the Delaware House of Representatives. Indeed, of thesixty-nine state legislative chambers for which we have data, fifty of them had at least 50 per centnew members in 1909, in twenty-five chambers 75 per cent or more of their members were new.Thus, in 1909 most state legislatures had far less stable memberships than did the US House.We would, however, argue that the difference between the US House and state legislatures at thispoint in time is not the fundamental distinction between a careerist body and non-careerist bodies.There is considerable evidence that the House was not yet a career institution. In 1907, 40 per centof US representatives were in only their first or second term and 77 per cent had served five or fewerterms.29 Moreover, 63 per cent of all members of the House who served between 1901 and 1910entered the body during that decade, the median career length during this time period was five years,and the median age at which members departed was 51 years old.30 Those descriptions do not fitthe profile of a career body. Indeed, House members at the beginning of the twentieth century didnot think of themselves as careerists; they continued to pursue outside occupations because theydid not see long-term service as financially viable.31Thus, the House and state legislative chambers at this time should be thought of as beingdistributed along a single membership stability continuum. The difference is that the House had ahigher percentage of members returning than most state legislative chambers. But even thatobservation may not imply that the interests and calculations of members of the House and statelegislatures were completely dissimilar. When Bianco, Spence and Wilkerson studied the electoraleffects of the Compensation Act of 1816, they noted, ‘It is one thing to argue that a congressionalcareer was less attractive or less feasible in an earlier time than it is today, but another to concludethat members of the early Congress were unconcerned about the electoral consequences of theirbehavior.’32 They demonstrated that voters held members accountable for their vote, even in thehigh turnover House of the early nineteenth century and that this influenced member behaviour. Wethink that argument can be extended to state legislators at the beginning of the twentieth century.We would assume that most state legislators were concerned about the electoral consequences oftheir behaviour, because all it takes to induce such concerns is a single future election. And thereis evidence that by the first decade of the twentieth century many state legislators were seekingre-election and that average years of service in a number of state legislative chambers was beginningto increase.33 Even if state legislative careers were only to be two terms, rather than the four- orfive-term House career, the desire to win re-election is the same. Thus, we should expect as27 Morris P. Fiorina, David W. Rohde and Peter Wissel, ‘Historical Change in House Turnover’, in NormanJ. Ornstein, ed., Congress in Change (New York: Praeger, 1975), pp. 24–49, at p. 30.28 The percentage of first-term members in seven of the chambers in non-reform states was very similar to thepercentage of first-term members found in the vast majority of other chambers. The exception was the SouthCarolina senate, which had fewer new members than most, but not all, of the other chambers. A table giving thepercentage of first-term members in each chamber is available from the authors.29 T. Richard Witmer, ‘The Aging of the House’, Political Science Quarterly, 79 (1964), 526–41, p. 538.30 Allan G. Bogue, Jerome M. Clubb, Carroll R. McKibben and Santa A. Traugott, ‘Members of the Houseof Representatives and the Process of Modernization, 1789–1960’, Journal of American History, 63 (1976),275–302, p. 291.31 Louis Fisher, ‘History of Pay Adjustments for Members of Congress’, in Robert W. Hartman and ArnoldR. Weber, eds, The Rewards of Public Service (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1980), pp. 25–52,at pp. 34–5; and Woodrow Wilson, Constitutional Government in the United States (New York: ColumbiaUniversity Press, 1980), p. 129.32 William Bianco, David B. Spence and John D. Wilkerson, ‘The Electoral Connection in the Early Congress:The Case of the Compensation Act of 1816’, American Journal of Political Science, 40 (1996), 145–71, p. 147.33 David Ray, ‘Membership Stability in Three State Legislatures: 1893–1969’, American Political ScienceReview, 68 (1974), 106–12, p. 111; and David Ray, ‘Voluntary Retirement and Electoral Defeat in Eight StateLegislatures’, Journal of Politics, 38 (1976), 426–33, pp. 430–1.Notes and Comments 177T A B L E 2 Membership Stability, Electoral Reforms and Committee Retention RatesVariable Equation 1 Equation 2 Equation 3 Equation 4 Equation 5Percentage of members 0.531*** 0.545*** 0.531*** 0.486*** 0.391**returning (0.100) (0.104) (0.103) (0.104) (0.124)Legislative chamber† 3.202 2.924 3.050 4.339 3.078(5.404) (5.533) (5.539) (5.407) (5.488)Chamber membership 0.053 0.055 0.053 0.058 0.049size (0.039) (0.040) (0.040) (0.039) (0.040)No Australian ballot 9.006 21.370 9.043 3.614reform‡ (6.325) (13.162) (6.539) (10.582)Office bloc ballot§ 12.561 12.617(12.206) (8.688)Party column ballot 12.879(11.939)Party column and party 0.401strip†† (4.685)No Australian ballot 0.483reform Percentage of (0.326)members returningOffice bloc ballot Percentage of 0.299members returning (0.186)Constant 24.622* 11.256 24.752* 27.674** 31.035**(9.561) (15.561) (10.649) (9.693) (9.562)Adjusted R2 0.33 0.32 0.32 0.34 0.33N 67 66 66 67 66*p0.05, **p0.01, ***p0.001, two-tailed tests.†Dummy variable, 1 lower chamber, 0 senate.‡Dummy variable, 1 legislative chambers in non-reform states (Connecticut, Georgia, North Carolina,South Carolina), 0ballot reform states.§Dummy variable, 1 state with office bloc ballot, 0 state with other ballot design.Dummy variable, 1 state with party column ballot, 0 state with other ballot design.††Dummy variable, 1 state with party column or party strip ballot, 0 state with office bloc ballot.legislative chambers approach the membership stability rates of the House they should exhibitsimilar committee retention rates.34In the first three columns in Table 2, we present regression equations with committee retentionrate as the dependent variable and variables for the percentage of legislative members returning tothe chamber, the various versions of the Australian ballot reform and the structural variablesemployed in Table 1. These equations produce one positive finding: committee retention ratesincrease significantly – both statistically and substantively – as the percentage of members whoreturn to the chamber increases. The size of the coefficients across the equations is impressive. A25 percentage point increase in the membership return rate to the chamber translates into an increasein committee retention rates of more than 13 percentage points. This finding is consistent with theresults of an earlier study that examined committee specialization in state legislatures over thetwentieth century.3534 Katz and Sala, ‘Careerism, Committee Assignments, and the Electoral Connection’, p. 29, include amembership turnover variable in their model.35 According to Hedlund and Hamm, ‘The Evolution and Role of Committee Specialization in the LegislativeProcess’, p. 21, ‘Without doubt, the major driving force in terms of the various measures of individual legislatorspecialization is the amount of stability among the legislative membership. In fact, it accounts for almost 50 percent of all of the significant relationships. As chamber membership stability increases, the average number ofcommittee assignments, the level of committee experience, and the level of committee carryover increase.’178 Notes and CommentsWith one exception, the coefficients for the various ballot reform variables in Table 2 are in thewrong direction. Only the dummy variable for party column and party strip ballot states takes thecorrect sign. All of the reform coefficients, however, fail to achieve statistical significance, althoughthe Australian ballot coefficient in Equation 2 just misses achieving statistical significance (but inthe wrong direction) at the most generous limits (p0.110, two-tailed). Thus, from a cross-sectionallook at over sixty-five legislative chambers, it seems clear that committee retention rates wereinfluenced by the overall stability of legislative membership, not by the introduction of any versionof the Australian ballot reform.36In their analysis Katz and Sala find that House members were more likely to give up committeeassignments in their first term or two than they were over the next several terms in office.37 Thuscommittee property rights only fully revealed themselves for those members who served more thana few terms. In many states, however, relatively few legislators at this time were apt to serve formore than a term or two. It is hard to see how similar committee property rights could materializein organizations where not many members were in office long enough to assert them.But do they appear where members are more likely to return (and, thus, more like the US House)and where Australian ballot reform in some version occurred? We test this proposition in Equations4 and 5 of Table 2. We cause both the Australian ballot reform dummy variable and the office blocballot dummy variable to interact with the percentage of members returning to the chamber variable.In Equation 4 we assess the interaction between the absence of the Australian ballot and memberreturn rates. Overall, the variables behave much the same as in Equation 1. The main difference isthat the Australian ballot dummy variable takes the anticipated negative sign, although it continuesto be far from achieving statistical significance. The interaction term also fails to achieve statisticalsignificance, although it comes reasonably close (p0.144). The coefficient, however, suggests thatin the absence of the Australian ballot, committee retention rates increase with membership retentionrates. The implication is, of course, that membership return rates, not ballot reform, drive committeeretention rates.As we argued earlier, however, it is in office bloc states – not the more inclusive category ofAustralian ballot reform states – where the effect of electoral reforms on committee retention ratesshould be most clearly manifested. In Equation 5 the coefficient for the office bloc variable takesa negative sign and approaches statistical significance (p0.152). The size of the coefficient issubstantial, suggesting an almost 13 point decrease in committee retention rates in office bloc ballotstates, contrary to what the Katz and Sala theory would suggest. But the interaction term providestheir theory some salvation. The positive coefficient, which also approaches statistical significance(p0.115), shows that as more members return to a chamber in office bloc ballot states, committeeretention rates increase. The size of the effect is not trivial; for every 10 percentage point increasein members returning to the chamber in office bloc ballot states, committee retention rates increaseby almost 3 percentage points.Overall, we find little evidence to support the idea that the introduction of the Australian ballot36 It may seem reasonable to charge the equations in Table 2 with being misspecified, because we failed tocontrol for any effects of partisan change. One defence we can offer is that the period being studied experiencedremarkable political stability. The mean percentage change in party membership between 1907 and 1909 for thefifty-seven chambers for which we have data was 5.5 per cent; the median was 3 per cent. These low levels ofpartisan change are not surprising. The South was, of course, a one-party region, particularly at the state legislativelevel. Nationally, in presidential contests only three states changed the party they supported between the 1904 and1908 elections. And between the 1907 and 1909 elections, the Republicans lost only two seats in the US Senateand three seats in the US House. It strikes us as highly unlikely that any measure of partisan change will materiallyalter our results. Another potential concern might be that there were different numbers of ‘desirable’ committeesin state legislatures compared with Congress. We do not find this concern to be compelling. The most importantcommittees across American legislatures tend to be a constant set: a tax policy committee, an appropriationscommittee, some variant on a rules committee, and often a judiciary committee. Thus, we think we are on safeground in suggesting that the number of desirable committees is roughly the same across legislative chambers.37 Katz and Sala, ‘Careerism, Committee Assignments, and the Electoral Connection’, p. 30.Notes and Comments 179or other ballot reforms resulted in a demand for committee property rights at the state legislativelevel. Instead, we find a strong relationship between membership stability and committee retentionrates. Indeed, the weight of our analysis suggests that committee retention rates increase withchamber return rates, regardless of the Australian ballot version. A final question to address, then,is why did retention rates vary between Congress and the states, and why did they vary betweenthe states?E X P L A I N I N G M E M B E R S H I P S T A B I L I T YTheoretically, as a legislature professionalizes it may also be ripe for institutionalization.38 The lineof reasoning is that as a legislature professionalizes its members have incentives to adopt the sortsof routines and rules that Polsby and Price found developed over time in the US House.39 We wouldanticipate that the more professionalized the legislature, the more likely that its members will seevalue in keeping their committee assignments session after session for the reasons offered by Katzand Sala. We use annual salary in 1910 as our measure of legislative professionalization.40There were, of course, some significant differences between Congress and state legislatures interms of the incentives offered for service. In 1910 members of Congress earned far higher salariesthan did their state counterparts. Congressional salaries had been raised to $7,500 in 1909 from$5,000.41 State legislative salaries varied considerably, although even the best-paid – New Yorklegislators earned $1,500 annually – received far less than members of Congress.42 A 1908 stateconstitutional amendment raised the pay for California legislators from $8 a day to $1,000 for eachregular biennial session, the rate given in Illinois, and Ohio.43 Not all annual or biennial salarieswere as generous. Members of the New Hampshire legislature, for example, earned $200 a biennialsession. (That rate was established by an 1889 amendment to the state constitution and has not beenchanged since.) The average salary in the states that paid them was about $500 annually.44 Themajority of state legislators, however, were paid by the day while the legislature was in session. InColorado, the rate was $7 per day; in Idaho it was $5 per day. Bryce reports that $5 a day was theaverage in states paying ‘per diems’.45 Thus, in terms of financial incentives, some state legislatureswere more like Congress than were other state legislatures.How does professionalization influence chamber return rates? A simple model examiningmembership stability is presented in Table 3. Here we use chamber return rates as the dependentvariable and annual salary and ballot reforms as the independent variables. We also control forlegislative chamber because of the typically different terms of office and membership sizes. Whilethere may be important variables excluded from these regressions, the results appear to point in an38 Squire, ‘The Theory of Legislative Institutionalization and the California Assembly.’39 Polsby, ‘The Institutionalization of the US House of Representatives’, and H. Douglas Price, ‘Congress andthe Evolution of Legislative “Professionalism” ’, in Ornstein, ed., Congress in Change, pp. 2–23.40 State legislative salary data were calculated from the Official Manual for the Use of Courts, State, and CountyOfficials, and General Assembly of Kentucky (Frankfort: Frankfort Printing Co., 1910), p. 147. In addition weconsulted James D. Driscoll, California’s Legislature (Sacramento: Center for California Studies, 1986), p. 79;James Bryce, The American Commonwealth, rev. edn (New York: Macmillan, 1906), p. 336, and legislative staffin several states. We also entered state population as a proxy for professionalization, based on the consistentfindings of a strong positive association between population size and level of legislative professionalization. See,for example, Christopher Z. Mooney, ‘Citizens, Structures, and Sister States: Influences on State LegislativeProfessionalism’, Legislative Studies Quarterly, 20 (1995), 47–67; and James D. King, ‘Changes inProfessionalism in US State Legislatures’, Legislative Studies Quarterly, 25 (2000), 327–43. The results for thatvariable were virtually the same, both substantively and statistically, as for the annual salary variable.41 Fisher, ‘History of Pay Adjustments for Members of Congress’, p. 40–1.42 Bryce, The American Commonwealth, p. 336.43 Driscoll, California’s Legislature, p. 79.44 Bryce, The American Commonwealth, p. 336.45 Bryce, The American Commonwealth, pp. 336–7.180 Notes and CommentsT A B L E 3 Models of Chamber Return RatesVariable Equation 1 Equation 2 Equation 3Legislative chamber† 20.644*** 20.971*** 20.971***(4.788) (4.851) (4.862)Annual salary‡ 0.043** 0.041* 0.041*(0.016) (0.017) (0.017)No Australian ballot reform in state§ 9.916 24.164 8.491(7.529) (15.815) (7.752)Office bloc ballot 11.122(14.994)Party column ballot†† 16.468(14.495)Party column and party strip‡‡ 4.589(5.811)Constant 58.592*** 73.659*** 62.627***(8.411) (16.171) (9.803)Adjusted R2 0.27 0.28 0.27N 69 68 68*p0.05, **p0.01, ***p0.001, two-tailed tests.†Dummy variable, 1 lower chamber, 0 senate.‡Annual salary in dollars calculated for 1910.§Dummy variable, 1 legislative chambers in non-reform states (Connecticut, Georgia, NorthCarolina, South Carolina), 0ballot reform states.Dummy variable, 1 state with office bloc ballot, 0 state with other ballot design.††Dummy variable, 1 state with party column ballot, 0 state with other ballot design.‡‡Dummy variable, 1 state with party column or party strip ballot, 0 state with office blocballot.important direction. Controlling for legislative chamber, chamber retention rates increase withsalary. The effect is substantial. For every $100 increase in salary, chamber return rates increaseby 4 percentage points. There also is a hint that the Australian ballot reform exerts some effect.Although none of the reform variables achieve statistical significance in any of the equations,interpreting their coefficients in a straightforward manner suggests that failure to introduce the secretballot reduces chamber return rates by between 5 and 24 points. Thus we find some indirect evidencethat the electoral reform might have had an effect on committee property rights through increasedmembership stability, a critical intermediary variable that varied substantially across legislativebodies.C O N C L U S I O NWe find little evidence that committee property rights appeared in state legislatures at the same timeas they took root in the US House of Representatives, even though both institutions were exposedto the same electoral reform. The absence of committee property rights in state legislatures suggeststhat their appearance in the House cannot be attributed directly to the introduction of the Australianballot. Instead our results suggest that the change in the electoral system was influential only inconjunction with a substantial level of membership stability in the institution. Thus, our analysisis consistent with Price’s observation that, ‘For the House there could be no question of modern-type“seniority” until membership stability was reduced to a level such that there was substantialcontinuity of committee service. Such de facto stability tends to generate demands for de jureseniority.’46Our findings do hint at the possibility that the Australian ballot reform contributed to the increased46 Price, ‘Congress and the Evolution of Legislative “Professionalism” ’, p. 14.Notes and Comments 181desire to pursue a career within the US House. This, in turn, led House members to mould the rulesand norms of the body to meet their long-term career needs, in part through the establishment ofcommittee property rights. As other studies in a variety of legislative settings have noted, careerismarises only when incumbents both desire to get re-elected and have the means to secure re-election.47Although the ability to get re-elected may well have been present in most, if not all, state legislaturesat the beginning of the twentieth century, the desire to pursue an extended career within theselegislatures was lacking. Thus, most state legislatures and the US House evolved differently,although they were operating within the same electoral environment.Finally, we think our findings demonstrate the value of testing legislative theories from acomparative perspective. Theories developed with one legislative chamber in mind are, of course,apt to be limited in their application. By collecting and analysing data on many legislative chambersrather than on just one, we gain considerable leverage on answering the question of how theAustralian ballot reform influenced legislative organization and behaviour. It is by looking at therelationship between the introduction of the Australian ballot and committee retention rates acrossa range of legislative organizational schemes that the overpowering intervening importance ofchamber membership retention rates becomes obvious. This leads us to suggest that the evolutionof legislative careers in America has been more responsive to differences in member salaries thanto reforms in the electoral process.47 See David Brady, Kara Buckley and Douglas Rivers, ‘The Roots of Careerism in the US House ofRepresentatives’, Legislative Studies Quarterly, 24 (1999), 489–510; Gary Moncrief, ‘Professionalism andCareerism in Canadian Provincial Assemblies: A Comparison to US State Legislatures’, Legislative StudiesQuarterly, 19 (1994), 33–48; Price, ‘Congress and the Evolution of Legislative “Professionalism” ’, p. 9; Squire,‘Member Career Opportunities and the Internal Organization of Legislatures’, and Squire, ‘The Theory ofLegislative Institutionalization and the California Assembly’.