ABSTRACT: 
This contribution sets out to combine the perspective of the degrowth paradigm with that of Critical Community psychology. Following the degrowth argument, the advancement of human well-being calls for a shift from growth-based societies to ones grounded in the ethos of degrowth. In this regard, we acknowledge the necessity for both theoretical principles and examples of good practice, which can lead to this transition. To this end, the article combines some of the underlying principles of the degrowth paradigm (i.e. decolonisation of the imaginary, reciprocity and conviviality, and environmental sustainability) with those of Critical Community Psychology, as well as, in one case, of Liberation Psychology (i.e. conscientisation and de-ideologisation, responsible togetherness, and environmental justice). This integration intends to equip academic scholars, practitioners, and social activists with visions and practices for the implementation of strategic actions aimed at individual and social well-being. The article concludes with a thorough reflection on social justice and how to better promote it through the combined contributions of both degrowth and Critical Community psychology. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This contribution sets out to combine the perspective of the degrowth paradigm with that of Critical Community psychology. Following the degrowth argument, the advancement of human well-being calls for a shift from growth-based societies to ones grounded in the ethos of degrowth. In this regard, we acknowledge the necessity for both theoretical principles and examples of good practice, which can lead to this transition. To this end, the article combines some of the underlying principles of the degrowth paradigm (i.e. decolonisation of the imaginary, reciprocity and conviviality, and environmental sustainability) with those of Critical Community Psychology, as well as, in one case, of Liberation Psychology (i.e. conscientisation and de-ideologisation, responsible togetherness, and environmental justice). This integration intends to equip academic scholars, practitioners, and social activists with visions and practices for the implementation of strategic actions aimed at individual and social well-being. The article concludes with atrough reflection on social justice and how to better promote it through the combined contributions of both degrowth and Critical Community psychology. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56De-growth and critical community psychology: Contributionstowards individual and social well-beingAlfredo Natale, Salvatore Di Martino, Fortuna Procentese,Caterina Arcidiacono*Department of Humanities, University of Naples Federico II, ItalyA R T I C L E I N F OArticle history:Received 6 September 2015Received in revised form 22 March 2016Accepted 22 March 2016Available online 1 April 2016Keywords:DegrowthCritical community psychologyWell-beingDecolonisation of the imaginaryReciprocitySocial justiceA B S T R A C TThis contribution sets out to combine the perspective of the degrowth paradigm with thatof Critical Community psychology. Following the degrowth argument, the advancement ofhuman well-being calls for a shift from growth-based societies to ones grounded in theethos of degrowth. In this regard, we acknowledge the necessity for both theoreticalprinciples and examples of good practice, which can lead to this transition. To this end, thearticle combines some of the underlying principles of the degrowth paradigm (i.e.decolonisation of the imaginary, reciprocity and conviviality, and environmentalsustainability) with those of Critical Community Psychology, as well as, in one case, ofLiberation Psychology (i.e. conscientisation and de-ideologisation, responsible together-ness, and environmental justice). This integration intends to equip academic scholars,practitioners, and social activists with visions and practices for the implementation ofstrategic actions aimed at individual and social well-being. The article concludes with athorough reﬂection on social justice and how to better promote it through the combinedcontributions of both degrowth and Critical Community psychology.ã 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CCBY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1. IntroductionThe recent increases in environmental degradation and inequality of access to resources and knowledge, as well as thenegative effects of the global ﬁnancial crisis, all raise increasing concerns about the extent to which the current growth-based and market-driven economic system is able to bring about individual and social well-being (Matthey, 2010; Stiglitz,2010). This state of affairs is urging scholars from different disciplines, policy-makers, and citizens of various nationalities toprovide a radical revision of our current way of life.1In line with this vision, the degrowth paradigm presents itself as an alternative to the current social apparatus and theproblems that it is causing (Latouche, 2009). Degrowth has been deﬁned as an alternative society based on “an equitabledown-scaling of production and consumption that increases human well-being and enhances ecological conditions at the local andglobal level, in the short and long term” (Schneider, Kallis, & Martínez-Alier, 2010, p. 512). It is also both an expandingphilosophy and a social movement that envisages a society that rejects the hegemony of Western neoliberal and capitalisticmarket models. Drawing on Flipo’s (2007) work, Demaria, Schneider, Sekulova, and Marti’nez-Alier (2013) identiﬁed a* Corresponding author at: Department of Humanities, University of Naples Federico II, Via Porta di Massa 1, 80133 Naples, Italy.E-mail address: caterina.arcidiacono@unina.it (C. Arcidiacono).1 See, by way of example, the recently released ‘Paris climate change agreement’ drafted by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change(UNFCCC, 2015) between November and December 2015.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2016.03.020Contents lists available at ScienceDirectFuturesjournal homepa ge: www.elsevier .com/ locate / fu tures0016-3287/ã 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).wolia48 A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56minimum of six ‘degrowth streams’: ecology, critiques of development and praise for anti-utilitarianism, the meaning of lifeand well-being, bioeconomics, democracy, and justice.In spite of its overtly revolutionary nature (Ott, 2012, p. 571), degrowth is open to contributions from other scholarshipprovided that they are not simply false alternatives that would only ameliorate the status quo without undermining theframework upon which it is built (Martínez-Alier, 2009; Martínez-Alier, Pascual, Vivien, & Zaccai, 2010; Trainer, 2012).In light of this, in this contribution we propose to integrate the approach of degrowth with that of Critical Communitypsychology (CCP). Community Psychology in its critical variant2 is an emerging approach particularly committed topromoting individual and social well-being through the adoption of an ecological, justice-oriented, and value-basedperspective (Arcidiacono & Di Martino, 2016; Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2010). According to Burton, Boyle, Harris, and Kagan(2007, p. 219) Community Psychology “emphasises a level of analysis and intervention other than the individual and theirimmediate interpersonal context” as well as being “ . . . concerned with how people feel, think, experience, and act as they worktogether, resisting oppression and struggling to create a better world”.This approach also holds that well-being is strongly dependent on the resources of the environment as well asopportunities to access them. In this view, Critical Community psychologists work on promoting quality of life through theadvancement of justice, democracy, environmental preservation, development of capabilities, and freedom of choice (Foxet al., 2009). Moreover, CCP adopts an ecological perspective to interpret social phenomena (Kelly, 1966). In terms ofinterventions geared to the furtherance of well-being and life satisfaction, this entails CCP overcoming individual levels ofanalysis to encompass groups, communities, organisations, and ultimately society at large (Prilleltensky, 2012).Furthermore, this approach maintains a strong focus on primary prevention as well as competence, empowerment, andheightened resilience (Cowen, 2000).Based on the above arguments, we believe that there are a number of reasons for combining the approaches of degrowthand CCP. First, a critical perspective combining the vision of Community psychology can be considered a valuable ally for thedegrowth movement, in that it assumes that the promotion of better societies entails challenging the status quo andproviding an antidote to co-optation. At the same time, it requires sustaining a perpetual critique of professional andtheoretical assumptions inherent in academic practices, and promoting interdisciplinarity (Davidson et al., 2006). It followsthat this approach, like degrowth, often brings into question cultural, economic, and political principles as well as thoseassumptions underpinning our societal system, including the belief in growth for the sake of growth (Nelson & Prilleltensky,2010, pp. 336–339).Second, both degrowth and CCP strive to understand individual and social phenomena from a multilevel and ecologicalperspective. In that regard, CCP has developed a strong focus on the micro- and meso-levels (Burton, 2015a), as well as anumber of techniques and good practices for community building, together with empowerment, care, and support foractivists (Kloos et al., 2012). On the other hand, CCP may beneﬁt from degrowth’s vision, which adds to its small-scalepractical interventions a general social and economic theory that analyses the societal and global aspects of unsustainablesocial and economic systems (Demaria et al., 2013).Third, the degrowth paradigm has advocated on more than one occasion the need to shift towards more cooperative,community-based, and participatory ways of living (Garcia, 2012; Trainer, 2012). Importantly, these are among the principlesthat CP and its critical variant have championed since their origin in an attempt to improve life conditions for individuals andcommunities (Fox et al., 2009; Kloos et al., 2012; Orford, 2008).Lastly, degrowth has often expressed its strong commitment to promoting well-being and quality of life by revisiting thefoundations of our current societal system (Andreoni & Galmarini, 2013; Bilancini & D’Alessandro, 2012). In the same vein,CCP has repeatedly upheld the need for more transformative – rather than just ameliorative – strategic interventions for thepromotion of human well-being. In this regard, it has developed tools and practices aimed at generating real change (Kagan,Burton, Duckett, Lawthom, & Siddiquee, 2011; Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2010).Based on the above arguments, in the following pages we shall attempt to identify the linkage between these twoapproaches as well as the beneﬁts that their alliance can yield in terms of advancement in human quality of life.2. Does more growth lead to increased well-being and life satisfaction?3The modern economic system has so far largely referred to gross domestic product (GDP) as an indicator of national well-being (Hamilton et al., 2006). It follows that the greater the year-on-year increase in the GDP of a country – or in other wordsthe higher its ﬁnancial growth – the greater the presumed national level of well-being. Nevertheless, this criterion has shownsigns of ineffectiveness since its inception, and the global ﬁnancial crisis – which has been unfolding since 2008 – hasbrought all the limits of market self-regulation to the fore (Stiglitz, 2010). However, degrowth also offers a more fundamental2 The ﬁeld of Community and Critical Psychology is highly variegated. For a review of both approaches, along with their common ground and differences,e refer the reader to Kagan et al. (2011), as well as Fox et al. (2009).3 In this paper, when referring to well-being, we intend “a positive state of affairs, brought about by the simultaneous and balanced satisfaction of diversebjective and subjective needs of individuals, relationships, organisations, and communities” (Prilleltensky, 2012, p. 2). Regarding life satisfaction and quality offe we draw on Ruut Veenhoven’s seminal work on the ‘Four Qualities of Life’ (Veenhoven, 2013). The latter is, in fact, in line with the vision of happinessdopted by de-growth (Sekulova, 2015).A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56 49critique of a society dominated by economic rationality. As Demaria et al. (2013, p. 193) have pointed out “degrowth is not justan economic concept . . . it is a frame constituted by a large array of concerns, goals, strategies and actions”. In this paper, inaccord with Abdallah and Thompson (2008), we assume degrowth to be also an antidote to the detrimental effect ofincreased consumption on well-being and life satisfaction.In this regard, the literature has demonstrated that a high materialistic value orientation  that is, an array of values andlife goals aimed at achieving ﬁnancial success and higher status, gathering material possessions, and having an appropriateimage  is likely to negatively affect both individual life domains (i.e. low self esteem, increased narcissism, and decreasedhappiness and well-being) and engagement in the social area (i.e. reduced involvement in community life, parenting andfamily, social relationships, and concern for the environment) (Burroughs & Rindﬂeisch, 2002; Kasser, 2002; Kasser, Ryan,Couchman, & Sheldon, 2004).The degrowth paradigm offers a possible solution to the negative effects of capitalistic and consumeristic culture. This liesin curbing the unbridled production and consumption of commodities – along with the values attached to them – anddownshift towards what Latouche (2011) has named ‘frugal abundance’, that is, a relational and economic system freed fromthe myth of endless growth.If this is our intention, we then must face the difﬁcult task of applying the degrowth principle to real life and everydaysituations. We acknowledge, in this sense, the need for instruments and good practices to better achieve this goal. Indeed, asKoch reminds us “no-growth” approaches have remained at fairly abstract levels to date, mostly failing to discuss concrete policyproposals, let alone their synergy potentials in a coherent transition strategy” (Koch, 2013, p. 13). With the exception of therecent special issue: ‘De-growth: from theory to practice’ in which new applications, methodologies, and policies werediscussed (Sekulova, Kallis, Rodríguez-Labajos, & Schneider, 2013), the degrowth literature could beneﬁt from more concreteexamples of good practices that would bring to bear its novel theoretical proposals.4In particular, as Burton (2015b) has pointed out, there are at least two major challenges that the degrowth paradigm mustface in order to make the transition to ‘an economy of the right size’. First, it must answer the question of how the movementintends to deal with unemployment, poverty, social dislocation, and conﬂict, all of which are problems generated by theeconomic system it claims to oppose. The second, which directly follows, is to address the ways of achieving a degrowthsociety and economy through political means.In this regard, CCP can offer degrowth scholarship a set of methodologies and good practices that have been speciﬁcallydesigned to promote critical consciousness, grassroots participation, sociability, and a just and equitable distribution ofpower and resources (Kagan et al., 2011; Kloos et al., 2012; Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2010; Prilleltensky, 2008). In regard to thisissue, Francisco et al. (2001) have developed an internet-based support service known as ‘Community Toolbox’, whichprovides a detailed list of good practices. The online journals the Global Journal of Community Psychology practice andCommunity Psychology in Global Perspective are also committed to disseminating CCP vision, tools, practices and goals, all ofwhich can be of great use to academics, scholars, and practitioners.Based on these premises, in this article we propose to re-examine three fundamental principles of the degrowth agenda,namely decolonisation of the imaginary, reciprocity and conviviality, and environmental sustainability. These will beanalysed in the light of the CCP ethos and practice and, in one speciﬁc case, of Liberation Psychology. More speciﬁcally, wewill make a case for conscientisation, de-ideologisation, responsible togetherness, and care for the environment as well associal justice. We believe that these value-based domains will provide the degrowth movement with valuable instruments tofurther its aims and broaden its scope. In particular, we believe the de-growth discourse will be strengthened by these threeaspects. The ﬁrst is that it will inform de-growth practitioners and scholars on how to increase awareness of people’sdependence on the capitalistic and market-driven system. It will also equip them with instruments and visions to createmore cooperative, collaborative, and cohesive societies. Lastly, it will help them to better deal with issues related toenvironmental justice as well as to build a more harmonious relationship with nature.3. Decolonisation of the imaginary, de-ideologisation, and conscientisationThe degrowth paradigm holds that the current cultural homogeneity, which is a direct consequence of economicglobalisation, has colonised the whole world both physically and psychologically. The quest for growth and capitalism has, infact, been indoctrinating society, with a plethora of materialistic and consumerist values, beliefs, and needs, generated by adominant social system that purports to be the best and only available option (Fisher & Ponniah, 2003; Latouche, 2009,2010). As Welzer (2011, p. 23) has pointed out “the principle of inﬁnity [which underpins the quest for endless growth] existsnot only externally, but within one’s self”. As a consequence, we must be mindful that “the idea of growth is therefore not onlyenshrined in business and politics, but also in the psychological structure of the people who grow up in such societies” (p. 15). Inline with this vision, Natale (2014, p. 60) holds that “a novel worldview as well as an alternative lifestyle . . . call for reshapingthe beliefs, motivations, and feelings that have hitherto underpinned our vision of the world”.In this light, CCP is able to offer theoretical and empirical tools, which will make this goal more attainable. For instance,the process of decolonisation of the imaginary, originally proposed by Habermas (1981/1984 and then championed by the4 Some interesting examples can already be found in Dietz and O’Neill’s (2013) work ‘Enough is Enough’, the programme for the Spanish economyreleased by Podemos (Navarro & Torres Lo’pez, 2014) and the Indignados movement in Barcelona, Spain (see Asara, 2015).soah50 A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56degrowth scholarship (Latouche, 2010) overlaps, in terms of both meaning and principle with that of ‘conscientisation’,5which is a concept largely advocated by Liberation Psychology (Martín-Baró,1994; Vaughan, 2011), a companion approach toCCP (Montero & Sonn, 2009; Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2010). Liberation Psychology is, more speciﬁcally, part of a broadmovement that began in Latin America in the 1960s, aimed at promoting social and economic justice for the poor, excluded,marginalised, and oppressed (Burton & Kagan, 2005; Quijano, 2000). Although it would be beyond the scope of this article toaddress all the facets of Liberation Psychology, we would particularly like to highlight here the power of conscientisation –and of de-ideologisation as a related tool – to operationalize the degrowth goal of ‘decolonising the imaginary’.According to Liberation and CCP, this goal is to be reached by equipping the oppressed, illiterate, and disenfranchised withempowering instruments for the development of critical consciousness, whereby they can understand the reason for theirsubjugation to the dominant power. To this end, a relevant tool is Participatory Action Research (PAR), which is an approachto research that emphasises both participation and action by working ‘with’ people – not ‘on’ people – to promote socialchange (Bradbury, 2015). In fact, PAR invites us, as researchers, ﬁrst to “decolonize ourselves, that is, to discover the reactionarytraits and ideas implanted in our minds and behaviours mostly by the learning process” (Fals Borda, 2001, p. 29). If we are able todo that, we can then move on to promote decolonisation both for and with others.CCP also makes use of several other PAR-oriented and liberationist principles such as reﬂexivity, critical thought, andawareness, all aimed at the promotion of individual and social well-being (Esposito & Freda, 2015; Minkler, 2000).Furthermore, this approach has redeﬁned a number of instruments such as research think-tanks, focus groups, teachinglaboratories, and bibliographical methods in line with conscientisation and de-ideologisation principles (Arcidiacono,Natale, & Carbone, 2012; Montero,1994). These tools can be used, in many cases, to foster critical reasoning, thereby enablingpeople to make informed choices with regard to the production and consumption of goods. These degrowth-orientedpractices have also proved effective in raising consciousness and self-responsibility, thereby allowing local groups andcommunities to demystify and de-colonise implicit mechanisms of ideology and take action towards social change (De LucaPicione & Freda, 2016; Montero, 1994).Based on these premises, it is worth describing here an Italian example of applied conscientisation and decolonisation ofthe imaginary. The ‘La Res’ project is a civil economy-orientated enterprise, which repurpose assets conﬁscated fromorganised crime in cooperative production, to promote community liberation and well-being (Natale, Arcidiacono, & DiMartino, 2013). The alternative community system this project created started from a process of collective and symbolicredeﬁnition of the territories under study, from which the ‘Gomorrah Domain’ (Saviano, 2007/[Saviano, 2007]2006) waseventually renamed the ‘Don Peppe Diana Lands’.6 This action of conscientisation is strongly intertwined with practices ofdecolonisation of the imaginary of an oppressed context.7In this case, CCP played a determining role in analysing and monitoring social interactions, promoting social awareness ofthe criminal power ruling the area, and generating a potential alternative economic system to capitalism. It also supportedsocial change by fostering enterprises based on solidarity, collaboration, and mutual trust (Natale et al., 2013).4. Reciprocity, conviviality, and responsible togethernessAn underlying cause for the current crisis is the extent to which the market-driven system erodes social fabric and the tiesthat keep people together, resulting in a diminished level of social capital as a consequence (Bartolini & Bonatti, 2008). Withregard to that, the degrowth paradigm makes the case for an alternative social system, in which the yearning for materialcommodities is to be quenched by the presence of more relational goods (Kerschner, 2010; Trainer, 2012).In this respect, some novel proposals for more communal and cooperative societies advocate a shift towards socialnetworking cultures, which are social systems built on “a paradigm centred less on self-interest and more on the ability to adoptcommon interests and belong to a group that shares objectives within a given network” (Cardoso & Jacobetty, 2012, p.197). In thesame vein, Conill, Castells, Cardenas, and Servon (2012) have outlined the framework for a new economic system that placesless emphasis on the growth imperative and focuses more on trust, altruism, and mutual exchange. In this context, we wouldlike to focus in particular on two means of achieving this goal, namely reciprocity and conviviality (Latouche, 2010; Illich,1973), given their beneﬁcial effect on life satisfaction and well-being (Sekulova, 2015). Reciprocity is considered, in the lightof the degrowth paradigm, as “time devoted to society in the form of self-production, voluntary work or mutual exchange of goodsand services”. Conviviality, on the other hand, is understood as “a system of social relationships based on community support,social unpaid work, reciprocity, voluntary work, favour and community exchange, household and informal care work” (Andreoni &Galmarini, 2014, pp. 79–80).When reciprocity and conviviality are seen through the lens of Community Psychology they acquire new meanings interms of how people live together and interact within communities (Kloos et al., 2012; Procentese, Scotto Di Luzio, & Natale,5 Originally developed by Pinto (1960), critical consciousness or conscientisation, is the process of learning how to perceive and be aware of oppressivecial, political, and economic contradictions (Freire, 1970).6 Don Peppe Diana was a priest killed for standing against maﬁa power. Today he is considered a symbol of civil resistance.7 This involved combined strategies of intervention such as the inclusion of marginalised people in the social and economic fabric, the development ofssociations and social enterprises producing, distributing, and consuming at the local level, and the regeneration of a highly polluted area througharnessing solar and bio-fuel energy (La Res manifesto, available at http://www.esperienzeconilsud.it/res/scheda-del-progetto/).A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56 512011) as well as the bearing that this has on their well-being. One of the main objectives of Community Psychology is to shiftfrom individualist to more collectivist societies (Orford, 2008) in order to increase relational empowerment, sense ofcommunity, inclusivity, self-determination, and self-efﬁcacy, all of which have a fundamental effect on human quality of life(Bofﬁ, Riva, & Rainisio, 2015). This goal is in line with the scientiﬁc literature, which has highlighted on several occasions thepositive effect of social cohesion (Delhey & Dragolov, 2015), as well as social capital, as an additional solution to the currentcrisis (Helliwell, Huang, & Wang, 2014). A critical perspective adds to this at least three further aspects. The ﬁrst pertains tothe role of social responsibility, whereas the second concerns an understanding of how globalisation impacts on our ways ofbeing with others. Lastly, CCP also considers the role that power plays in determining community life (Kagan et al., 2011).Starting with the ﬁrst point, CCP views reciprocity and conviviality as not only the result of sharing the same spaces andbeing in close proximity to others, but also as a means of taking on responsibility and providing useful resources for thewhole community. This calls for what Procentese et al. (2011) have deﬁned ‘responsible togetherness’, which implies an activeinvolvement of individuals and social groups in the life of the local community, in which members are expected to promoteresponsible actions as well as take part in a variety of social and community enterprises such as cultural, political, andsporting events. Overall, responsible togetherness depends on the collaboration, shared norms, and collective identity ofindividuals, groups, organisations, and institutions. Its objective is making social actors aware that they are capable ofproducing real change while assuming responsibility for themselves and others. In that regard, CCP is committed to fosteringresponsible togetherness through the promotion of social trust, a shared social agenda, community building, and socialactions, all of which must be directed towards the care and maintenance of social contexts (Procentese, 2011).Secondly, if our intention is to promote reciprocity and conviviality, we must also be mindful of the forces operating in anincreasingly globalised planet, which constantly threaten the stability of social ties. Sloan (2010), for example, hashighlighted the extent to which globalisation is undermining community life through increased social disaggregation. Thus,we must remember to link the global with the local, and invite international and national organisations, communities, andcitizens to address the negative consequences of globalisation. Both degrowth and CCP agree on the necessity of using globalresponses to global challenges. As such, efﬁcient interventions cannot be conﬁned to localism (Burton, 2015a; Kagan et al.,2011; Romano, 2012).One ﬁnal important contribution of CCP is to inform our practices about the hidden risk of promoting sociability while atthe same time overlooking the role and distribution of power in community life. While it is true, that reciprocity cannot beimposed by policies nor societies (Andreoni & Galmarini, 2013) there are several other communal principles that can bedistorted in order to reinstate and preserve the power of those at the top of the social ladder. A good example of this, asreported by Kagan et al. (2011), is the concept of ‘community as ghetto’, that is a state of affairs where the idea of community ishampered, with the intention of conﬁning people within either physical or social barriers. In this case, even a ﬂourishingcommunity that is based on reciprocity and conviviality, yet is conﬁned within boundaries by coercion, is likely to support astate of oppression and those who gain by it. In that regard, Perkins, Hughey, and, Speer (2002, pp. 34–35) warn against therisk of focusing solely on social cohesion and social capital while overlooking other important aspects determiningcommunity life. In their words “interpersonal bonding is useful as a catalyst for participation and commitment, but networkbridging opportunities that increase power, access, and learning deserve greater emphasis”.Examples of how CCP works to promote sociability include the Italian projects ‘I love Porta Capuana’ and ‘UrbanLaboratories’. The ﬁrst of these brought together local people, associations, social enterprises, and local institutions to creategrass-roots events and social opportunities. These were aimed at raising social awareness of problems, resources, andpossible solutions in a deprived urban area central to the city of Naples (Arcidiacono, Grimaldi, Di Martino, & Procentese,2016). The second promoted youth entrepreneurship through collaborative art-based laboratories, which were aimed atpromoting social capital, solidarity, and social responsibility as an antidote to the economic and social crisis (Serino,Morciano, Scardigno, & Manuti, 2012). In addition to these examples, the seminal volume ‘The Power of CollaborativeSolutions’ by Wolff (2010) offers a large array of case studies and good practices on how to build community coalition fromthe perspective of CCP.5. Human being and nature: promoting environmental justiceFrom a degrowth perspective, the current economic system is not only responsible for ﬁnancial and social inequality, butalso for environmental degradation as well as environmental injustice (Anguelovski, 2015). The term environmental justiceis generally used to describe grassroots movements around the world, which are ﬁghting against unequal allocation ofenvironmental hazards and environmental racism (Martínez-Alier, 2002; Newton, 2009; Schlosberg, 2007).In line with the CCP vision, Schlosberg (2007) has pointed out that “theories of justice must expand to encompass groups:because groups and communities are demanding justice for groups and communities—not only for individuals” (pp. 37–38). Infact, within the context of an increasingly globalised world, the communal quest for environmental justice also assumesglobal meaning. Indeed, “globalisation has created new patterns of exposures and opportunities for environmental justicemovement building” (Mohai, Pellow, & Timmons Roberts, 2009, p. 425). This is the reason why, as Martínez-Alier (2012, p. 64)reminds us, we should combine the campaigns of EJOs (environmental justice organisations) in the global south “againstecologically unequal exchange and the ecological debt” and the social movements for sustainable economic degrowth of therich Northern countries.52 A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56In this context, the capacity of CCP to achieve the objectives of degrowth lies ﬁrst and foremost in promoting the intrinsicrelatedness between human beings and the environment and then implementing the necessary changes. Furthermore, CCPbears the potential to act as a catalyst for pro-environmental behaviours by removing perceived barriers such as money, lowefﬁcacy, and hopelessness (Quimby & Angelique, 2011). In fact, as Riemer and Reich (2011) remind us, CCP can, among otherthings, “provide expertise in the practical application of ecological and system thinking (e.g., Foster-Fishman, Nowell, & Yang,2007; Kelly, Ryan, Altman, & Stelzner, 2000, p. 350)) and could become a major voice in ﬁnding solutions to the climate crisis thatmove beyond surface solutions”.Examples of how CCP works in the context of sustainability and environmental justice can be found at the individual,community, and macro level. At the micro level, Dittmer and Riemer (2013) ran a series of workshops to educate youngpeople in Ontario. The aim of these sessions was to address the issue of climate change by going beyond adjustments inindividual behaviour and focusing on higher-level factors such as social norms, family rituals, and the inﬂuence ofeconomics. These sessions also invited participants to reﬂect on how higher levels in society (i.e. the media) affect theindividual level (e.g., a sense of social status).At the community level, Culley and Angelique (2011) have shown the political stance of CCP in analysing how social powercan foster public participation in the environmental disputes associated with global climate change. In this context, theauthors assume a three-dimensional view of social power. This consists ﬁrstly of control over superior bargaining resources,which are used to inﬂuence others, and secondly of the ability to control participation in, and the nature of, debate over keyissues. The third dimension is the ability to control and disseminate truths, myths, and ideologies which are used to shapethoughts, desires, and interests (Culley & Angelique, 2011, p. 412).Lastly, with regard to the macro-level, Castro and Mouro (2011) have analysed the ‘European Natura 2000 Network ofProtected Sites’ to shed light on the psycho-social processes involved in how individuals, groups, and communities respondto multilevel governance of environmental protection.Turning to a more analytical and theoretical level, Harré (2011), in her book ‘Psychology for a Better World’, reports that ahigher identiﬁcation with their local community leads people to assume more environmentally sustainable practices (VanVugt, 2002). This is in line with degrowth’s aim of emphasising social relations in order for people to better deal with thedownscaling of consumption, which in turn is a prerequisite for a more environmentally sustainable social system (Matthey,2010).Nelson and Prilleltensky (2010), offer a ﬁnal contribution towards environmental preservation from the perspective ofCCP. The authors remind us that there are at least four points on which CCP can contribute in this regard. The ﬁrst, theconcern for individual, relational, and collective well-being, has been considered above. The second, the ﬁght for socialjustice, and the third, addressing issues of power and oppression, will be discussed in the next paragraph. Here we would ﬁrstlike to focus our attention on the fourth point, the prevention of conﬂict and use of violence, which relates to the often-overlooked negative impact of environmental injustice on social fabric. Given that one of the main concerns of theenvironmental justice movement is to ensure that the burden of natural depletion is fairly distributed among all people,regardless of class, race, and ethnicity, (Schlosberg, 2007; Shrader-Frechette, 2002), conditions of blatant environmentalinequity may lead to increased social conﬂict over land, water, and other resources (Moss, 2009, p. 177).This appears to be strongly evident in the recent wave of migrants and asylum seekers to Europe from the Middle East andAfrica, which is in many respects a consequence of the economic and environmental exploitation of the global south(Martínez-Alier, 2012). As shown in this paragraph, CCP and degrowth are well positioned to tackle this issue, and manyothers related to environmental matters, by redeﬁning the relationship between humans and nature as well as promotingconditions of environmental justice worldwide.6. Social justice as the ground for promoting degrowth and well-beingThe themes outlined above highlight some epistemic and value-based aspects that, albeit extremely relevant, could stillnot be sufﬁcient to promote well-being in a context of degrowth. If we really wish to fully advance individual and communityquality of life we need to prioritise the promotion of social justice, as well as equality of access to resources andopportunities.There is wide evidence in support of viewing social justice as a core value for both degrowth – especially with regard tointer-generational, environmental, and distributive justice (Muraca, 2012) – and CCP—particularly for inclusivity, cultural,and procedural justice (Prilleltensky, 2012). Nonetheless, we must be conscious that the bearing that this has on lifesatisfaction and well-being may vary according to different social climates. From a liberationist perspective, this means thatwhat many might consider a right is, in fact, very often a privilege and vice versa (Montero, 1994).On these grounds, the degrowth paradigm invites us to call into question the very idea of social justice, and what it trulymeans to promote related concepts such as freedom, health, happiness and well-being. To this end, degrowth advocates anepistemic transformation of the concept of ‘good life’ from ‘well-having’ to ‘well-being’ (Matthey, 2010) and eventuallybecoming ‘well-living’ (see the Quechuan ideal of ‘sumak kausai’).In this regard, the degrowth framework can beneﬁt from the seminal work ‘Wellness as Fairness’ by Isaac Prilleltensky(2012) whereby the author makes explicit, at least at a theoretical level, the effect that the promotion of social justice has onpeople’s life satisfaction and well-being. According to Prilleltensky, this linkage runs along a continuum that goes fromA. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56 53persistent conditions of injustice – which generate oppression, internalisation, helplessness, upward comparison andsuffering – to optimal conditions of justice—which conversely generate responsive conditions, prevention, individualpursuit, and avoidance of comparisons and hence a thriving context.Based on this premise, Ledwith (2012) recommends considering at least three aspects when setting out to promote socialjustice, environmental justice, and collective well-being from a CCP perspective. Firstly, we must remember that we need anunderstanding of ‘power’ and its role in shaping an individual’s psyche and behaviours. Framing human well-being in termsof how it is affected by a power differential, rather than the more abstract promotion of human rights, requires consideringwhere power resides, as well as dealing with power imbalances, In other words, this means identifying which groups orindividuals hold more power than others (Partridge, 2008; Prilleltensky, 2008). In this light, interventions aimed atpromoting well-being and life satisfaction from a CCP perspective need to be assessed, among other criteria, on the basis oftheir psycho-political validity (Prilleltensky, 2003), which pertains to “the role of power in wellness, oppression, and liberationat the personal, relational, and collective domains” (Prilleltensky, 2008, p. 129). This invites us to delve into the mechanismsthrough which power is exerted to generate oppression. Is power used to control resources, create barriers to participation,set agendas, shape conceptions through the creation of ideologies that perpetuate the status quo, or a combination of allthese (Culley & Hughey, 2008)? In this regard, as Prilleltensky (2008, p.116) argues “power is never political or psychological; itis always both”.Secondly, our critical approach to social justice should always be grounded in a dynamic and dialectical alternationbetween theory and practice. Again, the integration of Critical and Community psychology offers a good solution to this taskin that, as mentioned above, the former is highly action-oriented whereas the latter places a great deal of emphasis onchallenging the status quo (Davidson et al., 2006).As a third point, practice, also understood as ‘taking action’, cannot only be a matter of individual interest. Viewed from abroader perspective, the purpose of liberation must be, in Montero’s words, “collectively and individually built, obtained, andwon” (Montero,1994, p. 76). Collectivism also applies to assuring environmental justice for everyone, an aim that is endorsedby increasing demand for public participation in environmental decision-making (Spyke, 1999).As we have shown in this paragraph, social justice plays a fundamental role in determining how to address the crisis andits consequences. CCP assumes that the degrowth movement can overcome the current crisis, provided that it incorporates asocial justice compass into its vision thereby assuring that the construction of a less materialistic world will also entail afairer distribution of available resources and opportunities. In this sense, we are mindful of Caraça’s (2012, p. 58) warningabout the often quoted Chinese saying ‘crisis also means opportunity’, which is today becoming “crisis for most andopportunity for a few”.7. Final remarksThis article has presented some good practices and visions for attaining novel social and individual goals for the future ofhumankind. These will support scholars, practitioners, and social activists in paving the way for building fairer, moresustainable, collaborative, and responsible societies free from the myth of endless growth (Morin, 2011).Our argument rests on the assumption that decolonisation of the imaginary, reciprocity and conviviality, and therelationship with nature are three tenets of the degrowth rationale. In relation to this, scholars from a variety of disciplinesare facing the challenge of operationalising degrowth principles in order to unlock all of their transformative andrevolutionary potential (Haberl, Marina, Krausmann, Martínez-Alier, & Winiwarter, 2011).This work, therefore, has set out to integrate the vision of degrowth with the ethos and approach of CCP. In particular, wehave shown how this approach fosters social interaction, thereby raising awareness and generating support for social changeand social enterprises based on solidarity, collaboration, mutual trust, and respect for the environment.In doing so, we have offered examples of how citizens can be empowered and made aware of the practices used by thedominant system to enforce its power (conscientisation and de-ideologisation). We have also shown examples of practicesthat place value on sharing and being responsible for each other in community life (togetherness), and maintain aharmonious relationship with nature and the earth (environmental justice).In addition to this, we have framed these principles with reference to the promotion of social justice. This requiresaddressing the issue of what it means to assure conditions of social justice in a globalised society that considers fairness andequal opportunity in terms of having more rather than less (van Griethuysen, 2010).In conclusion, this work has attempted to shed light on the interrelatedness of degrowth and CCP. Our ultimate goal is toraise awareness of the challenges of our era in a way that is in keeping with what degrowth thinkers and Critical Communitypsychologists advocate. In particular, this paper has stressed the importance of ﬁnding alternatives to the current economicsystem, which is strongly shaped by imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, and globalisation. Moreover, it hashighlighted the need for novel models of interaction among individuals at the local and social levels. Lastly, it has offered anadditional space in which to rethink the relationship between human beings and nature.54 A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56ReferencesAbdallah, S., and Thompson, S., (2008). Psychological barriers to de-growth: values mediate the relationship between well-being and income. In: F. Flipo & F.Schneider (Eds.), First international conference on Economic De-growth for Ecological Sustainability and Social Equity (pp. 236–242). Paris. Retrieved fromhttp://events.it-sudparis.eu/degrowthconference/en/appel/Degrowth Conference-Proceedings.pdf.Andreoni, V., & Galmarini, S. (2013). On the increase of social capital in degrowth economy. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 72, 64–72.Andreoni, V., & Galmarini, S. (2014). How to increase well-being in a context of degrowth. Futures, 55, 78–89.Anguelovski, I. (2015). Environmental justice. In G. D’Alisa, F. Demaria, & G. Kallis (Eds.), Degrowth: a vocabulary for a new era (pp. 33–36).New York:Routledge.Arcidiacono, C., & Di Martino, S. (2016). A critical analysis of happiness and well-being. Where we stand now, where we need to go. Community Psychology inGlobal Perspective, 2(1), 6–35.Arcidiacono, C., Grimaldi, D., Di Martino, S., & Procentese, F. (2016). Participatory visual methods in the ‘Psychology loves Porta Capuana’ project. ActionResearch, 0(0), 1–17.Arcidiacono, C., Natale, A., & Carbone, A. (2012). Thinktank di ricerca per l’integrazione e la convivenza tra autoctoni e immigrati africani. In D. Giovannini, &L. Vezzali (Eds.), Immigrazione, processi interculturali e cittadinanza attiva (pp. 85–94).Caserta: Melagrana.Asara, V. (2015). Democracy without growth: The political ecology of the Indignados movement. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. http://www.tdx.cat/bitstream/handle/10803/305110/va1de1. pdf?sequence=1.Bartolini, S., & Bonatti, L. (2008). Endogenous growth, decline in social capital and expansion of market activities. Journal of Economic Behavior andOrganization, 67(3-4), 917–926.Bilancini, E., & D’Alessandro, S. (2012). Long-run welfare under externalities in consumption, leisure, and production: a case for happy degrowth vs. unhappygrowth. Ecological Economics, 84, 194–205.Bofﬁ, M., Riva, E., & Rainisio, N. (2015). Positive change and political participation: well-being as an indicator of the quality of citizens’ engagement. In P.Inghilleri, G. Riva, & E. Riva (Eds.), Enabling positive change: flow and complexity in daily experience (pp. 105–122).Berlin: De Gruyter Open.Bradbury, H. (2015). The SAGE handbook of action research. London: SAGE Publications.Burroughs, J. E., & Rindﬂeisch, A. (2002). Materialism and well-being: a conﬂicting values perspective. Journal of Consumer Research, 29(3), 348–370.Burton, M. (2015a). Economy and planet: a blind spot for community psychology? Universitas Psychologica, 14(4), 15–21.Burton, M., (2015). Re: Economics and climate change: the no-nonsense guide. [Web log message]. Retrieved from http://steadystatemanchester.net/2015/07/17/economics-and-climate-change-the-no-nonsense-guide/ Accessed July 17.Burton, M., Boyle, S., Harris, C., & Kagan, C. (2007). Community psychology in Britain. In S. M. Reich, M. Riemer, I. Prilleltensky, & M. Montero (Eds.),International community psychology history and theories (pp. 219–237).New York: Springer.Burton, M., & Kagan, C. (2005). Liberation social psychology: learning from Latin America. Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 15(1), 63–78.Caraça, J. (2012). The separation of cultures and the decline of modernity. In M. Castells, J. Caraça, & G. Cardoso (Eds.), Aftermath: the cultures of the economiccrisis (pp. 44–55).Oxford: Oxford University Press.Cardoso, G., & Jacobetty, P. (2012). Surﬁng the crisis: cultures of belonging and networked social change. In M. Castells, J. Caraça, & G. Cardoso (Eds.),Aftermath: the cultures of the economic crisis (pp. 177–209).Oxford: Oxford University Press.Castro, P., & Mouro, C. (2011). Psycho-social processes in dealing with legal innovation in the community: insights from biodiversity conservation. AmericanJournal of Community Psychology, 47(3), 362–373.Conill, J., Castells, M., Cardenas, A., & Servon, L. (2012). Beyond the crisis: the emergence of alternative economic practices. In M. Castells, J. Caraça, & G.Cardoso (Eds.), Aftermath: the cultures of the economic crisis (pp. 210–248).Oxford: Oxford University Press.Cowen, E. L. (2000). Community psychology and routes to psychological wellness. In J. Rappaport, & E. Seidman (Eds.), Handbook of community psychology(pp. 79–99).New York: Springer Science + Business Media.Culley, M. R., & Angelique, H. (2011). Participation, power, and the role of community psychology in environmental disputes: a tale of two nuclear cities.American Journal of Community Psychology, 47(3–4), 410–426.Culley, M. R., & Hughey, J. (2008). Power and public participation in a hazardous waste dispute: a community case study. American Journal of CommunityPsychology, 41(1-2), 99–114.Davidson, H., Evans, S., Ganote, C., Henrickson, J., Jacobs-Priebe, L., Jones, D. L., & Riemer, M. (2006). Power and action in critical theory across disciplines:implications for critical community psychology. American Journal of Community Psychology, 38(1-2), 35–49.De Luca Picione, R., & Freda, M. F. (2016). Borders and modal articulations. semiotic constructs of sensemaking processes enabling a fecund dialoguebetween cultural psychology and clinical psychology. Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science, 50(1), 29–43.Delhey, J., & Dragolov, G. (2015). Happier together. Social cohesion and subjective well-being in Europe. International Journal of Psychology.Demaria, F., Schneider, F., Sekulova, F., & Marti’nez-Alier, J. (2013). What is degrowth? from an activist slogan to a social movement. Environmental Values, 22(2), 191–215.Dietz, R., & O’Neill, D. (2013). Enough is enough: building a sustainable economy in a world of finite resources. San Francisco, CA: Routledge.Dittmer, L. D., & Riemer, M. (2013). Fostering critical thinking about climate change: applying community psychology to an environmental education projectwith youth. Global Journal of Community Psychology Practice, 4(1), 1–12.Esposito, G., & Freda, M. F. (2015). Reﬂective and agentive functions of narrative writing: a qualitative study on the narratives of university students.Integrative Psychological and Behavioural Science1–25.Fals Borda, O. (2001). Participatory (action) research in social theory. In P. Reason, & H. Bradbury (Eds.), Handbook of action research: participative inquiry andpractice (pp. 27–37).London: SAGE Publications.Fisher, W. F., & Ponniah, T. (2003). Another world is possible: popular alternatives to globalization at the World Social Forum. London: Zed Books.Flipo, F. (2007). Voyage dans la galaxie de ’croissante. Mouvements, 50(2), 143–151.Foster-Fishman, P. G., Nowell, B., & Yang, H. (2007). Putting the system back into systems change: a framework for understanding and changingorganizational and community systems. American Journal of Community Psychology, 39(3-4), 197–215.Fox, D., Prilleltensky, I., & Austin, S. (2009). Critical psychology: an introduction, 2nd ed. London: SAGE Publications.Francisco, V. T., Fawcett, S. B., Schultz, J. A., Berkowitz, B., Wolff, T. J., & Nagy, G. (2001). Using internet-based resources to build community capacity: thecommunity tool box. American Journal of Community Psychology 29(2), 293–300. http://ctb.ukans.edu/.Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.Garcia, E. (2012). Degrowth, the past, the future, and the human nature. Futures, 44(6), 546–552.Haberl, H., Marina, F.-K., Krausmann, F., Martínez-Alier, J., & Winiwarter, V. (2011). A socio-metabolic transition towards sustainability? Challenges foranother great transformation. Sustainable Development, 19(1), 1–14.Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action: vol. 2: lifeworld and system: a critique of functionalist reason. Boston: Beacon Press (Original workpublished, 1981).Hamilton, K., Markandya, A., Pedroso-Galinato, S., Silva, P., Ordoubadi, M. S., Lange, G.-M., & Martin-Hurtado, R. (2006). Where is the wealth of nations?Measuring capital for the 21st century. Annual Report . http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTEEI/214578-1110886258964/20748034/All.pdf.Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2014). Social capital and well-being in times of crisis. Journal of Happiness Studies, 15(1), 145–162.Harré N., (2011). Psychology for a Better World Strategies to Inspire Sustainability. [DX Reader version]. Retrieved from psych.auckland.ac.nz/psychologyforabetterworld.Illich, I. (1973). Tools for conviviality. London: Calder and Boyars.Kagan, C., Burton, M., Duckett, P., Lawthom, R., & Siddiquee, A. (2011). Critical community psychology. West Sussex, the UK: Wiley.A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56 55Kasser, T. (2002). The high price of materialism. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.Kasser, T., Ryan, R. M., Couchman, C. E., & Sheldon, K. M. (2004). Materialistic values: their causes and consequences. In T. Kasser, & A. D. Kanner (Eds.),Psychology and consumer culture: the struggle for a good life in a materialistic world (pp. 11–28).Washington D.C: American Psychological Association.Kelly, J. G. (1966). Ecological constraints on mental health services. American Psychologist, 21(6), 533–539.Kelly, J. G., Ryan, A. M., Altman, B. E., & Stelzner, S. P. (2000). Understanding and changing social systems: an ecological view. In J. Rappaport, & E. Seidman(Eds.), Handbook of community psychology (pp. 133–159).New York: Springer Science + Business Media.Kerschner, C. (2010). Economic de-growth vs. steady-state economy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(6), 544–551.Kloos, B., Hill, J., Thomas, E., Wandersman, A., Elias, M. J., & Dalton, J. H. (2012). Community psychology: linking individuals and communities: linking individualsand communities, 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.Koch, M. (2013). Welfare after growth: theoretical discussion and policy implications. International Journal of Social Quality, 3(1), 4–20.Latouche, S. (2009). Farewell to growth. Cambridge: Polity Press (Original work published, 2007).Latouche, S. (2010). Pour sortir de la socie´te´ de consommation: voix et voies de la de´croissance. Brignon: Les Liens Qui Liberent.Latouche, S. (2011). Vers une socie´te´ d’abondance frugale: contresens et controverses de la de´croissance. Paris: Mille et une nuits, Department de la LibrairieArthème Fayard.Ledwith, M. (2012). Community development’s radical agenda. In A. Azzopardi, & S. Grech (Eds.), Inclusive communities: a critical readerRotterdam: SensePublishers.Martín-Baró, I. (1994). Writings for a liberation psychology. In A. Aron, & S. Corne (Eds.), Harvard: Harvard University Press.Martínez-Alier, J. (2002). The environmentalism of the poor. A study of ecological conflicts and valuation. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.Martínez-Alier, J. (2009). Socially sustainable economic de-growth. Development and Change, 40(6), 1099–1119.Martínez-Alier, J. (2012). Environmental Justice and economic degrowth: an alliance between two movements. Capitalism Nature Socialism, 23(1), 51–73.Martínez-Alier, J., Pascual, U., Vivien, F. D., & Zaccai, E. (2010). Sustainable de-growth: mapping the context, criticisms and future prospects of an emergentparadigm. Ecological Economics, 69(9), 1741–1747.Matthey, A. (2010). Less is more: the inﬂuence of aspirations and priming on well-being. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(6), 567–570.Minkler, M. (2000). Using participatory action research to build healthy communities. Public Health Reports, 115(2–3), 191–197.Mohai, P., Pellow, D., & Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental justice. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 34, 405–430.Montero, M. (1994). Consciousness raising, conversion, and de-ideologization in community psychosocial work. Journal of Community Psychology, 22(1), 3–11.Montero, M., & Sonn, C. C. (2009). Psychology of liberation. Theory and applications. New York: Springer Science+Business Media.Morin, E. (2011). La vie. Pour l’avenir de l’humanite´. Paris: Fayard.Moss, J. (2009). Climate change and social justice. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.Muraca, B. (2012). Towards a fair degrowth-society: justice and the right to a good life beyond growth. Futures, 44(6), 535–545.Natale, A. (2014). Potere migrante. Tra identita` e conoscenza. Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli Unpublished doctoral dissertation.Natale, A., Arcidiacono, C., & Di Martino, S. (2013). From Gomorrah domain to Don Peppe Diana lands. A Southern Italian experience of work-basedliberation, community networking, and well-being. Universitas Psychologica, 12(4), 1037–1047.Navarro, V., & Torres Lo’pez, J. (2014). Un proyecto economico para la gente. . https://web-podemos.s3.amazonaws.com/wordpress/wpcontent/uploads/2014/11/DocumentoEconomicoNavarroTorres.pdf.Nelson, G., & Prilleltensky, I. (2010). Community psychology: in pursuit of liberation and well-being. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Newton, D. E. (2009). Environmental justice. a reference handbook. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, LLC.Orford, J. (2008). Community psychology: challenges, controversies and emerging consensus. West Sussex, England: Wiley.Ott, K. (2012). Variants of de-growth and deliberative democracy: a Habermasian proposal. Futures, 44(6), 571–581.Partridge, W. L. (2008). Praxis and power. Journal of Community Psychology, 36(2), 161–172.Perkins, B., Hughey, J., & Speer, P. W. (2002). Community psychology perspectives on social capital theory and community development practice. Journal ofthe Community Development Society, 33(1), 33–52.Pinto, A. V. (1960). Conscieˆncia e realidade nacional. São Paulo: ISEB.Prilleltensky, I. (2003). Understanding, resisting, and overcoming oppression: toward psychopolitical validity. American Journal of Community Psychology, 31(1–2), 195–201.Prilleltensky, I. (2008). The role of power in wellness, oppression, and liberation: the promise of psychopolitical validity. Journal of Community Psychology, 36(2), 116–136.Prilleltensky, I. (2012). Wellness as fairness. American Journal of Community Psychology, 49(1-2), 1–21.Convivenza responsabile: prospettive di intervento. In F. Procentese (Ed.), (2011). Rivista di Psicologia di Comunita`, Special issue.Procentese, F., Scotto di Luzio, S., & Natale, A. (2011). Convivenza responsabile: quali i signiﬁcati attribuiti nelle comunità di appartenenza. Rivista DiPsicologia Di Comunita` 19–29.Quijano, A. (2000). Coloniality of power and eurocentrism in latin america. International Sociology, 15(2), 215–232.Quimby, C. C., & Angelique, H. (2011). Identifying barriers and catalysts to fostering pro-environmental behavior: opportunities and challenges forcommunity psychology. American Journal of Community Psychology, 47, 388–396.Riemer, M., & Reich, S. M. (2011). Community psychology and global climate change: introduction to the special section. American Journal of CommunityPsychology, 47(3–4), 349–353.Romano, O. (2012). How to rebuild democracy, re-thinking degrowth. Futures, 44(6), 582–589.Saviano, R. (2007). Gomorrah: Italy’s other mafia. London: Macmillan (Original work published, 2006).Schlosberg, D. (2007). Defining environmental justice: theories, movements, and nature. New York: Oxford University Press.Schneider, F., Kallis, G., & Martínez-Alier, J. (2010). Crisis or opportunity? Economic degrowth for social equity and ecological sustainability. Introduction tothis special issue. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(6), 511–518.Sekulova, F. (2015). Happiness. In G. D’Alisa, F. Demaria, & G. Kallis (Eds.), Degrowth: a vocabulary for a new eraNew York: Routledge.Sekulova, F., Kallis, G., Rodríguez-Labajos, B., & Schneider, F. (2013). Degrowth: from theory to practice. Journal of Cleaner Production, 38, 1–6.Serino, C., Morciano, D., Scardigno, F., & Manuti, A. (2012). How communities can react to crisis: social capital as a source of empowerment and well-being.Global Journal of Community Psychology Practice, 3(3), 1–14.Shrader-Frechette, K. (2002). Environmental justice. Creating equality, reclaiming democracy. New York: Oxford University Press.Sloan, T. (2010). Globalization, poverty and social justice. In G. Nelson, & I. Prilleltensky (Eds.), Community psychology in pursuit of liberation and well-being(pp. 331–352).New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Spyke, N. P. (1999). Public participation in environmental decisionmaking at the new millennium: structuring new spheres of public inﬂuence. BostonCollege Environmental Affairs Law Review, 26(2), 263–313.Stiglitz, J. E. (2010). The Stiglitz report: reforming the international monetary and financial systems in the wake of the global crisis. New York: The New Press.Trainer, T. (2012). De-growth: do you realise what it means? Futures, 44(6), 590–599.UNFCCC (Framework Convention on Climate Change) (2015). Adoption of the Paris Agreement. Paris. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/l09r01.pdf.van Griethuysen, P. (2010). Why are we growth-addicted? The hard way towards degrowth in the involutionary western development path. Journal ofCleaner Production, 18(6), 590–595.Van Vugt, M. (2002). Central, Individual, or collective control? Social dilemma strategies for natural resource management. American Behavioral Scientist, 45(5), 783–800.56 A. Natale et al. / Futures 78–79 (2016) 47–56Vaughan, C. (2011). Dialogue, critical consciousness and praxis. In D. Hook, B. Franks, & M. W. Bauer (Eds.), The social psychology ofcommunicationBasingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Veenhoven, R. (2013). The four qualities of life ordering concepts and measures of the good life. In A. Delle Fave (Ed.), The exploration of happiness: present andfuture perspectives (pp. 195–226).New York: Springer.Welzer, H. (2011). Mental infrastructures: how growth entered the world and our souls. Publication Series on Ecology 14, 1–42. http://www.boell.de/downloads/Ecology-14-Mental-Infrastructures.pdf.Wolff, T. (2010). The power of collaborative solutions, six principles and effective tools for building healthy communities. San Francisco, CA: Josse.