ABSTRACT: 
This paper examines the issue ofwhat the self is by reviewing neuropsychological research,which converges on the idea that the selfmay be more complex and differentiated than previous treatments of the topic have suggested. Although some aspects of self-knowledge such as episodic recollection may be compromised in individuals, other aspects—for instance, semantic trait summaries—appear largely intact. Taken together, these findings support the idea that the self is not a single, unified entity. Rather, it is a set of interrelated, functionally independent systems. Implications for understanding the self in various areas of psychological research—e.g., neuroimaging, autism, amnesia, Alzheimer’s disease, and mirror self-recognition—are discussed in brief. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper examines the issue of what the self is by reviewing neuropsychological research, which converges on the idea that the self may be more complex and differentiated than previous treatments of the topic have suggested. Although some aspects of self-knowledge such as episodic recollection may be compromised in individuals, other aspects—for instance, semantic trait summaries—appear largely intact. Taken together, these findings support the idea that the self is not a single, unified entity. Rather, it is a set of interrelated, functionally independent systems. Implications for understanding the self in various areas of psychological research—e.g., neuroimaging, autism, amnesia, Alzheimer's disease, and mirror self-recognition—are discussed in brief. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. ISSN 0077-8923ANNALS OF THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCESIssue: The Year in Cognitive NeuroscienceThe multiplicity of self: neuropsychological evidence andits implications for the self as a construct in psychologicalresearchStanley B. Klein and Cynthia E. GangiUniversity of California, Santa Barbara, CaliforniaAddress for correspondence: Stan Klein, Department of Psychology, 551 Ucen Road, UCSB, Santa Barbara, CA 93106.Klein@psych.ucsb.eduThis paper examines the issue of what the self is by reviewing neuropsychological research, which converges on the ideathat the self may be more complex and differentiated than previous treatments of the topic have suggested. Althoughsome aspects of self-knowledge such as episodic recollection may be compromised in individuals, other aspects—forinstance, semantic trait summaries—appear largely intact. Taken together, these findings support the idea that theself is not a single, unified entity. Rather, it is a set of interrelated, functionally independent systems. Implications forunderstanding the self in various areas of psychological research—e.g., neuroimaging, autism, amnesia, Alzheimer’sdisease, and mirror self-recognition—are discussed in brief.Keywords: self; memory; neuropsychologyWhat is the self?The phenomenology is compelling. Each of us hasthe experience of a unitary self, an “I” that remem-bers, chooses, thinks, plans, and feels. Yet it has beennotoriously difficult to provide an account of justwhat this thinking, feeling, remembering, planningentity is. As Gordon Allport1 famously noted:“Who is the I that knows the bodily me, who hasan image of myself and a sense of identity overtime, who knows that I have propriate strivings?I know all these things, and what is more, I knowthat I know them. But who is it who has thisperspectival grasp?. . . It is much easier to feelthe self than to define the self.”Bertrand Russell’s2,3 distinction between knowl-edge by acquaintance and knowledge by descriptionmay be relevant to the difficulties that troubled All-port. According to Russell we have knowledge byacquaintance when we know something via di-rect personal contact (sensory or introspective) andmanifest that knowledge by using terms referring tothat knowledge to communicate with others. Withrespect to the self, this is seen in the ease with whichwe talk about the self as well as understand talkabout self by others.Problems quickly arise, however, when we try topin down what it is we refer to by the word “self”—when we are asked to describe what the word “self”means. Despite centuries of thought devoted to theproblem, it has proven notoriously difficult to pro-vide a set of propositions capable of transformingour acquired knowledge into a satisfying descriptionof what a self is.4–15The self, of course, is not alone in this regard. Sim-ilar issues arise, for example, with the word “time”:“What, then, is time? If no one asks me, I know; if Iwish to explain it to one that asked, I know not. . .”16This hardly is surprising, because the concepts ofself and time are intimately related.17–19 Questionspertaining to the ontology of self, for example, in-clude problems of synchronicity—i.e., what is itthat accounts for the apparent phenomenal unityof self at a single moment—and diachronicity—i.e.,the perceived continuity of self over time. Similarly,the notion of personal identity embodies the beliefthat the self, as presently experienced, is continu-ous with the self I experienced in the past and theself I will experience in the future.20 These, anda host of related, contentious, issues surroundingthe word “self” make it clear that describing whatwe are talking about when we use the word “self”doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05441.xAnn. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 1Self and memory Klein & Gangiis a task for which insufficient progress has beenmade.21–24When psychologists use the term “self,” we thusoften lack a clear conception of what the term isattempting to pick out—we have knowledge by ac-quaintance, but our knowledge by description is sel-dom up to the task. This is particularly problematicbecause the number of research papers devoted toself-related processes is proliferating at a staggeringpace. For example, in the most recent issue of thejournal Self and Identity (2009, Volume 8, jointlypublished as Issues 2 and 3) we identified fromthe table of contents the following potpourri of selftopics: self-processes, self-control, self-verification,self-authorship, self-enhancement, self-esteem, self-regulation, self-improvement, self-protection, self-image, self-threat, and self-stereotypes.But what exactly is “the self” that serves as theobject of this diverse set of predicates: What is be-ing verified, authored, threatened, regulated? On thecomparatively few occasions on which it has beenattempted,25–27 psychologists have found it extraor-dinarily difficult to provide a convincing and co-herent descriptive account of the self. Indeed, inves-tigators often sidestep these difficulties, relying ontheir readers’ familiarity with the term “self,” de-rived from years of knowledge by acquaintance, toconfer a sense of confidence that he or she knows towhat it is the author refers.A different view of the problem of “the self”One difficulty in describing the “self” is that theremay not be a single thing to be described. Rather,recent research suggests that the self is a multiplicityof related, yet separable, processes and contents.28,29As Klein and colleagues30 have argued, instead oflooking for a unitary entity we can describe as “theself,” we should be breaking the problem into parts,studying aspects of the self separately before askinghow they interact with one another to create thephenomenal appearance of unity.Contributions from neuropsychologyGiven the automatic and flawless way in whichdifferent cognitive systems normally interact, it isdifficult to disentangle their respective contribu-tions to knowledge about the self. However, be-cause neuropsychological disorders can be quiteselective—patients exhibit normal or near normalperformance in some domains and profound im-pairments in others18,31—they can provide a win-dow into the operation of a component system inrelative isolation, without the influence of other sys-tems. By revealing differential patterns of impairedand preserved performance, the study of patientswith neuropsychological impairments can illumi-nate aspects of a system’s function and structurethat are difficult to detect under normal operatingconditions.32,33Applied to the self, recent neuropsychologicalstudies suggest that the seemingly unitary self ofeveryday experience may be composed of severaldifferent, functionally isolable (though normally in-teracting) systems.28,29,34,35 These include, but arenot limited to:1. Episodic memories of one’s life events.18,36–382. Semantic summary representations of one’spersonality traits.39–423. Semantic knowledge of facts about one’slife.18,42,434. An experience of continuity through time:The “I” experienced now is connected to the“I” experienced at previous points (as well aslater points) in one’s life. Episodic memory isknown to contribute heavily to this ability.44,455. A sense of personal agency and ownership: Thebelief—or experience—that “I” (agency) amthe cause of “my own” (ownership) thoughtsand actions.46,476. The ability to self-reflect: To form metarep-resentations where the agent is the self, andmake inferences on the basis of those repre-sentations.46,48,497. The physical self: The ability to represent andrecognize (e.g., in mirrors, photographs) one’sbody.41,50,51The self and memoryOverviewIn the remainder of this paper, we focus onpoints 1, 2, and 3 above—the roles of episodicand semantic memory in knowledge of one’s self.First, we review evidence from case studies ofpatients suffering neurological disorders (e.g., am-nesia, Alzhiemer’s dementia, and autism) thatdemonstrate that episodic and semantic memoryboth contribute to our sense of self, although theirrelation is one of functional independence (i.e.,2 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memoryalthough under normal circumstances they interact,one self-memory system can operate independentlyof the other32). We then draw on these results to helpinterpret findings from studies of self in the cogni-tive, clinical, and social literatures. Our goal is todiscover which, if any, of our generalizations aboutthe fractionation of self-memory systems might helpus better understand the concept of self as it is usedin psychological research.Prior to presenting our Neurological casework,it is important to address the question of whetherthese participants, despite experiencing episodicamnesia, were able to access memory for lived events(albeit unconsciously), which could implicitly haveinfluenced their semantic judgments. Because thisconcern was voiced by some of the reviewers it mer-its discussion.We have two responses. First, in terms of def-initions, episodic memory is held to be the con-scious recollection of past personal events.34,52Accordingly, the notion of unconscious episodic in-fluence on semantic judgments is clearly at oddswith the meaning of the term “episodic memory” ascurrently used in the literature.However, one could reasonably adopt the posi-tion that exemplars,53 though not consciously avail-able for verbal report, nonetheless are active at asubconscious level when a semantic decision is re-quested. Aware of this concern, my colleagues andI36,54 have devoted a substantial amount of our re-search (consisting in multiple methods—for exam-ple, priming techniques, transfer appropriate pro-cessing, the method of reversed association39,55 toshow that exemplar-based self-knowledge is not ac-tivated (consciously or unconsciously) when par-ticipants perform semantic judgments about theself.29,35Case studies neurological patientsApproximately 15 years ago, Klein and Loftus36 pro-posed that the study of patients suffering amnesiamight provide a particularly effective method forexamining the respective contributions of episodicand semantic memory to self-knowledge. This is be-cause amnesic patients often experience highly se-lective memory loss, typically displaying intact se-mantic memory with impaired access to episodicmemory.32 Amnesic patients therefore present aunique opportunity to test alternative models ofself-knowledge: tests of trait knowledge can be con-ducted in amnesic patients with assurance thatepisodic memory for traits is not involved.If semantic memory contains a database of per-sonality trait summaries (see point 2), then an am-nesic patient should be able to know what he or sheis like despite being unable to episodically recollectthe particular experiences from which that knowl-edge was derived. There now is neuropsychologicaldata from five patients: W.J., K.C., D.B., R.J., andK.R, that speak directly to this and other issues in-volving how types of knowledge about oneself areacquired and represented in memory.W.J.: W.J. suffered a concussive blow to the headshortly after completing her first quarter in college.37Interviews conducted shortly after her accident re-vealed that W.J. had forgotten much of what hadhappened during the preceding 12 months—a pe-riod of time that included her first quarter at college.To document her deficit in episodic memory, Kleinand colleagues37 used the autobiographical memorycueing task originated by Galton56 and subsequentlypopularized by Crovitz and Schiffman.57 W.J. wasasked to try to recall specific personal events relatedto cue words and to provide for each recollection asprecise a date as possible. Initial testing revealed thatshe was unable to recollect personal events from thepast year. Over the next month, however, her am-nesia remitted, and when retested four weeks later,her performance had improved to the point thatit was indistinguishable from that of neurologicallyhealthy women who served as controls.On two occasions—during her amnesia and afterits resolution—W.J. was asked to provide person-ality ratings describing what she was like duringher first quarter at college. While she was amnesic,W.J. was able to describe her personality; more im-portantly, the ratings she made during her amnesicperiod agreed with those she made afterward, as wellas with independent raters who knew her at college.Thus, while W.J. was amnesic she knew what shehad been like in college, despite the fact that shecould not episodically recollect any personal eventsor experiences from that time period.Could W.J.’s judgments while amnesic be basedon her continued access to episodic recollectionsof high school or earlier—periods not covered byher amnesia? This seems unlikely. W.J., like manyfreshmen, manifested reliably different personal-ity traits in college than she did in high school.This is not surprising given the new-found personalAnn. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 3Self and memory Klein & Gangiindependence associated with the individual’sabrupt change from his or her role(s) in familylife to the freedom of college life. Yet W.J.’s self-ratings during the amnesic period reflected her col-lege personality to a reliably greater extent than theydid her precollege personality.37 This suggests thatW.J.’s ratings were based on semantic knowledge ofher personality during her time at college, not onrecollections of episodes long past.K.C.: Although the case of W.J. supports the in-dependence of semantic trait self-knowledge fromepisodic recollection, it might be argued that a par-tial overlap between her episodic knowledge of herprecollege self may have enabled her to providea reliable and accurate account of her trait self-knowledge during her amnesic episode. Such anaccount, however, fails to provide a viable expla-nation of the pattern of intact trait self-knowledgemanifested by our next patient, K.C.Patient K.C. permanently lost his entire fundof episodic memory following a motorcycle acci-dent.42,45 He also underwent a marked personalitychange following the accident. Nevertheless, K.C.was able to describe his postmorbid personality withconsiderable accuracy (his mother’s ratings servedas the criterion42). The fact that K.C. could accu-rately report his own personality traits supports theview that knowing oneself does not require retrievalof episodic memories. It is consistent with the hy-pothesis that personality information is stored in-dependently from episodic memory, in the form ofsemantic trait summaries.It is important to note that K.C.’s self-knowledgereflected his postmorbid personality, not his pre-morbid personality. This means that K.C. not onlyhad access to semantic knowledge of his own per-sonality traits, but he was also able to acquire newknowledge about his personality. Yet this updatingoccurred without his being able to episodically rec-ollect any information about the behavioral eventson which this updating presumably was based.D.B.: The case of D.B. (like that of K.C.) showsthat one can have accurate knowledge of one’s ownpersonality traits even with a total loss of episodicmemory. Patient D.B. was a 79-year-old man whobecame profoundly amnesic as a result of anoxiafollowing cardiac arrest.18 Both informal question-ing and psychological testing revealed that D.B. wasunable to recollect a single thing he had ever done orexperienced from any period of his life. In additionto his dense retrograde episodic amnesia, he alsosuffered severe anterograde episodic memory im-pairment, rendering him incapable of recollectingevents that transpired only minutes earlier.To test D.B.’s semantic self-knowledge, we askedhim on two occasions (separated by several weeks)to judge a list of personality traits for self-descriptiveness. We also asked D.B.’s daughter (withwhom he lives) to rate D.B. on the same traits. Ourfindings revealed that D.B.’s ratings were both reli-able (r = 0.69 across sessions) and consistent withthe way he is perceived by others (r = 0.64 be-tween D.B. and his daughter). (Age-matched con-trols showed rs = 0.74 and 0.57 across sessions andraters, respectively). D.B. thus appears to have accu-rate and detailed knowledge about his personalitydespite the fact that he has no known conscious ac-cess to any specific actions or experiences on whichthat knowledge was based.34,42,58–60Thus, like W.J. and K.C., D.B. manifests a cleardissociation between episodic and semantic self-knowledge. But can semantic knowledge of one’sown personality traits dissociate from other typesof semantic knowledge? Further testing of D.B. sug-gests that it can.D.B.’s semantic memory also was affected by hisillness, although this impairment was far less severethan that affecting his episodic memory.18 For ex-ample, although he knew a variety of general factsabout his life, he showed a number of striking gapsin his life story. He knew the name of the high schoolhe attended and where he was born, but could notrecall the names of any friends from his childhood orthe year of his birth. He also showed spotty knowl-edge of facts in the public domain. For example,although he was able to accurately recount a num-ber of details about certain historical events (e.g., theCivil War), his knowledge of other historical factswas seriously compromised (e.g., he claimed thatAmerica was discovered by the British in 1812). De-spite these impairments in D.B.’s semantic knowl-edge of his own personality was intact. This resultsuggests a dissociation within semantic memory—between general semantic knowledge and semanticknowledge of one’s personality traits.Additional testing revealed a dissociation be-tween D.B.’s knowledge of his own personality traitsand the traits of others. For example, D.B. couldnot retrieve accurate knowledge of his daughter’spersonaity traits. The correlation between D.B.’s4 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memoryratings of his daughter and her self-ratings was notreliable (r = 0.23), and was less than half that foundbetween control parents’ ratings of their child andthe child’s self-ratings (r = 0.61). Thus, althoughD.B.’s ability to retrieve accurate knowledge of hisown personality was intact—i.e., it was no differentfrom that of age-matched controls—he had lost theability to retrieve accurate personality informationabout his adult daughter.In short, D.B.’s case goes beyond theepisodic/semantic distinction, suggesting category-specific dissociations within semantic memory.61His ability to retrieve trait self-knowledge is in-tact; his ability to retrieve his daughter’s traits isimpaired; and his knowledge about the world atlarge (and specific facts about himself) is impaired.This pattern raises the possibility that the humancognitive architecture includes a subsystem of se-mantic memory that is functionally specialized forthe storage and retrieval of trait self-knowledge. Ad-ditional data relevant to this claim comes from thecase of K.R.K.R.: K.R., a patient diagnosed with late-stageAlzheimer’s dementia, shows that reliable, accurateknowledge of one’s own personality can exist with-out the ability to update that knowledge.40,51K.R.’s performance on standard tests of cognitivefunctioning (e.g., the Mini-Mental State Examina-tion) indicated she suffers from late-stage dementia.She was disoriented for time and place and experi-enced difficulties with word finding and object nam-ing. Her anterograde memory function was severelyimpaired, leaving her unable to recall events she hadin mind only moments before. Knowledge of herpersonal past was sketchy. For example, she some-times believed her late husband was alive, and herestimates of how long she has lived in her currentfacility ranged from 2 months to 14 years.Despite these profound deficits, K.R. had reliableknowledge of her own personality traits. We askedher on two separate occasions to judge a list of per-sonality traits for self-descriptiveness. We also askedK.R.’s daughter and her caregiver at the assisted liv-ing facility to rate K.R. on the same traits. The resultsshowed that K.R.’s test-retest ratings were reliable(r = 0.86). However, her ratings did not agree withthe ratings provided by either her daughter or hercaregiver (rs = 0.31, −0.11, for daughter and care-giver, respectively). This lack of consistency was notbecause the daughter and caregiver were poor judgesof character; when asked to rate other individuals,their judgments correlated strongly with those ofothers.How can K.R.’s ratings be so reliable, yet agree solittle with those who know her best? According to herfamily, K.R.’s personality and behavior have changeddramatically as the disease progressed, but she seemsunaware of her transformation (a situation fairlycommon among patients suffering Alzheimer’s de-mentia).62,63 This suggests the possibility that thedisease may have impaired K.R.’s ability to updatethe semantic records that store information abouther personality. If her self-knowledge is intact butnot being updated, then K.R.’s ratings may reflecther premorbid personality rather than her currentone.To test this hypothesis, we asked K.R.’s daugh-ter to rate her mother on the same list of traits,only this time she was asked to base her ratings onher mother’s personality prior to the onset of thedisease. These ratings were strongly correlated withthose provided by K.R. herself (r = 0.59). So werepreonset trait ratings of K.R. provided by her son-in-law (r = 0.79). Taken together, these findingsindicate that K.R.’s ratings are accurate, but reflecther pre-Alzheimer’s personality.K.R. also knows her daughter’s personality traits.When asked to rate her daughter on the same listof traits, her ratings correlated strongly with herdaughter’s self-ratings (r = 0.65). This is expectedif K.R.’s fund of personality knowledge was createdpremorbidly, and remains intact. But if, as hypothe-sized, K.R. has lost the ability to update her semanticpersonality files, then her ratings should be inaccu-rate for people whom she first met after the onset ofher dementia.This was the case. On two occasions (weeksapart), K.R. was asked to rate her caregiver, whomshe had been with for 2.5 years. K.R.’s test-retest re-liability was low (r = 0.34), in striking contrast tothe reliablity of her self-ratings (r = 0.86). More-over, K.R.’s ratings of the caregiver did not overlapreliably with the caregiver’s ratings of his own per-sonality (r = 0.18). This is not due to the caregiverhaving a skewed view of himself. His self-ratingswere strongly correlated with those provided by twoage-matched, neurological healthy, women living inthe same facility, who had known the caregiver forabout the same length of time (rs = 0.73, 0.68).This also shows that K.R.’s inability to acquire newAnn. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 5Self and memory Klein & Gangipersonality information is not a simple manifes-tation of the normal aging process. Clearly, theneurologically healthy age-matched controls werequite capable of acquiring accurate knowledgeof the personality of someone they had recentlymet.Thus, despite profound cognitive deficits, K.R.has intact knowledge of her own premorbid per-sonality and that of her daughter. That her traitknowledge has been preserved and remains retriev-able are remarkable given the difficulties she has re-trieving ordinary facts from semantic memory: e.g.,the names of everyday objects, what a clock lookslike, where she is. Like the case of D.B., K.R.’s pre-served self-knowledge suggests a dissociationwithinsemantic memory, suggesting the presence of a func-tionally specialized database for the storage and re-trieval of information about her personality.It would appear, however, that the computa-tional machinery responsible for updating person-ality knowledge (intact in K.C.) has been impairedin K.R. by the Alzheimer’s disease. K.R. does notknow her own current, postmorbid personality, norhas she been able to learn the personality traits ofher primary caregiver.R.J.: Patients K.C., W.J., and D.B. lost access toepisodic memory as a result of brain trauma. How-ever, there also are individuals for whom episodicmemory fails to develop in the first place.64,65 Suchdevelopmental dissociations are particularly inter-esting because they permit inferences about the ori-gins of self-knowledge that are not licensed by thediscovery of dissociations caused by brain traumaand disease in adults.Consider, for example, the hypothesis that se-mantic self-knowledge, despite being functionallyindependent of episodic memory, is initially con-structed from a database of episodic memories. Thishypothesis cannot be ruled out by cases like D.B.,K.R., and W.J. Their intact semantic self-knowledgecould have been derived from episodic memoriesacquired during the years prior to the brain traumathat caused their episodic loss as adults. But con-sider the implications of finding an individual whonever has developed the ability to access episodicmemories, yet has intact semantic self-knowledge.This developmental dissociation would suggest thatbuilding a semantic database of trait self-knowledgedoes not require access to a database of episodicmemories.Autism is a developmental disorder which hasbeen hypothesized to impair the cognitive machin-ery that supports metarepresentations from de-veloping normally.66,67 It has been proposed thatepisodic memories are stored in and retrieved viametarepresentations.68 If so, then autism should dis-rupt the normal development of episodic memory.To test this prediction, Klein, Chan, & Loftus69 as-sessed the episodic memory of R.J., a 21-year-oldmale with diagnosed with autism.Compared with ability matched controls, R.J. wasfound to be severely impaired on a variety of tests ofrecall, especially when memory for personally expe-rienced events was tested (e.g., the Galton-Crovitztask56,57). Although his impairment was develop-mental in origin, his episodic performance was sim-ilar to that found in cases of amnesia caused by braintrauma.70Despite his deficit in episodic retrieval, R.J.demonstrated reliable and accurate knowledge of hispersonality traits. His test-retest correlations werehigh (r = 0.86; I.Q. matched controls, r = 0.78).Moreover, the correlation between R.J.’s trait self-ratings and his mother’s ratings of him was signifi-cant (r = 0.56) and did not differ reliably from thatobtained from control mother–son pairs (r = 0.50).R.J.’s self-ratings also were compared with ratings ofR.J. obtained from one of his teachers; the correla-tion again was reliable (r = 0.49) and comparable tothose obtained between control mother–son pairs.These findings suggest that R.J.’s knowledge ofwhat he is like accurately reflects how he is perceivedby people with whom he interacts.71 But how did heacquire this trait self-knowledge? His case suggeststhat access to a database of episodic memories is notnecessary. R.J. cannot retrieve episodic memoriesnow and, because his impairment is developmentalin origin, he probably never developed this abil-ity in the first place. All four previously describedcases—W.J., D.B., K.C., and R.J.—show that traitself-knowledge can exist independently of episodicaccess; but R.J.’s developmental dissociation sug-gests that the acquisition of trait self-knowledge doesnot require episodic access (the same can be inferredfor K.C.’s ability to update his knowledge of his per-sonality).As in the cases of K.R. and D.B., further tests ofR.J. suggest content-specific dissociations within se-mantic memory. Klein and colleagues72 asked R.J. tojudge features of common objects (e.g., Is a lemon6 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memorysour? Is a balloon round?). R.J.’s answers were reli-able across sessions (r = 0.77). However, they didnot correlate with those provided by others of thesame mental age. There was high agreement amongI.Q. matched controls, with correlations amongtheir answers ranging from 0.78 to 0.81. In con-trast, correlations between R.J.’s answers and theirsranged from 0.18 to 0.33.R.J.’s atypical semantic knowledge is not dueto a general inability to understand or answerquestions—his ability to answer questions is fine,and when he is unsure what a term means, he re-quests clarification. This pattern—consensually ac-curate personality knowledge coexisting with odd,nonconsensual knowledge of foods, animals, andobjects—is thus surprising. One would think theevidence of one’s senses would allow the easy acqui-sition of knowledge about tastes, shapes, and colors.Indeed, words like sweet, tall, and large are moreconcrete and have more obvious referents than per-sonality terms such as kind, friendly, and ungrateful.Nevertheless, an individual with autism was able tolearn his own personality traits, but was unable toacquire consensually held knowledge of foods, ani-mals, and objects.It has been proposed that culturally shared knowl-edge results when domain-specific inference systemsinteract with linguistically transmitted informationwhich the hearer stores—at least temporarily—inmetarepresentations.73 Deciding which part of themessage is relevant requires one to make inferencesabout the speaker’s background beliefs and commu-nicative intent—which also depends on metarep-resentations.73 This proposal could explain why aperson with autism—whose ability to formmetarepresentations is likely limited—would havedifficulty figuring out which knowledge is sharedby those around him. Lacking normal metarepre-sentational abilities, R.J. would have difficulty infer-ring a speaker’s beliefs and communicative intent.66Without being able to store people’s utterances inmetarepresentations, apart from semantic memory,he would take everything said to him at face value.Other people’s false beliefs, lies, ironic remarks, andmetaphors would be stored in semantic memoryas if they were true. Eventually this could have theeffect of partially corrupting his database of worldknowledge.67More recently Klein and colleagues74 found thatR.J. fails to accurately differentiate between the per-sonalities of his various family members, and thathis ratings of them are less nuanced and less situa-tionally specific than his ratings of his own person-ality. Specifically, despite the finding that R.J. hasreliable and valid knowledge of his own personalitytraits,69 his ratings of other people (e.g., mother, fa-ther, brother) fail to accurately distinguish betweentheir quite different personalities. Rather, he viewsthem all as essentially the same (range of correla-tions = 0.75 to 0.89)—in fact, R.J. gave his mother,father, and brother identical personality ratings onalmost two-thirds of the traits he rated. This is notbecause his family members all share the same per-sonality profiles. The correlations they provide foreach other clearly indicate that they see themselvesas reliably different (range: rs = 0.41–0.46).Moreover, it is not the case that R.J.’s ratings ofhis parents correlate highly because they present auniform personality when interacting with him—R.J. also sees his brother as very similar to his parents(r=0.87 for his ratings of brother and father and r=0.75 for his ratings of brother and mother). Nor isR.J.’s failure to distinguish among family membersa side effect of his mental age. T.M., a cognitivelynormal male of approximately the same mental ageas R.J., distinguishes between his parents (r = 0.47),yet R.J. does not. Evidence presented in the casestudy also reveals that R.J.’s high correlations amongfamily members was not due to a tendency to assigna socially desirable rating to everyone.74Interestingly, R.J. was far more likely to assign ex-treme trait ratings—“definitely” or “not at all” tofamily members than were appropriately matchedcontrol raters. Yet, his response repertoire is notrestricted to the use of extreme categories. In rat-ing his ratings of his own personality traits, R.J.,often uses the intermediate category “somewhat.”Indeed, in this respect his self-ratings did not differreliably from self-ratings of cognitively normal con-trols. Moreover, R.J. used the category “somewhat”far more often in rating himself than in his ratingsof others.A “somewhat” generous (or kind or lazy) per-son may be someone who is moderately generous(or kind or lazy) in every situation. However, giventhat most human behavior shows considerable sen-sitivity to context, a more likely explanation is that“somewhat” reflects the perception that the indi-vidual being rated is (say) generous in some situa-tions but not in others. On this view, R.J.’s use ofAnn. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 7Self and memory Klein & Gangi“somewhat” indexes the extent to which he perceivesan individual’s behavior as varying across situations.If this line of inference is correct, then R.J. under-stands that his own behavior varies with the situa-tion, but he fails to see the same is true (at least tothe same degree) with respect to other persons.This interpretation fits well with what is knownabout autism and theory of mind. As a result of thisdevelopmental disorder, it is hypothesized that thecomputational machinery that supports metarep-resentation67 is impaired. As a consequence, peoplewith autism have difficulty inferring other peoples’mental states, especially what others think, believeand know (i.e., the epistemic mental states). Ourfindings suggest that a person with autism can acton his own knowledge, whether he is meta-awareof that knowledge or not. As a result, R.J. can beaware of the ways in which his behavior varies asa function of context (at least as he construes it).However, his inability to correctly infer what otherpeople believe, think, and know may be a barrierto his understanding how others construe their sit-uations. To see the situational contingencies in thebehaviors of his mother, father, and brother, R.J.would have to be able to infer what each of themthinks is happening in the situations in which theyfind themselves, even when what they think differsfrom what R.J. thinks. Yet many autistic individualsare notoriously poor at such “false belief” tasks.75Summing upThe neuropsychological cases presented permit usto draw some tentative conclusions about how thecognitive architecture learns the personality traits ofthe individual in which it is situated.1. Learning personality traits does not require ac-cess to episodic memories. K.C. learned abouthis postmorbid personality despite having noability to retrieve episodic memories. R.J. alsoknows his personality traits, yet he cannot re-trieve behavioral episodes from memory. In-deed, R.J.’s disorder is developmental in origin,suggesting that he has never been able to re-trieve episodic memories.2. Alzheimer’s dementia can damage the mech-anisms that allow one to learn about one’spersonality traits. Yet the inability to updatepersonality self-knowledge need not interferewith the ability to retrieve information froman intact, preexisting semantic store of traitsummaries (K.R.).3. Any dissociation between semantic domains—whether due to brain trauma (W.J., K.C., andD.B.), neural disease (K.R.) or autism (R.J.)—suggests functionally isolable storage and re-trieval systems. But finding a developmen-tal dissociation in R.J. suggests a function-ally isolable acquisition system. His semanticdissociation suggests that trait self-knowledgeis acquired via learning mechanisms that arefunctionally distinct from those that cause theacquisition of knowledge about animals, ob-jects, foods, and people.4. Five cases—W.J., K.C., D.B., K.R., and R.J.—show that trait self-knowledge can exist in-dependently of episodic access and may con-stitute a separate subsystem within semanticmemory (e.g., R.J., K.R., and D.B.).5. Trait self-knowledge is functionally indepen-dent of trait knowledge about other persons(D.B., R.J., M.J.H; for the case of M.J.H.).ImplicationsOur research strategy is based on the idea that oneway to determine what something is useful for is tolook at situations in which it no longer is present.33Guided by this principle, we examined neuropsy-chological case studies of cognitively impaired indi-viduals to help map out the boundaries of a term—the self—that has been imprecisely delineated inmuch of psychological research.While findings from individual case studies donot warrant broad conclusions about the nature ofself-related function in the populations from whichindividual cases have been drawn, the general con-clusions we have proposed about the self, per se,allow us to make some proposals and suggestionsabout its nature and function in a variety of do-mains and applications. In this section we draw outsome of the implications of our findings about themultifaceted nature of self and apply them to re-search domains that rely (in varying degrees) onthe concept of “self” to frame and/or interpret theirfindings.AutismGiven the multifaceted nature of self, it shouldbe clear that evidence of self-dysfunction in one8 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memoryaspect of autistic behavior should not automati-cally be construed as indicative of a general fail-ure of self in autism. For example, the finding thatautistic individuals fail to show a normal apprecia-tion of the value of first person access to their inter-nal states76 does not warrant a conclusion that self-understanding in general is deviant in autism (weare not suggesting that the authors have made thisleap; rather we are warning readers to keep in mindthat self-related findings in one context should notautomatically be assumed reflective of the self gen-erally). Nor does the finding that autistic individualshave been found to perform poorly on self-referentrecall tasks.77 Such findings may suggest that autismentails deficits in organization and elaboration ofepisodic recollection,78 but it is unclear what theyhave to say about the cognitive structure of semantictrait self-knowledge, per se.78,79Moreover, the absence of a normally functioningTheory of Mind in autism66 not necessarily licensethe assumption that knowledge of one’s own mentalstates will suffer equally. For example, finding thatpeople with autism show less empathy toward oth-ers80 does not necessarily imply reduced empathicknowledge of self.69,81What is warranted is that some aspects of self-knowledge may be impaired by an autistic disorderwhile others may be intact. The self, as we have ar-gued, is not a thing that submits to all-or-nothinganalysis. While aspects of autistic self-knowledgecan show impairment, such findings do not warrantgeneral conclusions about “the self in autism.”Alzheimer’s dementiaDespite profound cognitive deficits, K.R. has intactknowledge of her own premorbid personality andthat of her daughter. That her trait knowledge hasbeen preserved and remains retrievable is remark-able given the difficulties she has retrieving ordinaryfacts from semantic memory—the names of every-day objects, what a clock looks like, where she is.Like the other cases we have presented, K.R.’s pre-served self-knowledge suggests a dissociation withinsemantic memory, consistent with the presence of afunctionally specialized database for the storage andretrieval of information about personality. It wouldappear, however, that the computational machineryresponsible for updating personality knowledge hasbeen impaired in K.R. by her disease. K.R. does notknow her own current, postmorbid personality, norhas she been able to learn the personality traits ofher primary caregiver.Neural dissociations in other patients suggestthat personality knowledge is acquired via learn-ing mechanisms that are specialized for thatpurpose (e.g., D.B.). Individuals with profoundepisodic amnesia can nevertheless update their traitself-knowledge (e.g., K.C.). Moreover, personalityknowledge can be acquired despite developmentaldisorders that impair one’s ability to acquire gen-eral world knowledge (as well as episodic retrieval;e.g., R.J.). By contrast, in K.R., we see a case wheretrait knowledge of self and other remains intact, butthe ability to update that knowledge based on newexperiences is no longer functional.In a related study of Alzheimer’s disease,51 wedocumented a similar pattern of memory perfor-mance for another aspect of self—one’s physical ap-pearance. In that study, patient P.H., an 83-year-oldfemale in the late stages of the disease (she scores7 on the Mini Mental State diagnostic procedure,where a score of 22 or less is considered “definitelyabnormal” for members of her age group) was ableto recognize herself from photographs taken duringher early life (prior to age 40 years). By contrast,pictures of her taken from age 40 onward resulted ina far lower rate of recognition, with P.H. succeedingon only two of 20 opportunities.These findings, taken together with those of K.R.,suggest that aspects of self-knowledge (i.e., person-ality traits, facial appearance) that have been doc-umented in clinical descriptions as degraded as aresult of Alzheimer’s disease, might degrade in sucha way as to leave vestiges of earlier representationalstates. This idea is consistent with the proposal thatAlzeimer’s disease might carry with it impairment inprocedures that update various semantic databasesof self-related knowledge.40These findings map well onto recent evidence thatAlzheimer’s dementia entails a gradual, temporallygraded loss of generic world knowledge from se-mantic memory.82 Our results add to this litera-ture by suggesting that this loss extends to aspectsof semantic self-knowledge as well.83 In particular,we propose that a temporally graded breakdown insemantic memory function can account both forpatient K.R.’s failure to update her semantic self-knowledge on the basis of personality changes tak-ing place because the onset of her dementia.40 (Itis, of course, a logical possibility that patient P.H.’sAnn. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 9Self and memory Klein & Gangidifficulties recognizing herself from pictures takenduring the last several decades of her life may submitto a similar explanation). This conclusion has nowreceived support from subsequent studies replicat-ing these findings on larger samples of Alzheimer’spatients.84–86Clinicians and families often characterize late-stage Alzheimer’s patients as lacking a sense ofself.87,88 Our findings suggest a more nuanced view.Alzheimer’s patients may be operating from knowl-edge of a former self, which may not be congruentwith their current behavior. Clinicians and familymay need to be sensitive to the possibility that suchindividuals may see themselves as they were, not asthey are.Domain general learningDomain-general learning theories—connectionistor otherwise—presume that the same learningmechanisms account for knowledge acquisitionacross content domains.34 But a developmental dis-sociation (such as that shown by R.J.) that impairsthe acquisition of knowledge about people, animals,objects, and foods, while having little effect on theacquisition of trait knowledge, is difficult to recon-cile with such theories.Such results are especially difficult for theoriespositing equipotential mechanisms that computecorrelations between elementary perceptual or con-ceptual dimensions. Surely the evidence of one’ssenses is sufficient for R.J. and others to end upconcurring that apples are sweet, lemons are not,rocks are hard, and giraffes are tall. Yet R.J. andothers do not concur in their judgments of easilyobservable properties of food, animals, and objects.In contrast, R.J.’s judgments about his own person-ality are consistent with those of others who knowhim—even though R.J.’s judgments are those of anautistic individual with social deficits.Mirror self-recognitionA considerable body of research has argued that achild’s rudimentary awareness of self first emergesby approximately 18–24 months. The evidential ba-sis for this conclusion is the finding that by this agemost children are able to recognize themselves in amirror.28,89However, a recent study examining the abilityof a patient suffering from Prosopagnosia (an im-pairment of face recognition following neurologi-cal damage) to draw accurate trait inferences fromfaces of persons he knows (including himself), butfails to recognize casts doubt on the usage of face-recognition as a means of establishing the first signsof self-knowledge in humans.41 Although the pa-tient, M.J.H., is not reliably greater than chancewhen judging the faces of well-known others, histrait ratings achieved considerable accuracy whenthe face judged was his (despite the fact that hecould not overtly recognize that face as belonging tohim).41This research suggests reliance on mirror self-awareness to establish the presence of self may be illplaced. While an ability to respond appropriately toone’s image in a mirror may be a sufficient conditionfor identification of self-awareness, it clearly is not anecessary condition. As both the case of M.J.H. andK.H.51 have shown, an individual may possess accu-rate and detailed self-knowledge in the absence ofan ability to identify self via visual channels. This isnot surprising, given that the seemingly unitary selfactually may be composed of a number of different,functionally isolable (though normally interacting)systems.NeuroimagingA considerable number of recent neuroimagingstudies appear to be on a mission to locate the “self.”But what is “the self” that neuroimagers attempt tocapture with their pictures of the brain? The results,as the reviewers point out, thus far have been lessthan encouraging.90As we have argued in this paper, the idea that thereis a “self” to be found is based on the premise (in ourestimation, false) that there is a “self to be found.”Rather, as we have tried to show, the self consistsin a collection of contents, aspects, and functions.No wonder meta-analytic assessments of the suc-cess of self-localization via imaging techniques havebeen discouraging.90 Different self-related tasks ac-tivate different aspects of the general construct, lead-ing of necessity to a diversity of conclusions. Putmore positively, what these studies seem to be say-ing is that the self is a multiplicity, and thus theidea of localizing an entity called the “self” is anonstarter.What ultimately is as important as the specificitywith which our imaging techniques can capturemental/neural activity in the brain is the specificitywith which our constructs can capture the essence of10 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memorywhat they are intended to describe.91 As Polanyi,92perhaps echoing Wittgenstein, long ago warned:“. . .either you know what you are looking for,and then there is no problem; or you do notknow what you are looking for, and then youcannot expect to find anything.” (p. 22).Episodic memory and identity through timeAs reported above, patient D.B. suffered a particu-larly dense amnesia affecting his memory for per-sonal events, which occurred both before and afterhis illness. In contrast, his general knowledge andlanguage skills appeared relatively intact. To doc-ument D.B.’s memory deficits, we administered abattery of tests designed to assess both anterogradeand retrograde memory function. Testing revealedhe had profound difficulty remembering events andexperiences from his own past, but was able to pro-vide accurate information about a number of is-sues and events that had been in the public domain.This pattern of selective memory impairment—aloss of the lived past accompanied by relative spar-ing of the known past—is consistent with a largebody of research from experimental and cognitiveneuroscience documenting dissociations betweenepisodic and semantic memory functioning inamnesia.93A novel contribution of the study of patient D.B.44concerns the effects of his amnesia on his ability toimagine the future. In parallel with his difficultiesremembering his personal past, D.B. had severe dif-ficulty imagining what his experiences might be likein the future.45,94 By contrast, his capacity to an-ticipate issues and events in the public domain waslargely indistinguishable from that of neurologicallyhealthy, age-matched controls.These findings may extend our understanding ofthe relation between memory and temporal identity.In an influential series of papers, Tulving 42,45,95 ar-gued that episodic memory differs from other formsof memory in that it alone enables one to relive per-sonal events from the past and mentally project one’sexistence into the future. Tulving42,45 has coined theterm autonoesis to describe the type of awarenessaccompanying episodic recollection that enables aperson to mentally travel through subjective time.The impairment of personal temporal orientationsuffered by patient like D.B. can thus be attributedto a disturbance in autonoetic consciousness.While the research just reviewed might suggestthe conclusion that absent episodic memory, a senseof self through time would be lacking or absent,this is not necessarily the case. Our research alsosuggests that semantic memory makes possible aform of mental time travel, albeit one that does notentail awareness of the temporal dimension of one’sown experience. Specifically, D.B., who does possesssemantic memory, is capable of knowing about, butnot re-experiencing, previous states of the worldand drawing on that generic knowledge to constructpossible impersonal scenarios of the future. Thus, hemay be able to infer his placement in a chronology ofevents without simultaneously being able to call updistinct, personal imagery of himself in that past andfuture.It thus would seem that the ability to mentallytravel back and forth in time is not wedded to a par-ticular form of memorial experience; rather, thereappear to be qualitatively different types of tem-poral experience associated with different forms ofmemory. It is the episodic variant, which appearsprimarily related to what might best be termed tem-poral personal identity. This is consistent with find-ings of identity loss accompanying episodic amne-sia in dissociative identity disorders such as Fuguestates.96ConclusionsThe case studies we have summarized add to agrowing body of evidence demonstrating that somecomponents of the self can be selectively sparedwhile others are profoundly damaged.18,28,37,42,72,97Across these cases, trait self-knowledge has beenpreserved in the face of impairments to episodicretrieval,18 personal temporality,44 general worldknowledge,40,72 and the meta-representational skillsthat allow self-reflection.40,49In fact, to the best of our knowledge, there are nodocumented cases in which a person has lost traitself-knowledge while retaining other componentsof the self. Of the systems of self we have exam-ined, the semantic self-knowledge system seems themost resilient in the face of the cognitive chaos re-sulting from developmental and/or environmentaldamage to the brain. This is both an empirical factand a mystery for which we have, at present, noexplanation.Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 11Self and memory Klein & GangiFinal thoughtsAt its most general level, our point is this. Tounderstand what it means, cognitively, to have a“self,” divide and conquer may be the best re-search strategy, and the fractionation provided byneuropsychological data may provide a particularlyuseful database. Although the corpus of relevantneuropsychological cases is still small, it already sug-gests that “the self” is actually composed of a num-ber of functionally independent systems.28,29,34,90These include, but are not limited to: (a) semanticrepresentations of one’s own personality traits, (b)episodic memories of one’s own life, (c) knowledgeof facts about one’s own life, (d) a sense of personalagency and ownership, (e) the ability to self-reflect,(f) the experience of continuity of personal identitythrough time, and (g) ability to recognize represen-tations of self (e.g., in mirrors, photographs).By developing a careful model of each, one caneventually put the pieces together. Detailed, com-putationally explicit models of each piece will al-low one to discover which components actually arethe outputs of a single mechanism; when one com-ponent of the self requires another component tooperate properly, without being reducible to thatcomponent; and when two (or more) componentsof the self coexist and jointly contribute to men-tal life, without requiring one another to operate.Paradoxically, a research strategy that assumes theself is divided may be the fastest way to learn howthe parts come together to create the experienceof unity derived from our knowledge of self byacquaintance.Conflicts of interestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.References1. Allport, G.W. 1961. Patterns and Growth in Personality.Holt, Rinehart & Winston. New York, NY.2. Russell, B. 1912/1999.The Problems of Philosophy. DoverPublications. Mineola, NY.3. Russell, B. 1913/1992. Theory of Knowledge. Routledge.New York, NY.4. Cassam, Q. 1997. Self and World. Oxford UniversityPress. New York, NY.5. Dainton, B. 2008. The Phenomenal Self . Oxford Univer-sity Press. New York, NY.6. Foster, J. 1991. The Immaterial Self . Routledge. NewYork, NY.7. Gallagher, S. & J. Shear. 1999. Models of the Self . ImprintAcademic. Thorverton, UK.8. Hasker, W. 1999. The Emergent Self . Cornell UniversityPress. Ithaca, NY.9. James, W. 1890. Principles of Psychology, Vol. 1. HenryHolt and Company. New York, NY.10. Jopling, D.A. 2000. Self-knowledge and the Self . Rout-ledge. New York, NY.11. Kolak, D. 1999. Life, Death and Personal Identity: InSearch of Myself . Wadsworth Publishing Co. Belmont,CA.12. Kolak, D. & R. Martin. 1991. Self & Identity: Contem-porary Philosophical Issues. Collier Macmillan Canada.Toronto, Canada.13. Lapsley, D.K. & F.C. Power. 1988. Self, Ego and Identity.Springer-Verlag. New York, NY.14. Leary, M.R. & J.P. Tangney. 2003. Handbook of Self andIdentity. The Guilford Press. New York, NY.15. Legrand, D. & P. Ruby. 2009. What is self-specific? Theo-retical investigation and critical review of neuroimagingresults. Psychol. Rev. 116: 252–282.16. Augustine, St. 1980. InConfessions. Gibb, J. & W. Monte-gomery, Eds.: Garland Press. New York, NY. Translationby E. B. Pusey (1955).17. Dalla Barba, G. 2002. Memory, Consciousness and Tem-porality. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Norwell, MA.18. Klein, S.B., K. Rozendale & L. Cosmides. 2002. A social-cognitive neuroscience analysis of the self. Soc. Cogn. 20:105–135.19. Klein, S.B., T.P. German, L. Cosmides & R. Gabriel.2004. A theory of autobiographical memory: necessarycomponents and disorders resulting from their loss. Soc.Cogn. 22: 460–490.20. Brennan, A. 1988.Conditions of Identity. Oxford Univer-sity Press. New York, NY.21. Baillie, J. 1993. Problems in Personal Identity. ParagonHouse. New York, NY.22. Johnstone, H.W. 1970.TheProblemof the Self . The Penn-sylvania State University Press. University Park, PA.23. Williams, B. 1973. Problems of the Self . Cambridge Uni-versity Press. Cambridge, UK.24. Sorabji, R. 2006. Self: Ancient and Modern Insights aboutIndividuality, Life, and Death. The University of ChicagoPress. Chicago, IL.25. Conway, M.A. 2005. Memory and the self. J. Mem. Lang.53: 594–628.26. Neisser, U. 1988. Five kinds of self-knowledge. Philos.Psychol. 1: 35–39.12 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memory27. Kihlstrom, J.F. & S.B. Klein. 1994. The self as a knowledgesystem. InHandbook of Social Cognition. Vol 1. Basic Pro-cesses. Wyer, R.S. & T.K. Srull, Eds.: 153–208. Erlbaum.Hillsdale, NJ.28. Klein, S.B. 2001. A self to remember: a cognitive neu-ropsychological perspective on how self creates memoryand memory creates self. In Individual Self, RelationalSelf, and Collective Self . Sedikides, C. & M.B. Brewer,Eds.: 25–46. Psychology Press. Philadelphia, PA.29. Klein, S.B. 2004. The cognitive neuroscience of knowingone’s self. In The Cognitive Neurosciences III . Gazzaniga,M.A., Ed.: 1007–1089. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.30. Klein, S.B. in press. The self: as a construct in psychol-ogy and neuropsychological evidence for its multiplicity.WIREs: Cogn. Sci.31. Parkin, A.J. & N.R.C. Leng. 1993. Neuropsychology of theAmnesic Syndrome. Erlbaum. Hillsdale, NJ.32. Tulving, E. 1983. Elements of Episodic Memory. OxfordUniversity Press. New York, NY.33. Weiskrantz, L. 1997. Consciousness Lost and Found. Ox-ford University Press. New York, NY.34. Klein, S.B., L. Cosmides, J. Tooby & S. Chance. 2002. De-cisions and the evolution of memory: multiple systems,multiple functions. Psychol. Rev. 109: 306–329.35. Klein, S.B., T.E. Robertson, C.E. Gangi & J. Loftus. 2008.The functional independence of trait self-knowledge:commentary on Sakaki (2007). Memory 16: 556–565.36. Klein, S.B. & J. Loftus. 1993. The mental representationof trait and autobiographical knowledge about the self.In Advances in Social Cognition, Vol. 5. Srull, T.K. & R.S.Wyer, Eds. Erlbaum. Hillsdale, NJ.37. Klein, S.B., J. Loftus & J.F. Kihlstrom. 1996. Self-knowledge of an amnesic patient: toward a neuropsy-chology of personality and social psychology. J. Exp. Psy-chol.: Gen. 125: 250–260.38. Stuss, D.T. & D.A. Guzman. 1988. Severe remote mmeoryloss with minimal anterograde amnesia: a clincial note.Brain Cogn. 8: 21–30.39. Klein, S.B., J. Loftus, J.G. Trafton & R.W. Fuhrman. 1992.Use of exemplars and abstractions in trait judgments: amodel of trait knowledge about the self and others. J.Pers. Soc. Psychol. 63: 739–753.40. Klein, S.B., L. Cosmides & K.A. Costabile. 2003. Pre-served knowledge of self in a case of Alzheimer’s De-mentia. Soc. Cogn. 21: 157–165.41. Klein, S.B., R.H. Gabriel, C.E. Gangi & T.E. Robertson.2008. Reflection on the self: a case study of a Prosopag-nosic patient. Soc. Cogn. 26: 766–777.42. Tulving, E. 1993. Self-knowledge of an amnesic indi-vidual is represented abstractly. In Advances in SocialCognition, Vol. 5. Srull, T.K. & R.S. Wyer, Eds.: 147–156.Erlbaum. Hillsdale, NJ.43. Young, K. & J.L. Saver. 2001. The neurology of narrative.Substance 30: 72–84.44. Klein, S.B., J. Loftus & J.F. Kihlstrom. 2002. Memory andtemporal experience: the effects of episodic memory losson an amnesic patient’s ability to remember the past andimagine the future. Soc. Cogn. 20: 353–379.45. Tulving, E. 1985. Memory and consciousness. Can. Psy-chol. 26: 1–12.46. Frith, C.D. 1992. The Cognitive Neuropsychology ofSchizophrenia. Erlbaum/Taylor & Francis. East Sussex,England.47. Gallagher, S. 2000. Philosophical conceptions of the self:implications for cognitive science. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4:14–21.48. Katzko, M.W. 2003. Unity versus multiplicity: a concep-tual analysis of the term “self” and its use in personalitytheories. J. Pers. 71: 83–114.49. Robinson, M.F. & W. Freeman. 1954. Psychosurgery andthe Self . Grune & Stratton. New York, NY.50. Gillihan, S.J. & M.J. Farah. 2005. Is self special? A criticalreview of evidence from experimental psychology andcognitive neuroscience. Psychol. Bull. 131: 76–97.51. Hehman, J., T.P. German & S.B. Klein. 2005. Impairedself-recognition from recent photographs in a caseof late-stage Alzheimer’s disease. Soc. Cogn. 23: 116–121.52. Wheeler, M.A., D.T. Stuss & E. Tulving. 1997. Toward atheory of episodic memory: the frontal lobes and auto-noetic consciousness. Psychol. Bull. 121: 331–354.53. Hintzman, D.L. 1986. “Schema abstraction” in a multi-trace memory model. Psychol. Rev. 93: 411–428.54. Klein, S.B., J. Loftus & H.A. Burton. 1989. Two self-reference effects: the importance of distinguishing be-tween self-descriptiveness judgments and autobiograph-ical retrieval in self-referent encoding. J. Pers. Soc.Psychol. 56: 853–865.55. Klein, S.B., S.H. Babey & J.W. Sherman. 1997. Thefunctional independence of trait and behavioral self-knowledge: methodological considerations and new em-pirical findings. Soc. Cogn. 15: 183–203.56. Galton, F. 1879. Psychometric experiments.Brain2:149–162.57. Crovitz, H.F. & H. Schiffman. 1974. Frequency ofepisodic memories as a function of their age. Bull. Psy-chon. Soc. 4(5B): 517–518.58. Cermak, L.S. & M. O’Connor. 1983. The anterogradeand retrograde retrieval ability of a patient with amnesiadue to encephalitis. Neuropsychologia 21: 213–234.Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 13Self and memory Klein & Gangi59. Kircher, T.T.J., C. Senior, M.L. Phillips, et al. 2000. To-wards a functional neuroanatomy of self processing: ef-fects of faces and words. Cogn. Brain Res. 10: 133–144.60. Starkstein, S.E., L. Sabe & M.F. Dorrego. 1997. Severeretrograde amnesia after a mild closed head injury. Neu-rocase 3: 105–109.61. Caramazza, A. & J. Shelton. 1998. Domain-specificknowledge systems in the brain: the animate-inanimatedistinction. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 10: 1–34.62. Mills, M.A. 1998. Narrative Identity and Dementia. Ash-gate Publications, Ltd. Aldershot, UK.63. Seigler, I.C., D.V. Dawson & K.A. Welsh. 1994. Caregiverratings of personality change in Alzheimer’s Disease pa-tients: a replication. Psychol. Aging 9: 464–466.64. Ahern, C.A., F.B. Wood & C.M. McBrien. 1998. Preservedvocabulary and reading acquisition in an amnesic child.InBrain andValues. Pribram, K., Ed.: 277–298. Erlbaum.Mahwah, NJ.65. Vargha-Khadem, F., D.G. Gadian, K.E. Watkins, et al.1997. Differential effects of early hippocampal pathologyon episodic and semantic memory.Science 277:376–380.66. Baron-Cohen, S. 1995. Mindblindness: An Essay onAutism and Theory ofMind. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.67. Leslie, A.M. 1987. Pretense and representation: the ori-gins of “Theory of mind”. Psychol. Rev. 94: 412–426.68. Cosmides, L. & J. Tooby. 2000. Consider the source: theevolution of adaptations for decoupling and metarep-resentation. In Metarepresentations: A MultidisciplinaryPerspective. Sperber, D., Ed.: 53–115. Oxford UniversityPress. New York, NY.69. Klein, S.B., R.L. Chan & J. Loftus. 1999. Independenceof episodic and semantic self-knowledge: the case fromautism. Soc. Cogn. 17: 413–436.70. Boucher, J. & D. Bowler. 2008. Memory and Autism.Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK.71. Crane, L. & L. Goddard. 2007. Episodic and semantic au-tobiographical memory in adults with autism spectrumdisorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 38: 498–506.72. Klein, S.B., L. Cosmides, K.A. Costabile & L. Mei. 2002.Is there something special about the self? A neuropsy-chological case study. J. Res. Pers. 36: 490–506.73. Sperber, D. & D. Wilson. 1995. Relevance: Communica-tion and Cognition, 2nd edn. Blackwell. Oxford, UK.74. Klein, S.B., L. Cosmides, E.R. Murray & J. Tooby. 2004.On the acquisition of knowledge about personality traits:does learning about the self engage different mechanismsthan learning about others? Soc. Cogn. 22: 367–390.75. Baron-Cohen, S., A.M. Leslie & U. Frith. 1985. Does theautistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition 21:37–46.76. Mitchell, P. & K. O’Keefe. 2008. Brief report: do individ-uals with autism spectrum disorder think they knowtheir own minds? J. Autism Dev. Disord. 38: 1591–1597.77. Toichi, M. 2008. Episodic memory, semantic memoryand self-awareness in high-functioning autism. In Mem-ory and Autism. Boucher, J. & D. Bowler, Eds.: 143–165.Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK.78. Klein, S.B. & J. Loftus. 1988. The nature of self-referentencoding: the contributions of elaborative and organi-zational processes. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 55: 5–11.79. Klein, S.B. & J.F. Kihlstrom. 1986. Elaboration, organi-zation, and the self-reference effect in memory. J. Exp.Psychol: General 115: 26–38.80. Hobson, J.A., R. Harris, R. Garcia-Perez & R.P. Hobson.2009. Anticipatory concern: a study in autism. Dev. Sci.12: 249–263.81. Lombardo, M.V., J.L. Barnes, S.J. Wheelwright & S.Baron-Cohen. 2007. Self-referential cognition and em-pathy in autism. PloS ONE 9: 1–11.82. Westmacott, R., M. Freedman, S.E. Black, et al. 2004.Temporally graded semantic memory loss in Alzheimer’sdisease: cross–sectional and lognitudinal studies. Cogn.Neuropsychol. 21: 353–378.83. Kazui, H., M. Hashimoto, N. Hirono & E. Mori. 2003.Nature of personal semantic memory: evidence fromAlzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychologia 41: 981–988.84. Harrison, B.E., B.A. Therrien & B.J. Giordani. 2005.Alzheimer’s disease behaviors from past self-identities:an exploration of the memory and cognitive fea-tures. Am. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. Other Dement. 20: 248–254.85. Rankin, K.P., E. Baldwin, C. Pace-Savitsky, et al. 2005.Self awareness and personality change in dementia. J.Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 76: 632–639.86. Ruby, P., F. Collette, A. D’Argembeau, et al. in press. Per-spective taking to assess Self-personality: what’s modifiedin Alzheimer’s disease? Neurobiol. Aging .87. Cohen, D. & C. Eisdorfer. 1986.The Loss of Self: A FamilyResource for the Care of Alzheimer’s Disease and RelatedDisorders. W.W. Norton. New York, NY.88. Ronch, J.L. 1996. Mourning and grief in late lifeAlzheimer’s dementia: revisiting the vanishing self. Am.J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 11: 25–28.89. Parker, S.T., R.W. Mitchell & M.L. Boccia. 1994. Self-Awareness in Animals and Humans: Developmental Per-spectives. Cambridge University Press. New York, NY.90. Ruby, P. & D. Legrand. 2007. Neuroimaging the self? InSensorimotor Foundations of Higher Cognition. Rossetti,Y., P. Haggard & M. Kawato, Eds.: 22nd Attention &14 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.Klein & Gangi Self and memoryPerformance Meeting, pp. 293–318. Oxford UniversityPress. New York, NY.91. Uttal, W.R. 2001. The New Phrenology. MIT Press. Cam-bridge, MA.92. Polanyi, M. 1967. The Tacit Dimension. Anchor Books.Garden City, NY.93. Schacter, D.L. & E. Tulving, Eds. 1994. Memory Systems1994. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.94. Dalla Barba, G., J.Y. Cappelletti, M. Signorini & G. Denes.1997. Confabulation: remembering another’ past, plan-ning another’s future. Neurocase 3: 425–436.95. Tulving, E. & M. Lepage. 2000. Where in the brain isthe awareness of one’s past. In Memory, Brain, and Be-lief . Schacter, D.L. & E. Scarry, Eds.: 208–228. HarvardUniversity Press. Cambridge, MA.96. Kihlstrom, J.F. & D.L. Schacter. 1995. Functional disor-ders of autobiographical memory. In Handbook of Mem-ory Disorders. Baddeley, A.D., B.A. Wilson & F.N. Watts,Eds.: 337–364. Wiley. New York, NY.97. Rathbone, C.J., C.J.A. Moulin & M.A. Conway. 2009. Au-tobiographical memory and amnesia: using conceptualknowledge to ground the self. Neurocase 15: 405–418.Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 (2010) 1–15 c© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences. 15