ABSTRACT: 
While the social work literature is broader and more holistic than many disciplines, we undoubtedly still limit the knowledge we draw upon in ways that stifle our creativity in conceptualising and attempting to facilitate wellbeing, which flows on to limit our teaching. In particular, the significance to wellbeing of place and social space, the value of informal networks to generate support and opportunities for reciprocity, and the inherent therapeutic value of creative activity appears to be neglected. In this paper we draw upon a small Australian research study around older women and craftmaking to explore how learning from diverse disciplines, such as critical gerontology and textile making, can illuminate our understanding of wellbeing. We relate this discussion to examining notions of ageing that go beyond a focus on illness and deterioration, to enhance positive and diverse concepts of health in the context of everyday life. We then discuss the implications for social work education, with particular emphasis on ageing, and argue that by engaging with a diverse range of disciplines, we are able to think about, teach and advocate for wellbeing in more expansive and useful ways.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article explores the potential of creative design to enhance practice interventions with older people. Drawing on research conducted with nine women in Victoria, Australia, we demonstrate how connecting with principles related to social sustainability within creative design can potentially enhance practice interventions with older people. This work is underpinned by recognition of the centrality of interdependence between those working in diverse disciplines, between practitioners and clients, between community and business interests, and between older people themselves, to generate innovative living, helping and educating synergies. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords: Ageing; Arts and Craft; Creativity; Interdependence; Interdisciplinary Introduction: Re-evaluating the Social Work Knowledge Base There is ready acknowledgement in the social work literature attesting to the rapidly changing practice and policy context, increased workloads and complexity of client issues being encountered by workers (Baines, 2006). These trends, together with emergent areas of concern impacting upon community health, including social, ISSN 0261-5479 print/1470-1227 online q 2011 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/02615479.2011.586568 Correspondence to: Dr Jane Maidment, Senior Lecturer in Social Work, School of Nursing and Human Services, Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology, P.O. Box 540, Christchurch, New Zealand. Email: maidmentj@cpit.ac.nz Jane Maidment, Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology, New Zealand; Selma Macfarlane, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia Social Work Education Vol. 30, No. 6, September 2011, pp. 700–711 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 technological, and environmental sustainability (Zapf, 2009), raise questions about the efficacy of traditional social work education for preparing future practitioners. In a recently published call for action, social work has been dared to foster ‘education that is capable of challenging existing paradigms, critically evaluating emerging alternatives, and encouraging action grounded in new ways of understanding the world’ (Jones, 2010, p. 68). This robust appeal to the profession warrants a serious examination of our existing knowledge base, and consideration of how we might strengthen our capacity to meet emerging practice challenges in order to strengthen individual and community health and wellbeing. Social work education and practice has traditionally been embedded within an understanding and application of theory and method derived from a range of sources. These sources have been variously described using discipline based categorisations, such as psychology, sociology, anthropology, economics, politics, law, medicine and the social sciences (Chenoweth and McAuliffe, 2005). The diversity of knowledge influences on practice have been simultaneously criticised for being incoherent and conceptually untidy (Clark, 2008, p. 44), and praised for their holistic and dynamic nature. Nevertheless, paradigm shifts in the way people live their lives prompted by the impacts of globalisation necessitate a re-examination of the knowledge base that informs social work and the way it is practised. The emergence of global ageing, the exponential growth in geographic mobility of kith and kin, rapidly changing technologies and environmental estrangement require practitioners to engage with an expanded understanding of ecological knowledge and awareness (Jones, 2010), a deepened sense of the spiritual influences on wellbeing, in conjunction with overt political activism (Besthorn, 2003). In the interests of promoting strategies to nurture sustainable individual and community wellbeing, connections between social work and a broader content and process knowledge base is warranted. These efforts to think and engage more generally across diverse sources of knowledge and insight also need to be reflected in our social work curriculum and continuing professional education. Using research conducted with nine women in Victoria, Australia we demonstrate how connecting with principles related to social sustainability within creative design can potentially enhance practice interventions with older people. This work is underpinned by recognition of the centrality of interdependence between those working in diverse disciplines, between practitioners and clients, between community and business interests, and between older people themselves, to generate innovative living, helping and educating synergies. For social work, moving beyond consideration of wellbeing within a strictly health focused paradigm signals a readiness to communicate and promote education not only between health related disciplines but together with practitioners, volunteers and laypeople in quite different fields. The rationale for such an approach can be found in Popper’s assertion that, ‘We are not students of some subject matter, but students of problems. And problems may cut right across the borders of any subject matter or discipline’ (Popper, 1963, p. 88). While Popper’s ‘problem’ focused discourse does not particularly resonate with social Social Work Education 701 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 work, recognising the potential for diverse parties with different forms of expertise to contribute to solution building is generally a supported tenet in this discipline (Saleeby and Day, 2008). With this principle in mind it has been argued that there is always the potential for substantial omission (of understanding) if issues based knowledge is wholly constructed within specific disciplines (Campbell, 1969 cited in Ellis, 2008, p. 8). To this end we argue that social work practice with older people will be strengthened through interdisciplinary educational inquiry and intervention, where students discover not simply the content contribution that diverse disciplines make to shaping wellbeing, but learn the skills and processes for crossing ontological and epistemological borders, making this type of collaboration a practice reality. Our work with older craftswomen in Victoria has demonstrated to us that the liminal thresholds ‘betwixt and between’ disciplines (Ellis, 2008), offer up unexplored territories and significant potential for promoting wellbeing amongst older people. Not surprisingly, this conceptualisation of what might be ‘relevant’ information for practice prompts reconsideration of the relationship between power and knowledge, the potential for some migration of specialisms, with the hybridisation of knowledge development between disciplines being inevitable (Ellis, 2008, p. 11). Subsequent implications for breaking down the existing knowledge silos for social work practice and education are discussed in more depth later in this article. Suffice at this stage to signal that a re-examination of this order necessitates engagement with notions of critical pedagogy. Critical pedagogy, according to McArthur (2010, p. 301) ‘has a strong commitment to interdisciplinarity, [regarding] interdisciplinary spaces as crucial to the pursuit of emancipatory ideals’, and thus vital to higher education’s wider social purpose to create ‘changes in society in the direction of social justice’ (McLean, 2006 cited in McArthur, 2010, pp. 302–303). These wider aims for higher education clearly resonate with social work education and practice. Craft, Wellbeing and Ageing Systematic attempts to research subjective wellbeing in conjunction with the engagement with art and craft have been limited (Reynolds, 2010, p. 135). This lack of attention to the contribution that creative endeavours make towards fostering personal health is evidenced through a review of 1,085 articles within the first 65 volumes of Social Indicators Research where not one publication documented the impact of participation in the arts on wellbeing (Michalos, 2005, p. 12). Further indications of inattention to the relationship between the arts and wellbeing is reflected in the social work literature, where a review of the last 10 years of publication records in six prominent social work journals (Australian Social Work; British Journal of Social Work; Social Work Education; Families in Society; Canadian Journal of Social Work; International Social Work) found just seven articles exploring participation in arts and crafts in association with social work practice and research. As such the connection between fostering wellbeing with participation in arts and craft is rarely acknowledged in social work, despite reminders in the professional literature that creativity has positive associations with wellbeing, health and life satisfaction 702 J. Maidment & S. Macfarlane D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 (Grace et al., 2009, p. 241), with artistic expression being associated with strengthening identity, building resilience and facilitating solace and healing (Crisp, 2010). As social work educators and practitioners we recognise that we bring not only professional knowledge to our work, but also our personal, multi-faceted selves. Our own experiences of wellbeing stem from many sources and are part of our identities. For those of us who are craftswomen, we carry this involvement—or even passion— with us; in the same way, other social workers who are musicians or writers or walkers bring these aspects of their identity and wellbeing to their work. While we may consider these pastimes and creative endeavours to be therapeutic, empowering and enriching in our own lives, it seems we have not adequately acknowledged their beneficial nature in the lives of others, particularly those labelled as ‘clients’. Most of us did not study such things as part of our social work education; in fact, while notions of illness, oppression and disempowerment were addressed, the notion of ‘wellbeing’ in a more holistic and creative sense has been widely neglected in traditional social work education. We therefore draw upon the textile and crafting literature to illustrate how creative endeavours may be used to promote wellbeing. Craft has been identified as an item that fulfils a function, requires the use of the hands to create and uses materials identified as natural—something both functional and aesthetically pleasing (MacEachren, 2004). Historically, textile handcrafting was entwined with women’s history: work done in the private sphere that was relatively child safe and could be picked up and put down—‘the most visible result of women’s labour [providing] tangible lasting proof of a woman’s skills’ (Johnson and Wilson, 2005, p. 115). Despite many viable alternatives available today, handcrafts have not disappeared (Johnson and Wilson, 2005). Engagement with craft provides an experience that ‘balances and unifies the needs of both mind and body’ (MacEachren, 2004, p. 143). Csikszentmihalyi (1990 cited in Reynolds, 2010, p. 136) suggests that ‘serious leisure activities’—those that invite challenge and commitment—are linked with the experience of ‘flow’, which describes ‘an experience of deep engagement’. This feeling of engagement or interest is an emotion that is both a form of wellbeing in itself, and one that may lead to other forms of wellbeing such as the development of diverse life experiences and skills (Dik and Hansen, 2008). Textile handcrafting has also been described as a means of dealing particularly with health related issues as well as stressful situations of daily life, promoting mental health, while ‘forging an alternative identity to that of being a sick person’ (Gandolfo and Grace, 2009, p. 16). Reynolds (2010, p. 138), in her study of how visual art-making (including craft and painting) contributed to the subjective wellbeing of older women in the UK, found that the women valued art-making for ‘its capacity to stimulate thought and learning’, and the way everyday life was enriched by ‘sensuous experiences, challenges, playful experiments, and the pleasure of developing new skills and expertise’. Contemporary women crafters affirm that craft contributes to their sense of a meaningful identity, as they realise their individual goals and creative aspirations (Schofield-Tomschin and Littrell, 2001), and leave a trail of artefacts that affirm the role they have with family and friends (Johnson and Wilson, 2005). Art-making as Social Work Education 703 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 a process can be particularly important in protecting older women’s self-identities, which may suffer due to ageist stereotyping and exclusionary social practices (Schofield-Tomschin and Littrell, 2001; Reynolds, 2010). As such the experience of vulnerability and frailty that older women may experience can co-exist with wisdom, resilience and affirmation (Gattuso, 2003). In addition to being useful and unique, ‘textile objects communicate meanings to producers and owners’ (Schofield-Tomschin and Littrell, 2001, p. 42). ‘Mastering the skills to make a useful item allows the maker to offer to others the “gifts” embedded in the made item’—for example the warmth of socks (MacEachren, 2004, p. 145). Making an item that is useful to another is a form of serving or sharing that encourages a sense of citizenship while contributing to community wellbeing (MacEachren, 2004), often across generations. The importance of reciprocity, as suggested here, resonates with notions of connection, contribution and attachment to community, bringing with it a sense of generativity and meaning in life (Craft and Grasser, 1998). Our own research into the relationship between craft and wellbeing amongst older women demonstrates engagement with these activities is often associated with fostering experiential forms of learning in supportive peer learning environments (Maidment and Macfarlane, 2008), where opportunities exist for increasing social networks and relationship building (Schofield-Tomschin and Littrell, 2001; Johnson and Wilson, 2005). Schofield-Tomschin and Littrell (2001) observe that ‘women bind themselves symbolically to other women by their membership in small social groups’ (2001, p. 41). At a time of life when friendship may become more difficult to maintain, ‘natural’ network groups—those based on common interests—can contribute significantly to combating loneliness, decreasing isolation and enhancing wellbeing in older age (Stevens, 2001), with recent research noting that due to geographic mobility and changing employment patterns older people are more likely to depend upon their own ‘personal community’ rather than kin to provide companionship (Gray, 2009, p. 8). In conjunction with these observations the sustaining protective and restorative health functions of sturdy friendships are well documented in recent research (Cummins and Mead, 2008), as is the capacity for craft groups to provide the infrastructure to foster these strong friendship networks (Maidment and Macfarlane, 2008). Research Method and Design The initial premise on which we developed our pilot research included the position statement that participation by older women with informal craft activities could ameliorate the need for engagement with formal social services. The focus for this inquiry grew out of recognition that social connection and subjective wellbeing appear to provide protective effects against ill-health and mortality in the aged (Malta, 2005; Reynolds, 2010), while at the same time noting that the impact of participation in the arts on wellbeing has been comprehensively ignored (Michalos, 2005). Given our own observations of the large numbers of older women participating in some form of craft venture we were curious to explore the curative, restorative and protective factors these activities appeared to offer. 704 J. Maidment & S. Macfarlane D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 The literature review for this research took us as social workers into the hitherto unfamiliar disciplines of textile design, as discussed above (Schofield-Tomschin and Littrell, 2001) and micro geographies (Wiles et al., 2008), where the concepts of place, space and belonging, nurturing creativity and meaning making provide diverse explanations on factors that promote wellbeing. As such our pilot research with older craftswomen provides an example of crossing the traditional knowledge thresholds which inform social work, creating new possibilities for imaginative and sustainable social work intervention in the field of ageing. The method for conducting the research included semi-structured interviews with nine women aged between 54 and 86. The 54-year-old in this sample was a daughter of one of the older participants and as such was the youngest of those interviewed by 16 years. The remaining eight participants were aged between 70 and 84 years of age. The participant craftswomen were sourced from two craft groups in a regional town based in Victoria, Australia. These women volunteered to be interviewed after hearing a presentation about the research, its purpose and process from the authors. Prior to conducting the interviews late in 2007 and early 2008, an ethics application was submitted and subsequently approved by the Deakin University Ethics Committee. Given the regional site for this study, particular care needed to be taken to ensure that the identity of individual participants was protected. To this end all results have been reported using pseudonyms with other unique identifying information offered during the interviews being removed. Participants were provided with examples of the questions prior to conducting the interviews in order to have a sense of the sorts of information being sought. Examples of these questions include ‘What do you get out of being involved in craftwork?’ and ‘To what extent (if any) does craftwork contribute to your own sense of wellbeing?’. The interviews lasted between 45 minutes and two hours. They were audio-recorded, transcribed and then organised using Nvivo. The data were subsequently coded and analysed independently by two of the researchers. While the scope and focus of this article does not provide an opportunity for comprehensive feedback on the analysis procedure and specific results [and these can be found in publications elsewhere (Maidment and Macfarlane, 2008, 2011)], the trends indicated in the findings suggest that social work educators and practitioners have much to learn about the wellbeing, expression of autonomy and personal agency of older people through engaging with discourses commonly found in creative arts. These include taking cognisance of: . The sustenance gained from being amidst creative endeavour, colour and textiles . . . I have a few health problems and sometimes you get up and think I feel terrible today and you can go really down when you feel like that, when your bits and pieces hurt, I feel bad today and then I think to myself I can’t do this to myself, so I’d be better off sewing, and I have a love of materials, and might spend an hour sorting out materials and before I know it I am right into it . . . (Betty) You might go to find the tiniest little piece of material you remember you have for something so you have to go through this great big . . . cane basket, and it’s full . . . and you never throw away any little bits, and you go scrounging through for leaf Social Work Education 705 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 material or something like that, and even at home you are occupied even if you don’t do a lot of craft you are thinking I had some material I could have done a rose or something like that. (Ruby) . The use of arts and craft as a vehicle for bringing potentially isolated groups of people together, generating ongoing friendships and staying connected with others Some days, we didn’t do anything, we just sat there and laughed. We never put pressure on ourselves to have anything done. It’s a matter of getting together and spending a day like women do . . . swap the odd recipe and talk about the grandchildren, and . . . if anything is wrong. (Elizabeth) One of our ladies is 86 and she doesn’t drive . . . so she’s picked up and brought here or wherever we are going. (Ruby) A lot of the girls who started out as loners have now formed friendships in that group and quite often they go to patchwork shops together and have been able to mingle and form new friendships . . . meeting all these new people all different personalities, but with the same love of what we’re doing. (Elsie) . The sense of pride, accomplishment and confidence gained from having made an artefact, learned or taught a new crafting technique . . . I love it when someone asks you, “how did you do that?” . . . and I say, “if you do this and that” . . . and you feel, I don’t know, a bit important. (Elsie) I think if you’re learning something—and at my age in the mid 70s you think you’ve learned all you can—but there is always another thing to get enthused about . . . I enjoy helping people to learn things because I’ve got so much out of it myself. (Betty) . The generative and healing nature of long standing naturally occurring communities of interest . . . We are all in our seventies and we’ve all enjoyed such a long, long time together. (Ruby) I get to meet people I get to be in company with other ladies, and I enjoy doing it. I get a bit lonely . . . so it’s good for me to go out and be with great people. (Helene) . Using craft activities to provide a sense of purpose and meaning in life through contributing to the community and wellbeing of others . . . Whatever we are doing is now helping Red Cross because the sale of what we make goes to help other countries . . . all the appeals, we are helping the Mongolian children at the moment . . . if there’s any disasters whatever we make goes straight into that, but Mongolia was the last project. (Ruby) This is my outlet to be in the free time, to do things for others . . . I like to think I can help somewhere, and when it’s been long since you’ve worked, you can’t give money to charity. But you can provide by doing this work that you like and enjoy . . . and that is a great lift then—how I feel myself, knowing I am helping someone. (Betty) . Use of craft to affirm identity and place in the world . . . . . . we were talking about it and he said to me “If you die while you’re in surgery what will I do with all your quilts?”, because I have some 60 or 70 down there. I said 706 J. Maidment & S. Macfarlane D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 “Don’t worry about them just wrap me up in them, I’m going to be cremated, you can do that and won’t have to buy a coffin”. So the next day when I went to (the group) I was telling them, “Bill (not his real name) is worried I’m going to die so I told me to wrap me up in the quilts”. “Oh don’t do that! Tell him to put in the paper all those attending the service will receive a quilt then you’ll be sure of getting an audience!!”. (Betty) It’s craft with a purpose . . . older women now have got the chance to participate in so much more than they used to be able to, because once they outlived the usefulness of being a grandmother when the grandkids grew up, and weren’t needed any more, so they sat down and become un-needed. (Thelma) . The benefits of experiencing what Csikszentmihalyi (1990 cited in Reynolds, 2010) described as the ‘flow’ . . . I get involved and with the work that I do I am not thinking of other bad things . . . you concentrate and forget, you forget what you’re worried about. (Helene) The passages above illustrate in a small way the multiple benefits to health and wellbeing that the older women we interviewed experienced through being part of a craft group. As educators we were struck with how a low cost intervention, such as linking a person interested in arts and crafts with such a group, could have a powerful flow-on effect, in terms of building and sustaining self-esteem and community connectedness. While this observation may seem self-evident, on examining our social work educational curriculum and professional literature we were struck by the absence of acknowledgment given to the arts as a means of kindling self-worth, meaningful social roles and active community participation. Through completing this research we discovered the liminal spaces between social work and textile design which helped us to conceptualise new understandings and ways for promoting health and wellbeing in social work practice with older people. Reconfiguring Social Work Education? Oversight in the area of the arts and wellbeing has prompted us to question the sorts of knowledge considered as ‘legitimate’ for inclusion in social work education curriculum and discourse. This questioning led us into the territory of the liminal spaces between social work and the disciplines of the arts and textile design and, while not specifically discussed in this article, we were also challenged during the research to consider knowledge dimensions associated with architecture, urban planning and technology studies in terms of the way these discourses impacted upon the women’s craft activities. From our research and own experiences as craftswomen we argue that testing and reconfiguring disciplinary pedagogical boundaries to include consider- ation of disciplines as diverse as creative arts, are likely to open up new empowering ways to work with people and communities. The development of a new lens through which to explore human functioning and potential contributes to the ongoing evolution of social work practice, within an expanded understanding of ecological knowledge and awareness (Jones, 2010). Social Work Education 707 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 Social work’s commitment to respond to everyday human problems across a wide spectrum of practice fields is a hallmark of the profession. Students in professionally qualifying social work courses study a range of subjects from various disciplines including politics, health and sociology, exemplifying awareness of the multi-faceted nature of individual and social life. Social work students develop skills in critical analysis, critical reflection and working across boundaries; hence, students, educators and practitioners are potentially ideally placed to embrace diverse sources of knowledge, whether from other disciplines or outside traditional ‘disciplinary’ categories altogether, in the interests of fostering individual wellbeing and the creation of a more socially just society. At the same time, over the four years of their course, social work students develop a strong sense of themselves as belonging to a unique professional group, and that ‘to be engaged in a discipline is to shape, and be shaped by, the subject, to be part of a scholarly community, to engage with fellow students—to become “disciplined”’ (Parker, 2010, p. 374). Social work is constantly evolving, and while drawing from a strong theory, value and skill base, is ‘modelled not as a citadel . . . guarded by experts, but as a community of practitioners’, taught by educators who believe in and communicate the importance of their discipline, whilst engaging in a reflective, dialogical and critical approach (Parker, 2010, p. 379). This approach includes a commitment to social change, by moving beyond the capacity to think and reflect critically ‘to actively frame problems or issues in a way that points out the road to transformative change’ (McArdle and Mansfield, 2007, p. 496). This willingness to reframe problems or issues enables us as educators to productively deconstruct professional discourses and examine the positions that social workers occupy within them. Our expertise, as social workers and social work educators, may be enhanced by our ability to listen and look for opportunities to step outside disciplinary boundaries: to ‘trade in ideas by transgressing discursive frontiers’, recognising that ideas impact on both the individuals we work with, as well as having resonance within the wider socio- political context (hooks and West, 1991 cited in McLaren, 1996, p. 137). By listening to the group of older craftswomen, we developed a better understanding of the role that craftmaking, community belonging and interconnect- edness had in relation to fostering individual wellbeing. At the same time we were encouraged to recognise the importance of advocating for the provision of creative meeting spaces for all community members, and developing imaginative ways in which the needs of older people are interwoven into a range of opportunities that provide genuine and empowering choices for people as they age. Disciplines then, can be seen and experienced not so much as ‘demarcations but communities . . . with fluid structures based on common concerns’ (Parker, 2010, p. 381). Students can be encouraged to engage, not simply with curriculum content, but with the ‘processes of knowledge production . . . asking questions about the nature of the knowledge [needed] in order to engage with and practise the discipline’ (Parker, 2010, pp. 381–382). This ‘critical professionalism’ can be enhanced by strategies that promote interdependence in higher education (Davidson, 2004, p. 299). For educators, this process involves decentering the academic self by acknowledging that there 708 J. Maidment & S. Macfarlane D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 are diverse ways of knowing the world, critically engaging with the wider purposes of (disciplinary-based) work, and looking over ‘the hedges surrounding our own discipline’ (Davidson, 2004, p. 305). This pursuit does not require the abandonment of one’s own ‘academic tribe and territory’, but involves working collaboratively to explore issues across disciplines (Davidson, 2004, p. 310). We learned this lesson through conducting our research with older women engaged in crafting, where we discovered paradigms more commonly associated with creativity, art and design have much to offer our professional understanding of personal and community wellbeing. Our experience in this research affirms the claim that if social work educators have a responsibility to ‘be leaders in building a society where human worth is not defined in monetary terms’ (Wehbi and Turcotte, 2007, pp. 3–6) we need to draw on an even wider range of thought and experience, to ensure that deeper explanations of social problems and their potential remedies are not jettisoned in favour of superficial explanations, primarily aimed more at management and control rather than empowerment and wellbeing (Ferguson, 2008, p 19, citing Howe, 1996). This focus is particularly important in relation to our aged population, whose worth and contribution to community and wider society is often devalued. Adopting critical interdisciplinarity then, can potentially help defend the complexity of higher education (McArthur, 2010, pp. 302–303) and return disciplines to their rightful place for ‘develop[ing] minds to contribute to understanding and knowing how to act in the world’, balancing critique and imagination, while acknowledging the permeable and dynamic nature of disciplinary communities. We are mindful that in this process it is not only higher education that is complex. So too is the rapidly changing world in which practitioners are engaged, necessitating increasingly open minds and imaginations to educate the social workers of the future. The capacity for social work educators and practitioners to make connections across boundaries—disciplinary, paradigmatic, cultural, organisational or group—requires skills in developing deep and genuine knowledge through active curiosity, imaginatively seeking commonalities and interconnections, perceiving and building on strengths, and using power and influence wisely (Adams, 2005, p. 112). By encouraging students to engage in critical reflection and to consider ‘transformational best case scenarios’, educators can assist students to develop a willingness to reconsider practice and embrace new ideas and interdependence in responding to ‘the diversity and full extent of people’s needs’ (Adams, 2005, p. 114). For the older women we talked with, interdependence between the members in their groups, and between the women and the wider community they contributed their craft to, was crucial to their wellbeing. In relation to social work curricula itself, educators can continue to focus on both micro and macro levels of practice, acknowledging the significance of community and place, creativity, connectedness and wellbeing for diverse members in the community. Thismay involve policy advocacy for greater public investment by government in creative and art-related projects across the lifespan; promotion of well-designed urban and non- urban landscapes that cater to all—young, old and in-between; and the creation of community spaces that encourage diverse forms of citizenship and participation. More Social Work Education 709 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 specifically, social work courses need to re-visit the place of ‘the aged’ in their curriculum, as this field of practice continues to be as invisible and marginalised as elders themselves (Hughes and Heycox, 2010), with even feminist literature having neglected to focus on old women, aging, and the political nature of age relations (Calasanti et al., 2006). Fostering health and wellbeing amongst a growing ageing population will require flexible, imaginative and transformational approaches, that encourage connectedness and acknowledge interdependence between older people themselves as well as those working in the caring professions. This approach will require social work educators to extend current discipline-specific educational horizons beyond the grand narratives to include voices from the margins. We argue in this article for educators to shift their pedagogical gaze to include wisdom from the creative arts and textile design when attempting to help students understand the notions of health and wellbeing. References Adams, R. (2005) ‘Working within and across boundaries: tensions and dilemmas’, in Social Work Futures: Crossing Boundaries, Transforming Practice, eds R. Adams, L. Dominelli & M. Payne, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, pp. 99–114. Baines, D. (2006) ‘“If you could change one thing”: social service workers and restructuring’, Australian Social Work, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 20–34. Besthorn, F. H. (2003) ‘Radical ecologisms: insights for educating social workers in ecological activism and social justice’, Critical Social Work: An Interdisciplinary Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 66–106. Calasanti, T., Slevin, K. & King, N. (2006) ‘Ageism and feminism: from “et cetera” to center’,National Women’s Studies Association Journal, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 13–30. Chenoweth, L. & McAuliffe, D. (2005) The Road to Social Work & Human Service Practice, Thomson, Southbank. Clark, J. (2008) ‘Complex approaches to wicked problems: applying Sharon Berlin’s analysis of dichotomous thinking’, Social Work Now: The Practice Journal of Child, Youth and Family, vol. 39, pp. 38–48. Craft, B. & Grasser, C. (1998) ‘The relationship of reciprocity to self health care of older women’, Journal of Women & Ageing, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 35–47. Crisp, B. (2010) Spirituality and Social Work, Ashgate, Burlington, VT. Cummins, R. & Mead, R. (2008) What Makes Us Happy? Australian Unity Wellbeing Index, Survey 18, Report 18.2, Australian Unity, Deakin University, Melbourne. Davidson, M. (2004) ‘Bones of contention: using self and story in the quest to professionalize higher education teaching—an interdisciplinary approach’, Teaching in Higher Education, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 299–310. Dik, B. & Hansen, J. (2008) ‘Following passionate interests to well-being’, Journal of Career Assessment, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 86–100. Ellis, R. (2008) ‘Problems may cut across the borders. Why we cannot do without interdisciplinarity’, in Interdisciplinary Learning and Teaching in Higher Education, eds B. Chandramohan & S. Fallows, Routledge, Hoboken. Ferguson, I. (2008) Reclaiming Social Work: Challenging Neo-liberalism and Promoting Social Justice, SAGE Publications, London. Gandolfo, E. & Grace, M. (2009) . . . It Keeps Me Sane . . . Women Craft Wellbeing, The Vulgar Press, Spotlight, Victoria University, Melbourne. 710 J. Maidment & S. Macfarlane D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 Gattuso, S. (2003) ‘Becoming a wise old woman: resilience and wellness in later life’, Health Sociology Review, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 171–177. Grace, M., Gandolfo, E. & Candy, C. (2009) ‘Crafting quality of life. Creativity and wellbeing’, Journal of Association for Research on Mothering, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 239–250. Gray, A. (2009) ‘The social capital of older people’, Ageing and Society, vol. 29, pp. 5–31. Hughes, M. & Heycox, K. (2010)Older People Ageing and Social Work: Knowledge for Practice, Allen & Unwin, Crows Nest, NSW. Johnson, J. & Wilson, L. (2005) ‘It says you really care: motivational factors of contemporary female handcrafters’, Clothing & Textiles Research Journal, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 115–130. Jones, P. (2010) ‘Responding to the ecological crisis: transformative pathways for social work education’, Journal of Social Work Education, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 67–84. MacEachren, Z. (2004) ‘Function and aesthetics: defining craftsmanship’, Journal of Experiential Education, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 138–151. Maidment, J. & Macfarlane, S. (2008) ‘Craft groups: sites of friendship, empowerment, belonging and learning for older women’, Groupwork, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 10–25. Maidment, J. &Macfarlane, S. (2011) ‘Crafting communities: promoting inclusion, empowerment and learning between older women’, Australian Social Work. DOI: 10.1080/0312407X.2010.520087. Malta, S. (2005) Social Connectedness and Health Amongst Older Adults, TASA Conference, University of Tasmania, 6–8 December. McArdle, K. & Mansfield, S. (2007) ‘Voice, discourse and transformation: enabling learning for the achieving of social change’,Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 485–498. McArthur, J. (2010) ‘Time to look anew: critical pedagogy and disciplines within higher education’, Studies in Higher Education, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 301–315. McLaren, P. (1996) ‘Liberatory politics and higher education: a Frierean perspective’, in Counternarratives: Cultural Studies and Critical Pedagogies in Postmodern Spaces, eds H. Giroux, C. Lankshear, P. McLaren & M. Peters, Routledge, New York & London, pp. 117–148. Michalos, A. (2005) ‘Arts and the quality of life: an exploratory study’, Social Indicators Research, vol. 71, pp. 11–59. Parker, J. (2010) ‘A new disciplinarity: communities of knowledge, learning and practice’, Teaching in Higher Education, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 373–386. Popper, K. (1963) Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge, Routledge and Kegan Paul, New York. Reynolds, F. (2010) ‘“Colour and communion”: exploring the influences of visual art-making as a leisure activity on older women’s subjective well-being’, Journal of Aging Studies, vol. 24, pp. 135–143. Saleeby, D. & Day, P (2008) The Strengths Perspective in Social Work Practice. 5th edn. Allyn & Bacon Inc, Boston, MA. Schofield-Tomschin, S. & Littrell, M. (2001) ‘Textile handcraft guild participation: a conduit to successful aging’, Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 41–51. Stevens, N. (2001) ‘Combating loneliness: a friendship enrichment programme for older women’, Ageing and Society, vol. 21, pp. 183–202. Wehbi, S. & Turcotte, P. (2007) ‘Social work education: neoliberalisms’ willing victim?’, Critical Social Work, vol. 8, no. 1. Wiles, J., Allen, R., Palmer, A., Hayman, K., Keeling, S. & Kerse, N. (2009) ‘Older people and their social spaces: a study of well-being and attachment to place in Aotearoa New Zealand’, Social Science & Medicine, vol. 68, pp. 664–671. Zapf, M. (2009) Social Work and the Environment: Understanding People and Place, Canadian Scholars Press, Toronto. Social Work Education 711 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 2 0:2 4 0 4 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 