ABSTRACT: 
In this paper we posit a radical retheorization of anorexia as a form of deviance. We examine how the disciplinary practices and moral technologies typical of contemporary secondary schooling signify and enter into the articulation of three &lsquo;virtue discourses&rsquo; (discipline, achievement and healthism), and tease out how these &lsquo;virtue discourses&rsquo; play into the formation of the &lsquo;anorexic&rsquo; subject. Informed by Foucauldian theory, our analysis draws on our life history interview study with teenage girls diagnosed with anorexia nervosa and their parents. We argue that anorexia can be understood not as a form of deviance but as a &lsquo;paradox of virtue&rsquo; involving zealous compliance with and taking up of socially and culturally sanctioned &lsquo;virtue discourses&rsquo; that are immanent in schooling and wider society.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
In this paper we posit a radical retheorization of anorexia as a form of deviance. We examine how the disciplinary practices and moral technologies typical of contemporary secondary schooling signify and enter into the articulation of three ‘virtue discourses’ (discipline, achievement and healthism), and tease out how these ‘virtue discourses’ play into the formation of the ‘anorexic’ subject. Informed by Foucauldian theory, our analysis draws on our life history interview study with teenage girls diagnosed with anorexia nervosa and their parents. We argue that anorexia can be understood not as a form of deviance but as a ‘paradox of virtue’ involving zealous compliance with and taking up of socially and culturally sanctioned ‘virtue discourses’ that are immanent in schooling and wider society. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  This is the published version Halse, Christine, Honey, Anne and Boughtwood, Desiree 2007, The paradox of virtue : (re)thinking deviance, anorexia and schooling, Gender and education, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 219-235. Available from Deakin Research Online http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30035148 Reproduced with the kind permission of the copyright owner Copyright: 2007, Taylor and Francis This article was downloaded by: [Deakin University] On: 28 August 2011, At: 18:21 Publisher: Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK Gender and Education Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cgee20 The paradox of virtue: (re)thinking deviance, anorexia and schooling Christine Halse a , Anne Honey a & Desiree Boughtwood a a University of Western Sydney, Australia Available online: 12 Mar 2007 To cite this article: Christine Halse, Anne Honey & Desiree Boughtwood (2007): The paradox of virtue: (re)thinking deviance, anorexia and schooling, Gender and Education, 19:2, 219-235 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540250601166068 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and- conditions This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material. Gender and Education Vol. 19, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 219–235 ISSN 0954–0253 (print)/ISSN 1360–0516 (online)/07/020219–17 © 2007 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/09540250601166068 The paradox of virtue: (re)thinking deviance, anorexia and schooling Christine Halse*, Anne Honey and Desiree Boughtwood University of Western Sydney, Australia Taylor and Francis LtdCGEE_A_216534.sgm10.1080/09540250601166068Gender and Edu ation0954-0253 (pri t)/1360-0516 (online)Original Article2 07 & Francis000Ma ch 2007hristineHalsec. a s @uws. du.au In this paper we posit a radical retheorization of anorexia as a form of deviance. We examine how the disciplinary practices and moral technologies typical of contemporary secondary schooling signify and enter into the articulation of three ‘virtue discourses’ (discipline, achievement and healthism), and tease out how these ‘virtue discourses’ play into the formation of the ‘anorexic’ subject. Informed by Foucauldian theory, our analysis draws on our life history interview study with teenage girls diagnosed with anorexia nervosa and their parents. We argue that anorexia can be understood not as a form of deviance but as a ‘paradox of virtue’ involving zealous compliance with and taking up of socially and culturally sanctioned ‘virtue discourses’ that are immanent in school- ing and wider society. Introduction On a chilly autumn afternoon, Sarah, the 14-year-old daughter of one of the authors, arrived home from school and announced ‘Today I learned how to become an anor- exic’. Gleefully reading her mother’s disquiet, Sarah explained that her physical education class had been taught to avoid dieting and excessive exercise or to risk being smitten by anorexia nervosa (hereafter anorexia).1 Leaving aside the question- able insinuation of causality, Sarah announced that her class had been equipped with all the necessary knowledge ‘to become an anorexic’. Her mother’s insistence that the point was to eat sensible portions of healthy foods and exercise moderately was greeted with distain. In a tone of bored scorn, Sarah explained that her class had been taught not to eat too much and to exercise ‘lots’ when they had ‘done’ obesity. The teachers, she decreed: ‘need to get the story straight’. Sarah’s performance unwittingly exposed the double bind that entangles schools in trying to address the issue of anorexia. Schooling has been implicated in the social construction of the ‘ideal’ body (see Shilling, 1991; Wright, 1997) and the development *Corresponding author. School of Education, University of Western Sydney, Building 1, Bankstown Campus Locked Bag 1797, Penrith South DC NSW 1797, Australia. Email: c.halse@uws.edu.au D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 220 C. Halse et al. and maintenance of eating disorders (see Mensinger, 2001). With anorexic cultures having been identified amongst girls and young women in schools and colleges (Gordon, 2000), academics and the popular press have called for more school-based programmes to address anorexia (see Schwitzer et al., 1998; Berry, 1999). But exactly how schooling and anorexia intersect remains a largely neglected area of scholarly anal- ysis. One exception is the work of Evans and his colleagues in the UK (see Evans, 1988; Evans et al., 2002, 2003, 2004) which has sought to elucidate the relationship ‘between the practices and processes of formal education and the aetiology (the ‘causations’) and development of eating disorders, specifically in young women and girls’ (2004, p. 124). Drawing on interviews with ‘middle class’ girls and Bernstein’s theory of performance codes, Evans et al. (2004) argue that locating eating disorders against ‘a backdrop of intensified school work, a culture dominated and driven by performance modalities’ and body ‘perfection codes expressed through a culture of healthism’ is ‘a necessary precursor not just to understanding disordered eating but as seeing it among other forms of deviance, success and failure in schools’ (p. 132). In everyday usage, deviance is understood as a negative state or a set of undesirable behaviours that diverge from ‘an accepted norm’ (Delbridge et al., 1981, p. 503). This notion of deviance is problematic because it presumes the existence of an iden- tifiable, agreed norm. Nevertheless, deviance persists as an analytical frame for anor- exia in medicine, psychology and sociology. In sociology, deviance is constituted as a property of social systems and social situations involving norm violation and stigma (Marshall, 1998). In bio-medical and psychological discourse, anorexia is constituted as an abnormal biological and/or psychological pathology that marks the ‘anorexic’ as deviant from a generalized ‘normal’ population and warranting correction through medical and/or psychological intervention (Halse & Honey, 2005). In this paper we revisit and offer an alternate theorization of anorexia as a form of deviance. We do not attempt to present a causal explanation of anorexia or a defini- tive answer as to how schools should work to check the incidence of anorexia. Rather, we respond to the invocations of researchers for more contextualized understandings of the sociocultural contribution of schooling to eating disorders (see Mensinger, 2001, p. 427). Specifically, we extend the work of Evans et al. (2004) by addressing two questions arising from their analysis. First, exactly what are the discursive prac- tices and technologies in schools that (might) engender perfectionism and a focus on performance? Second, what are the theoretical implications of construing compliance with dominant social codes and modalities as a form of deviancy? In addressing these questions, we focus explicitly on anorexia amongst teenage girls as a specific and distinct area, whilst recognizing that the incidence of eating disorders amongst males is also a matter of educational, scholarly and public concern (Andersen, 1990; Berry, 1999). Our paper is structured in three parts. In ‘Part 1: theoretical perspectives’, we overview different conceptualizations of anorexia nervosa and the data and theoretical framework used in our analysis. In ‘Part 2, anor- exia and schooling’, we examine how disciplinary regimes and discursive practices in secondary schooling signify and enter into the articulation of three (of many) socially and culturally sanctioned discourses that are taken up and (re)formed in ways that D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 221 make the behaviours and investments of the ‘anorexic’ teenage girl both desirable and not deviant. In ‘Part 3, the paradox of virtue’, we use our preceding analysis to posit a radical retheorization of anorexia as a form of deviance by arguing that anorexia can be read as a ‘paradox of virtue’ constructed through zealous compliance with and taking up of particular socially and culturally sanctioned virtues that permeate and are perpetuated through the discourses embedded in and articulated through the technologies and practices of contemporary secondary schooling. Part 1: theoretical perspectives Background Between 0.5 and 3.7% of the female population are estimated to suffer from anor- exia and the rate is higher amongst girls and young women (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). The incidence of partial or intermittent symptoms of anorexia is even higher with 5–10 times as many girls believed to engage in fasting, self- induced vomiting, and abuse of laxatives and diet pills (Austin, 2001). Anorexia is a painful and difficult experience that often involves multiple hospital admissions, failed clinical interventions, physical self-harm and attempted suicide, and extended separation from education, work, friendships and social interaction that diminish future life opportunities. Five years after diagnosis, approximately 50% of sufferers remain clinically ill (Steinhausen, 2002) and 5–20% of all sufferers die from self-starvation, suicide or related complications (American Psychiatric Associ- ation, 2000; Polivy & Herman, 2002). Anorexia is popularly viewed as a problem defined by race, class and gender: a problem that affects White girls from middle class and affluent families (Brumberg, 1988). A growing body of evidence has demonstrated the inaccuracy of this stereo- type, showing anorexia in a range of ethnic and socio-economic groups (Thompson, 1994; Gard & Freeman, 1996; Katzman & Lee, 1997; Gordon, 2000). As Gordon argues: … the consumer culture and television have done much to level class distinctions in values and aspirations and to universalize the conflicting dilemmas of female identity, [therefore] the class basis of eating disorders may well become a relic of the past. (Gordon, 2000, p. 93) The enigma of what cause/s and sustains anorexia has made it a topic of concern for scholars across a range of disciplines using a variety of epistemological and theo- retical perspectives. Biomedical discourse, for instance, treats anorexia as a physical problem, predisposition or illness, while psychodynamic and psychological discourses constitute anorexia as a consequence of poor self-esteem, body image distortion, a compulsive desire for thinness or family dysfunction. Because bio-medical and psychological discourses construct anorexia as an embodied pathology located within the individual, they have been criticized for decontexualizing and depoliticizing anor- exia. Feminist writers, for instance, have argued that anorexia should be read as a set of practices embedded within and constituted by everyday social, cultural and political D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 222 C. Halse et al. contexts, and have described anorexia as: an expression of social, cultural, political and gender anxieties; a metaphor for sociocultural concerns about consumption, personal display, feminist politics and individualistic competitiveness; a site of cultural and social oppression; and a form of resistance to hegemonic scripts of femininity and patriarchal culture (see Chernin, 1985; Orbach, 1986; Bordo, 1993; Fallon et al., 1994; Malson, 1998). While different discourses constitute anorexia in different, competing ways, popular notions of anorexia as a diet gone wrong (Dolan et al., 1990) or a response to media messages (Bordo, 1993; Way, 1993), understate the complexity of anorexia and sidestep how it is discursively constructed amongst teenage girls in specific social, cultural and historical contexts, including schools. Theoretical positioning of our analysis Our paper makes a start in addressing this theoretical gap by illuminating how three particular ‘virtue’ discourses immanent in contemporary schooling—and society more broadly—help construct the subject positions taken up by ‘anorexic’ teenage girls. We deploy the notion of virtue in its contemporary sense as ‘excellence, merit or good quality’ (Delbridge et al., 1981, p. 503), in contrast to Aristotle’s notion of virtue (arete) as a ‘golden mean’ between the extremes of excess and defect that is necessary for the state of goodness (Aristotle, 1955). In keeping with feminist analyses of anorexia (see Hepworth, 1999; Eckermann, 2003) and established frameworks for analysing educational issues and contexts (see Ball, 1990; Ryan, 1991; Popkewitz & Brennan, 1997), the theoretical positioning of our paper draws on Michel Foucault’s (1977) elucidation of how disciplinary prac- tices, regulatory regimes and moral technologies in schooling signify and enter into the articulation of discourses. Discourses are sets of values, practices and behaviours that institute particular realities, establish regimes of truth, and organize particular ways of thinking about the world that shape subjects and subjectivities. Thus, discourses are constitutive and have moral and political effects because they ‘establish what qualifies as “being”’ (Butler, 1993, p. 188) by categorizing and differentiating between individuals in precise and particular ways. Foucault explicitly turned his attention to the regulatory regimes of schooling in Discipline and Punish (1977), particularly in the chapters entitled ‘Docile bodies’ and ‘The means of correct training’, to show how the material practices of schooling signify and articulate discourses and the subjectivation of individuals. In drawing on Foucault to inform our analysis, we differ from Evans et al. (2003) who contend that Foucault offers ‘no substantive analysis of the complex agencies, agents, social rela- tions through which power, knowledge and discourse are brought into play as regu- lative devices, nor any discussion of modalities of control’ (Evans et al., 2003, p. 207). Like all discourses, the disciplinary practices and regulatory regimes that construct the discourses immanent in schools do not merely subjugate and oppress individuals but are generative and productive (Butler, 1995). Through immersion in and habit- uation to discourse, individuals interiorize external controls and practices and take them up as an internal constraint on the conduct of the self. It is through this process D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 223 that the political and moral technologies of schooling slide into a mode of personal self-regulation known as subjection (assujettissement) whereby the subject is brought ‘from one way of being to another’ (Rose, 1999, p. 250; see also Foucault, 1980). Discourses are not fixed entities but are repeatedly colonized, extended by and conflated with other discourses within schools and in society more broadly (Foucault, 1972, p. 29). Thus, at any time, an individual will be positioned in a discursive network of intersecting discourses and relations. Nor do subjects take up and inter- nalize the practices that signify and articulate discourses in ‘mechanical or fully predictable ways’ (Butler, 1997, p. 19) but discursively (re)configure, (re)form and (re)shape these in different ways into personal modes of being. At the heart of our theoretical stance, therefore, is an ontology of the subject as discursively constructed and constantly in a process of ‘becoming’, in contrast to the fixed, pre-given subject of humanist discourse. As we argue below, this theoretical approach configures agency not as an a priori construct or condition, but as a form of political action within the discourses that inscribe the ‘anorexic’ subject. Method Our discussion draws on two data sources. First, an existing body of research about the generic organization and patterns of operation of secondary schools (see Ball, 1990; Popkewitz et al., 1997; McLeod, 2001; Dussel, 2004; Halse, 2006; Halse et al., 2006). Second, empirical data collected through in-depth, life history interviews with 24 adolescent girls receiving treatment for anorexia nervosa, and separate interviews with 24 parents (16 mothers and 8 fathers) of girls who met these criteria.2 Not all parents and girls came from the same families, and a total of 30 families were repre- sented. In 12 families the girls were receiving outpatient treatment, while girls from 18 families were inpatients. Girls were between 14- and 20-years-old, with an average age of 16.3 years. They had been diagnosed between two weeks and seven years before being interviewed. Participants were recruited from two large, public hospitals in Sydney, the capital city of the state of New South Wales, Australia. Reflecting the diversity of Australian society and the dispersion of anorexia across social and racial groups discussed previ- ously, the sample represented the full range of social groups in terms of socio- economic indicators, including family income, home address, parental education and occupation, and included first and second generation migrant families (China, India and Italy), with the bulk of participants being of Anglo-Australian descent. All girls were attending school when they developed and were diagnosed with anor- exia, and 18 were still enrolled in secondary school at the time of the interview. Reflecting schooling patterns in Australia generally (see Halse, 2006), the majority of girls (n = 16) were attending or had attended comprehensive, co-educational, Government secondary schools; seven attended selective Government high schools (specialist Government schools for students who are talented academically, in sport, in the arts, or in languages), and five attended independent, private schools. Two girls had attended more than one type of secondary school. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 224 C. Halse et al. In contrast to the UK (Walkerdine et al., 2001), no systematic differences were evident in terms of types of school and the schooling discourses that the girls’ and parents’ articulated. This was expected because of the high level of similarity in the operation of different school types in New South Wales where: all schools follow the same curriculum, assessment procedures, and daily school program; schools are monitored by and accountable to the State for compliance; all Government schools receive the same levels of funding and resources regardless of geographic location or the socio-economic status of the suburb or region; and there are no legislated restric- tions on school choice. This differs from the system in some other countries, such as the operation of school districts in the US (see Halse, 2006). The recursive model of interviewing (Minichiello et al., 1990) was used, involving open-ended questions proceeding along the lines of a conversation. Broad areas of interest, such as the development and impact of anorexia, were used to initiate discus- sion, however participants were encouraged to talk about issues that were priorities for them rather than the interviewer. Part 2: discourses of schooling and anorexia Discipline as a virtue and the self-disciplined girl The disciplinary practices and moral technologies of secondary schools regulate the bodies and shape the conduct of children in specific ways (Dussel, 2004, p. 89) that signify and enunciate a discourse of discipline as a socially productive and culturally desirable virtue. Stephen Ball (1990) explained this process: Disciplinary institutions organize physical space and time with activities that have been developed over time to change people’s behaviour along a number of parameters [which determine] not only whether a person is governable—that is, likely to lead a docile, useful, and practical life—but also [to identify] to the individual the ‘true’ self, whereby (s)he becomes classified as an object in various ways for others and is tied to the ‘true’ self as subjected or politically dominated being (Ball, 1990, pp.15–16) In the modernist secondary school, bells, timetables and protocols regulate the approved use of time and bodies: lesson and meal times are fixed; the curriculum is taught within designated timeframes; assignments and assessment tasks have sched- ules and deadlines; and exam times are carefully controlled and monitored. Explicit and implicit rules dictate where it is permissible/unacceptable for students’ bodies to be (e.g., the classroom, playground, library, gymnasium) and the acceptable/unac- ceptable use of bodies in these spaces (e.g., silence/talking; work/play; games/learn- ing; eating/not eating). A range of subtle (and not so subtle) ‘punishments’ work to discipline and normalize the school population in accordance with institutionally approved behaviour: the withdrawal of privileges; detention; physical exclusion from a class or activity; the critical comment on a report card; the stern reprimand from a teacher that identifies and labels non-compliant students as different, deviant and other to the institutionally approved constructions of appropriate/inappropriate behaviour. Punishments are not merely punitive or repressive but political tactics that D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 225 define what is permissible and approved in schools (Foucault, 1977). They work alongside institutionalized systems of rewards and benefits that shape embodied subjects who are indebted to and have a material investment in sustaining the school’s disciplinary regimes: the affirming remark from a teacher; awards and prizes; the posi- tive comment on a report card; and public recognition, for instance through elevation to coveted positions in the school hierarchy such as head of school, captain of a sports team, member of the student council, or prefect. The girls in our study took up the notion of discipline as a virtue, reproducing its regulatory practices in other aspects of their existence including segmenting their daily lives into tidy timeslots with specific, productive purposes: At school, [I’ll] have a sandwich and maybe a salad and then come home. Have two fruits with—um—and start doing homework. Come five [o’clock], just go for a walk… and then I have to—um—have a shower, relax, read and watch TV for half an hour. Then have dinner, start my homework again and come nine o’clock, I’ll go skipping for 15 minutes. (Elise) As part of their self-production as self-disciplined subjects, girls disciplined, ritual- ized and documented other aspects of their lives, including their eating and exercise regimes (see also Malson, 1998, p. 171). As Laura explained, her daughter would: … go and get a packet of frozen vegetables or a frozen dinner or whatever out. She would read the nutritional value on the back. She would write it down. She would pour it out of the bag. She would still put it on the scales and weigh it, then heat it, and take it out, and reheat it, and weigh it and put it down. And she would eat it in the same order. And it was every single meal, every single day. (Laura) Control of food and the body is a metonym for a disciplined, productive and controlled life (Malson, 1998, p. 123). Constructing a subjectivity and identity as a controlled, self-disciplined subject involved strict compliance with self-imposed rules about where, when and what foods could be eaten. As Elise explained: ‘I’m making a rule that I can only eat at home or school. Places where I’m kind of restricted’. The virtue of achievement and the high achiever The notion of achievement as a virtue had its roots in the nineteenth century and the emergence of the Protestant work ethic that stressed the nobility of labour and the fruitful use of time. Developing by accretion, these virtues later merged with a capi- talist discourse of individualism that venerated the ‘high achiever’—a subject position signified by hard work, commitment and success. Social practices that nurture competition and enable the display of individual prowess (e.g., sporting contests; TV game shows) work to configure achievement as a virtue and a desirable subject posi- tion that brings the ‘high achiever’ rewards, such as monetary prizes, awards, public recognition, popularity and social standing. In secondary schools, the ‘high achiever’ is configured as a desirable subject posi- tion through practices that foster competition and make individual performance a matter of public scrutiny and display: assessment tasks and exams; the allocation of D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 226 C. Halse et al. grades and rankings; sporting competitions, and competitive auditions (e.g., for musicals, bands and sport teams). Institutionalized rewards sustain the discourse of achievement through the allocation of prizes, privileges, public accolades, scholar- ships and university places. In this discourse, non-achievement is ‘punished’ by exclu- sion from the privileges accorded to those who succeed. Arguably, such pressures are intensified in New South Wales, Australia, where our study was conducted, with its disciplined-based curriculum, regime of mandatory, public examinations and publi- cation by the metropolitan media of the annual honour roll of ‘high achieving’ students in high stakes exams. The idea of a link between eating disorders and the veneration of individual achievement in schooling is familiar. As Ward (2003, pp. 114–115) discussed: Schools may encourage the development of perfectionist traits by strongly reinforcing educational attainment. For those with the ability to succeed, but with poor self-esteem and a sense of ineffectiveness in other spheres of life, control over school achievement may result in a general sense of being in control in a threatening world. This may extend to control of food and weight, highly valued in current society. Constructing a subjectivity as a disciplined, high achieving subject involves subli- mation to the regulatory regimes of schooling, for instance by studying, completing assignments and working hard. The young women in our study zealously took up their subjection as agenetic subjects in the discourse of individual achievement. As one parent explained: Every weekend, she’d get up at eight o’clock Saturday morning, be on the kitchen table doing homework all day, all day Sunday. It was just over the top stuff, you know. It just became all [consuming]. She said, ‘Well, this is my last year at school, I want it to be a good one’. And that’s an honourable goal. And obviously, that’s what she wanted to do, to make it a good [year]. But I think it was so much. She put pressure on herself. The school had an element of putting pressure on them to achieve. And the result was that she got sick. (Mathew) This parent, like others in our study, unwittingly deployed the discourse of individ- ual achievement as a virtue (an ‘honourable goal’) in which self-discipline was neces- sary to be publicly recognized as a high achiever. For the girls, the desire for recognition as a high achiever was conflated with their anorexia: I’m never ever happy with what [mark] I get. I always think it’s not good enough. And that’s what my mum said, ‘You’re very hard on yourself. You need to stop it’. But it’s just the way I am… With a mark in a school subject, I’ll think, ‘Oh, yeah, it’s alright but it’s not good enough. I could have done heaps better than that’. And I’d set myself too many high expectations and I think, ‘No, really I could have done better’. So it upsets me and I guess school is a big part that distracts me the most and also make me turn away from food. I never had time [to eat]. I’m too busy. I’ve got to do school work that’s more important. (Maria) Maria deciphers her achievement through the discourses, cultural practices and criterion employed by schools (a ‘mark in a school subject’) to assert a subjectivity as a self-disciplined subject with ‘high expectations’ about doing well. In a discourse where achievement is taken as the measure of personal worth, Maria constructs her D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 227 anorexia as an effect of her investment in being constituted as a high achiever, argu- ing that she is too busy with ‘more important’ schoolwork to eat. The paradox entan- gled in Maria’s account is that regardless of the effort she invests, her achievements can always be improved and bettered. Thus, the work of constructing a subjectivity as a high achiever is iterative and ongoing: a never-ending process of ‘becoming’. Walkerdine et al. (2001) report a similar phenomenon amongst middle class girls, describing one participant in their study as so powerfully caught up in achievement discourses that she was ‘never able to allow herself off the roundabout of outstanding achievement, while never sure that she had made the grade’ (p. 137). Like Maria, other girls in our study argued that subjection to the virtue of achieve- ment made abstaining from food an agenetic act of self-discipline and a deliberate strategy for achieving at school: I’m controlling my eating whereby I have more time to do my schoolwork. If I didn’t, I would just eat, and eat, and eat, and I’ll forget about my homework and say, ‘I’ll do it another day’. And then you’ve got nothing done. You’ve achieved nothing. (Elise) In a realist frame, Elise’s account might be read as an excuse or rationalization. In a Foucauldian frame, it articulates a desire to take up a subject position in a discourse that configures (self)discipline and achievement as virtues and a desirable state of being. In schools, the desire to be constituted as a high achiever is cultivated through competitive academic and social practices and through the comparisons that such competition generates with others. Hannah, for instance, attributed the beginning of her anorexia to her desire to be a high achieving swimmer who could beat a particular competitor: I’ve been a swimmer since I was very young and I was very, very competitive. And there’s this girl at my school that I always want to beat… the swimming season was coming up and I wanted to do really good and I really wanted to beat [her] and so I read in this book [that the] best body fat percentage for competing at was 17%. So I got my body fat checked at the gym and it was 23%, and so I decided I wanted to lower my body fat. I didn’t have specific things about weight or anything. I just wanted to decrease my body fat a little bit so I could beat [her]. (Hannah) Hannah approaches winning as an intellectual exercise (reading a book) as well as a physical task (checking and decreasing her body fat). She mobilizes the discourse of achievement by othering the idea that her desire to lose weight is connected to her anorexia or to aesthetic choice: ‘I just wanted to decrease my body fat a little bit so I could beat her’. Within a virtue discourse, food abstinence (self-starvation) can be constructed as an area of personal expertise and achievement: ‘Something that’s in the back of my mind… If I really wanted to lose weight, I know exactly how to do it and I know that I’m good at it… It was a success of mine’ (Madeline). In contrast, non-achievement is constituted as its oppositional ‘other’: an undesir- able and unwanted state that signifies failure. This construct is reflected in the comments of weight-recovered anorexics who describe themselves as ‘failed anorexics’ (Hornbacher, 1998). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 228 C. Halse et al. The virtue of healthism and the thin girl Several writers have discussed the pervasiveness of a discourse of healthism in schools and society more broadly (Featherstone, 1991; Lupton, 1996; Lelwica, 1999). Healthism is a regime of truth immanent in school curricula and the public domain that equates fitness and health with slenderness and positions these as moral virtues and desirable attributes (Hornbacher, 1998) requiring (self)disci- plined eating and exercise. The discourse of healthism has been colonized by constructions of femininity, body and appearance articulated through other sources, including the media, movies, advertising and the fashion industry (Wolf, 1991; Jackson, 2003). These forums promote weight loss as a desirable achievement warranting congratulations, and construct thinness as the signifier of beauty (Bartky, 1988; Bordo, 1993; Malson, 1998) that is necessary to escape its opposi- tional ‘other’: a subjectivity where fatness is a metonym for laziness and ugliness (Gordon, 2000; Tan et al., 2003). For instance, Amanda, recounting the history of her anorexia, mobilized the discourse of healthism by describing her decision ‘to get healthy’ in terms of not being fat: ‘I was overweight in primary school and I decided to get healthy for high school ‘cause I didn’t want to go into high school fat’ (Amanda). Schools are sociocultural contexts that discursively reproduce and reinscribe the discourse of healthism, including through physical education and health curricula (see Gard & Wright, 2001; Evans et al., 2004). In the state where our study was conducted, physical education is mandatory for all students and the secondary sylla- bus constructs eating disorders in terms of nutrition (Board of Studies, 2001, 2002, 2003), positioning it in the curriculum under the heading of ‘Healthy food habits’ (Board of Studies, 2003, p. 37). Through their interweaving, the discourses of health- ism and discipline inflect eating with moral attributes, as Renee illuminates: … some foods are good and some are bad, and so letting myself have those bad foods and really pigging out on them makes me a bad person. And so I feel like the word fat isn’t just physical. For me, it incorporates laziness and greed and it’s just all these things that I don’t like that are rolled into one. (Renee) Renee configures lack of self-discipline (‘pigging out’) and eating ‘bad foods’ as signifiers of negative personal attributes—laziness and greed—that align with two of the seven deadly sins: sloth and gluttony. Resisting the temptation to eat ‘bad foods’ and eating ‘good’ food are more than just physical acts. Renee constructs her absti- nence as a deliberate moral choice—an agenetic taking up of subjectivity as a virtuous, self-disciplined, ‘good’ person and a renouncing of a subjectivity as a gluttonous, indolent, undisciplined, ‘bad’ person. The rhetoric Renee mobilizes to describe her eating behaviours draws on discourses about self-discipline and controlled eating in society, in general. As Ritenbaugh (1982) comments, the terms obese and overweight are: … biomedical gloss for the moral failings of gluttony and sloth. Important themes in American society are individual control and fear of non-control—obesity is a visual repre- sentation of non-control. In the ‘blame the victim’ culture which this nurtures, fat is thus D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 229 interpreted as an outward sign of neglect of one’s corporeal self; a condition considered either as shameful, as being dirty or irresponsibly ill. (p. 352) The discourse of healthism/thinness/beauty is inscribed and normalized though the everyday practice of schooling. School activities position bodies as objects of public display in ways that nurture physical comparisons, for instance through insti- tutionalized dress codes and events such as swimming and athletics carnivals, school dances, sport and gym classes. The regulation of the school day and meal times normalizes eating behaviours by making food consumption a public act that is open to moral surveillance by peers and others, and where lack of self-discipline about the type or quantity of food eaten is susceptible to commentary, ridicule or other social ramifications. In a milieu that constitutes self-discipline and achievement as virtues, anxieties about social inclusion and exclusion can play into compliance with the dominant discourses and values about health, body and beauty. As Bettina explained: When I went to high school, a lot of the girls were still really skinny… so I think I just felt a bit big… then in Year 8, I don’t really know what happened. I think I just wanted to fit in more or something. (Bettina) Healthism discourses reflect and perpetuate the ‘contemporary pressure on young people to produce a certain sort of homogenized appearance’ (Frost, 2003, p. 122) needed to be accepted/acceptable. Lieberman and her colleagues (Lieberman et al., 2001) examined the role of peer pressure and relationships in the development of disordered eating in adolescent girls and suggested that girls who desired popularity were more likely to develop disordered eating, concluding that: ‘there seems to be an underlying pressure during adolescence that to be accepted by peers and to be popu- lar with members of the opposite sex, one has to be thin, and therefore, engage in extreme weight loss behaviours’ (p. 230). Mensinger (2001) is more cautious about the influence of the opposite sex, based on her comparison of single-sex and coedu- cational schools, but also concludes that a discourse of healthism/thinness/beauty combined with the competitive culture of schools plays into the development of emaciating eating behaviours. Two girls in our study articulated their social position- ing in this discourse: Oh, I just have to lose weight. Maybe that way they would accept me. ‘Cause on television, like, you see usually chubbier people who have become thin and they’re, like, popular. Mm. So I thought, maybe I’ll become popular. (Elise) All my friends were really skinny and there was a boy that I really liked but he liked some- one else and she had anorexia. I thought he only liked her because she was skinny, so that was part of my eating problems. (Madeline) More overtly, non-compliance with the dominant discourse of healthism/thinness/ beauty in schools can prompt negative social interactions about the body such as teas- ing, harassment and being called ‘fat’. Some participants in our study, as with previous research (McVey et al., 2002; Barker & Galambos, 2003; Dohnt & Tiggemann, 2005), cited these experiences as formative episodes in the development of their anorexia. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 230 C. Halse et al. I was happy. I was healthy. I ate what I wanted. I exercised. I was sporty. I got called fat and… you know when you start to get conscious of your weight around, I guess about 16 or 17 [or] maybe it was earlier 14–15. I started getting conscious of [my] weight and things like that. And to get called fat. You know, it was a big blow and… I guess I took it really seriously and wanted to lose that weight, wanted to get healthy and fit and I started on that road, like the healthy way to go… but it got muddled up and I guess I was one of those people who took it one step too far. (Jo) Formal teaching practices also wittingly and unwittingly assert the discourse of healthism by subjecting the body to public scrutiny and surveillance. As one parent, discussing her daughter’s experiences explained: She reached puberty when she was 10… she was large and because of the way she’s built, she had huge breasts… their teacher in Year 5 had a thing about everybody putting their weight on the board [to illustrate] differences… that day really affected her. She came back distraught and she said: ‘I never actually realized I was actually a lot heavier than every- body else until it was written on the board’. And then everybody started to tease her. (Colleen) Part 3: the paradox of virtue: (re)theorizing deviance and anorexia As our discussion illustrates, the disciplinary practices and moral technologies of secondary schooling signify and enter into the articulation of discourses that consti- tute achievement, discipline and healthism as virtues and regimes of truth in which being recognized as self-disciplined, a high achiever and healthy/thin/beautiful is a socially desirable and desired subject position. Immersed in and habituated to these ‘virtue’ discourses, the constitutive work of becoming the self-disciplined, high achieving, healthy/thin/beautiful girl involves active and zealous subjection (assujet- tissement) to the terms that these overlapping and conflating ‘virtue’ discourses demand. These conditions configure virtue as an open-ended condition: a state of excellence that has no boundaries or exclusions to delimit the meaning or signification of a subjectivity as a virtuous self-disciplined, high achieving, or healthy/thin/beautiful girl. These discourses paper over the possibility of excess, creating a milieu in which it is not possible to be too disciplined, too high achieving or too healthy. Consequently, the project of becoming a ‘virtuous’ girl is a never-ending project of self-perfection and self-production. Herein lies the paradox of virtue. Contrary to the notion of anorexia as an individ- ual psychopathology or form deviance from a ubiquitous, generalized norm, the formation of the ‘anorexic’ subject can be read as an agenetic subjection to the virtue discourses brought into being and articulated through the discursive practices of schooling and wider society. This does not mean that the production of a virtuous self cannot slide into self-destructive excess. For particular girls under particular condi- tions, the point that marks the margins of excess are obscured or unidentifiable. Nor do we suggest that all girls who aspire to be disciplined, high achievers or healthy will ‘become anorexic’. This presumes a humanist notion of causality that constitutes girls as passive victims and ignores how disciplinary practices both normalize and D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 231 individualize subjects (Foucault, 1977, p. 193) and are taken up and incorporated into subjectivity in different ways and to different effects. In our interviews, the deployment of virtue discourses was evident amongst girls and parents from all school types and not confined to those from middle class or afflu- ent backgrounds. Thus theorizing anorexia as a paradox of virtue has implications for secondary schooling, in general. Despite limited empirical data to guide the design and implementation of prevention and intervention programs for anorexia, schools have integrated formal initiatives and introduced prevention/intervention courses into the curriculum (Austin, 2000). In general, school-based initiatives are ameliorative or corrective interventions that aim to tell teenagers about healthy eating and the dangers of poor dieting, and to try to help them identify and counteract media influ- ences so they develop realistic expectations of their body shapes (Austin, 2000; O’Dea & Maloney, 2000). School-based programs tend to constitute anorexia as a personal pathology because they focus on changing individuals. Yet, there is little evidence that school-based programs effect positive changes in behaviour (Battle & Brownell, 1996; Mann et al., 1997; Austin, 2000). Rather, they may actually be harm- ful because they can be misinterpreted by students, introduce students to unhealthy weight loss strategies or glamorize or normalize eating disorders (Mann et al., 1997; O’Dea et al., 2000; O’Dea, 2002), a point underlined by Sarah’s complaints that opened our paper. As one mother in our study bemoaned: I think what the schools do… like with drugs and alcohol is that they try and frighten the girls away from anorexia and I don’t think that’s a good idea… They show films of girls who are really sick and in hospital to frighten the girls. And they say things like, ‘Don’t drink too much water or you’ll get anorexia’. There’s a lot of myths going around and scare tactics. I don’t know if that works. I don’t know if it’s good. It’s seems the wrong way. A least my experience with Sophie, I don’t think showing films of how bad you can become or showing films of skinny models on the catwalk was going to influence her one way or the other. I don’t think the schools have quite got it right. I know they’re trying really hard ‘cause they’re all worried about the increase in anorexia but they’ve got to find something else. (Sherry) Theorizing anorexia as a paradoxical effect of virtue discourses unravels the taken- for-granted assumptions, ways of thinking, technologies and tactics that (can) shape teenage girls in potentially life-threatening ways. This, we contend, is the particular strength of conceptualizing anorexia as an effect of discourse. As we have pointed out elsewhere (Halse & Honey, in press), it is precisely because discourses and discursive resources construct, rather than reflect, their objects that they carry within themselves the conditions of possibility for reconfiguring the rhetoric, practices, and assumptions that help bring the ‘anorexic’ subject into being. It is beyond the scope of the current paper to detail how the organizational regimes, competitive cultures, values and practices of secondary schooling might be revisioned and reformed to become a site for counter-discourse and alternate feminist pedago- gies and practices. Nor do we seek to offer a definitive blueprint or impose a new set of universal, moral technologies and governing practices that will foreclose, rather than open up, the possibility of developing new ways of doing schooling. Nor do we D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 232 C. Halse et al. underestimate the challenge of changing schools and society, particularly given the hold of neo-liberalism on education policy and practice in politically conservative places like Australia, the UK and the US. Nevertheless, the complexities and difficul- ties of the challenge does not absolve feminist educators and social activists from doing the difficult intellectual work of critiquing the paradoxical effects of virtue discourses and theorizing an alternative pedagogic politics. By unpicking the para- doxical effects of the virtue discourses immanent in secondary schooling, our paper offers one contribution to this broader feminist agenda of countering the social scripts and codes that shape the bodies and souls of teenage girls. Acknowledgements The research reported in this paper was funded by a research grant from the Australian Research Council, the Centre for Digestive Diseases and the Children’s Hospital Education Research Institute, in Sydney, Australia. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Joint Conference of the New Zealand and Australian Associations for Research in Education, Auckland New Zealand, 29 November–2 December 2003. Notes 1. In feminist and poststructural writing, ‘anorexic’ and ‘anorexia’ are contested labels. We use them here provisionally, for the sake of economy and in the absence of better words. The term anorexia is also necessary to converse. As Lelwica notes, anorexia ‘has become part of this culture’s vocabulary in the past decade. I use the terms because I want to communicate, not because I accept their traditional meanings—which can be stigmatizing’ (1999, p. 16). 2. All participants are identified by pseudonyms. References American Psychiatric Association (2000) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association). Andersen, A. E. (1990) Males with eating disorders (New York, Brunner/Mazel). Aristotle. (1955) Nichomachean ethics (Middlesex, Penguin). Austin, S. B. (2000) Prevention research in eating disorders: theory and new directions, Psychological Medicine, 30, 1249–1262. Austin, S. B. (2001) Population-based prevention of eating disorders: an application of the Rose prevention model, Preventative Medicine, 32, 268–283. Ball, S. (Ed.) (1990) Foucault and education: Disciplines and knowledge (London, Routledge). Barker, E. T. & Galambos, N. L. (2003) Body dissatisfaction of adolescent girls and boys: risk and resource factors, Journal of Early Adolescence, 23(2), 141–165. Bartky, S. (1988) Foucault, femininity and the modernisation of patriarchal power, in: I. Diamond & L. Quinby (Eds) Feminism and Foucault, reflections on resistance (Boston, Northeastern University Press). Battle, E. K. & Brownell, K. D. (1996) Confronting a rising tide of eating disorders and obesity: treatment vs. prevention and policy, Addictive Behaviors, 21(6), 755–765. Berry, K. (1999, April 16) Anorexia? That’s a girls’ disease, Times Educational Supplement, 1–2. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 233 Board of Studies, NSW (2001) Personal development, health and physical education syllabus: Years 7–10 (NSW, Board of Studies NSW). Board of Studies, NSW (2002) Food technology: Draft syllabus (NSW, Board of Studies NSW). Board of Studies, NSW (2003) Personal development, health and physical education: Years 7–10 syllabus (NSW, Board of Studies NSW). Bordo, S. (1993) Unbearable weight: feminism, western culture, and the body (Berkeley, University of California Press). Brumberg, J. (1988) Fasting girls: the emergence of anorexia nervosa as a modern disease (Cambridge, Harvard University Press). Butler, J. (1993) Bodies that matter. On the discursive limits of sex (New York, Routledge). Butler, J. (1995) For a careful reading, in: S. Benhabib, J. Butler, D. Cornell & N. Fraser (Eds) Feminist contentions: a philosophical exchange (New York, Routledge). Butler, J. (1997) The psychic life of power: theories in subjection (Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press). Chernin, K. (1985) The hungry self: women, eating and identity (New York, Times Books). Delbridge, A., Bernard, J. R. L., Blair, D., Ramson, W. S. & Butler, S. (Eds) (1981) The Macquarie dictionary (Sydney, Macquarie Library). Dohnt, H. K. & Tiggemann, M. (2005) Peer influences on body dissatisfaction and dieting aware- ness in young girls, British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 23, 103–116. Dolan, B. M., Lacey, J. H. & Evans, C. (1990) Eating behaviour and attitudes to weight and shape in British women from three ethnic groups, British Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 523–528. Dussel, I. (2004) Fashioning the schooled self through uniforms: a Foucauldian approach to contemporary school policies, in: B. M. Baker & K. E. Heyning (Eds) Dangerous coagulations? The uses of Foucault in the study of education (New York, Peter Lang). Eckermann, L. (2003) Foucault, embodied and gendered subjectivities: the case of voluntary self– starvation. Available online at: www.academyanalyticarts.org/eckerman.htm (accessed 10 October 2005). Evans, J. (1988) Body matters: towards a socialist physical education, in: H. Lauder & P. Brown (Eds) Education in search of a future (Lewes, Falmer Press). Evans, J., Evans, R., Evans, C. & Evans, J., E. (2002) Fat free schooling: the discursive production of ill-health, International Studies in Sociology of Education, 12(2), 191–212. Evans, J., Davies, B. & Wright, J. (Eds) (2003) Body knowledge and control: studies in the sociology of physical education and health (London, Routledge). Evans, J., Rich, E. & Holroyd, R. (2004) Disordered eating and disordered schooling: what schools do to middle class girls, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 25(2), 123–142. Fallon, P., Katzman, M. A. & Wooley, S. C. (Eds) (1994) Feminist perspectives on eating disorders (New York, Guildford Press). Featherstone, M. (1991) The body in consumer culture, in: M. Featherstone, M. Hepwort & B. S. Turner (Eds) The body: social process and cultural theory (London, Sage Publications). Foucault, M. (1972) The archeology of knowledge and the discourse on language (New York, Pantheon). Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison (London, Penguin). Foucault, M. (1980) Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings, 1972–1977 (Brighton, Harvester Press). Frost, L. (2003) Researching young women’s bodies: values, dilemmas and contradictions, in: A. Bennett, M. Cieslik & S. Miles (Eds) Researching youth (Hampshire, Palgrave MacMillan). Gard, M., & Freeman, C. P. (1996) The dismantling of a myth: a review of eating disorders and socio–economic status. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 20, 1–12. Gard, M. & Wright, J. (2001) Managing uncertainty: obesity discourses and physical education in a risk society, Studies in Philosophy and Education, 20, 535–549. Gordon, R. A. (2000) Eating disorders: anatomy of a social epidemic (2nd edn.) (Oxford, Blackwell Publishers Ltd). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 234 C. Halse et al. Halse, C. (2006) Striving for balance: Australian perspectives on the future of schooling, International Journal of Education Research: Special Issue on Schooling for the Future, 41(7/ 8), 523–533. Halse, C. & Honey, A. (2005) Unravelling ethics: illuminating the moral dilemmas of research ethics, Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 30(4), 2142–2161. Halse, C., & Honey, A. (in press) Rethinking ethics review as institutional discourse, in: G. Cannela & Y. Lincoln (Eds) Qualitative inquiry: special issue on ethics in qualitative research. Halse, C., Kennedy, K. & Cogan, J. (2006) Schooling for the future, International Journal of Education Research: Special Issue on Schooling for the Future, 41(7/8), 584–594. Hepworth, J. (1999) The social construction of anorexia nervosa (London, Sage). Hornbacher, M. (1998) Wasted (New York, Harper Collins). Jackson, S. (2003) Measuring up to Barbie: young women negotiating representations of feminin- ity in heterosexual relationships, in: A. Potts, N. Gavey & M. Weatherall (Eds) Sex and the body (Palmerston North, New Zealand, The Dunmore Press). Katzman, M. A., & Lee, S. (1997). Beyond body image: the integration of feminist and transcul- tural theories in the understanding of self-starvation. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 22(4), 385–394. Lelwica, M. M. (1999) Starving for salvation (New York, Oxford University Press). Lieberman, M., Gauvin, L., Bukowski, W. & White, D. (2001) Interpersonal influence and disordered eating in adolescent girls: the role of peer modelling, social reinforcement, and body–related teasing, Eating Behaviours, 2, 215–236. Lupton, D. (1996) Food, the body and the self (London, Sage). Malson, H. (1998) The thin woman: feminism, post-structuralism and the social psychology of anorexia nervosa (London, Routledge). Mann, T., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Huang, K., Burgard, D., Wright, A. & Hanson, K. (1997) Are two interventions worse than none? Joint primary and secondary prevention of eating disor- ders in college females, Health Psychology, 16(3), 215–225. Marshall, G. (1998) A dictionary of sociology, Oxford Reference Online. Available online at: www.oxfordreference.com (accessed 30 September 2005). McLeod, J. (2001) Foucault forever, Discourse Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 22(1), 95–104. McVey, G. L., Pepler, D., Davis, R., Flett, G. L. & Abdolell, M. (2002) Risk and protective factors associated with disordered eating during early adolescence, Journal of Early Adolescence, 22(1), 75–95. Mensinger, J. (2001) Conflicting gender role prescriptions and disordered eating in single-sex and coeducational school environments, Gender and Education, 13(4), p. 417. Minichiello, V., Aroni, R., Timewell, E. & Alexander, L. (1990) In-depth interviewing: researching people (Melbourne, Longman Cheshire). O’Dea, J. (2002) Can body image education programs be harmful to adolescent females?, Eating Disorders: The Journal of Treatment and Prevention, 10(1), 1–13. O’Dea, J. & Maloney, D. (2000) Preventing eating and body image problems in children and adolescents using the health promoting schools framework, Journal of School Health, 70(1), 18–21. Orbach, S. (1986) Hunger strike: the anorectic’s struggle as a metaphor for our age (London, Faber & Faber). Polivy, J. & Herman, C. P. (2002) Causes of eating disorders, Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 187–213. Popkewitz, T. & Brennan, M. (1997) Restructuring of social and political theory in educa- tion: Foucault and the social epistemology of school practices, Educational Theory, 47(3), 287–313. Ritenbaugh, C. (1982) Obesity as a culture-bound syndrome, Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 6(4), 347–361. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 The paradox of virtue 235 Rose, N. (1999) Powers of freedom: reframing political thought (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press). Ryan, J. (1991) Observing and normalizing: Foucault, discipline, and inequality in schooling, The Journal of Educational Thought, 25(2), 104–119. Schwitzer, A. M., Bergholz, K., Dore, T. & Salimi, L. (1998) Eating disorders among college women: prevention, education, and treatment responses, Journal of American College Health, 46(5), 199–209. Shilling, C. (1991) Educating the body: physical capacity and the production of social inequalities, Sociology, 25, 653–672. Steinhausen, H.C. (2002) The outcome of anorexia nervosa in the twentieth century, American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(8), 1284–1293. Tan, J., Hope, T. & Stewart, A. (2003) Anorexia nervosa and personal identity: the accounts of patients and their parents, International journal of Law and Psychiatry, 26(5), 533–548. Thompson, B. (1994) A hunger so wide and so deep: American women speak out about their eating problems (London, University of Minnesota Press). Walkerdine, V., Lucey, H. & Melody, J. (2001) Growing up girl: psychosocial explorations of gender and class (Hampshire, Palgrave). Ward, A. & Gowers, S. (2003) Attachment and childhood development, in: J. Treasure, U. Schmidt & E. van Furth (Eds) Handbook of eating disorders (2nd edn.) (West Sussex, John Wiley & Sons Ltd). Way, K. (1993) Anorexia nervosa and recovery: a hunger for meaning (Binghampton, NY, Howarth Press). Wolf, N. (1991) The beauty myth (London, Chatto & Windus). Wright, J. (1997) A feminist poststructuralist methodology for the study of gender construction in physical education: description of a study, Journal of Teaching and Physical Education, 15, 1–14. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:2 1 2 8 A ug us t 2 01 1 