ABSTRACT: 
This paper is part of the research of the fRaill project (grant reference: G1001375/1) (www.ihs.manchester.ac.uk/MICRA/fRaill/) which is funded by the cross-research council Lifelong Health and Wellbeing Programme.Migration scholarship has recently paid attention to lifecourse and non‐economic effects of moving house. Yet consideration of the effects of internal migration in later life has been relatively neglected despite their implications for social and spatial inequalities. Thus we address two questions: how trajectories of wellbeing in later life vary for movers and non‐movers, and how the event of moving affects wellbeing. In both cases we distinguish between “voluntary” and “involuntary” movers. We use 10 years (2002–2012) of the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) to analyse trends in wellbeing for age cohorts and to examine how wellbeing changes through the event of moving. The Control, Autonomy, Selfrealisation and Pleasure (CASP‐19) measure of wellbeing is used. We find that, after controls for demographic and socio‐economic characteristics, involuntary movers have lower levels of wellbeing than stayers or voluntary movers; and involuntary movers experience a stabilisation in the decline in wellbeing following migration which is not seen for voluntary movers. So, migration in later life is good for wellbeing, maintaining advantageous wellbeing trajectories for voluntary movers and improving wellbeing trajectories for involuntary movers. These findings imply a rich potential of ELSA and similar longitudinal datasets for examining residential mobility; the need for ageing inequalities studies to take more account of residential mobility; the need for internal migration scholarship to pay greater attention to reason for move; and for policy to consider the potentially beneficial effects of residential mobility in later life, particularly for those in adverse circumstances.Publisher PDFPeer reviewe. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Migration scholarship has recently paid attention to lifecourse and non-economic effects of moving house. Yet consideration of the effects of internal migration in later life has been relatively neglected despite their implications for social and spatial inequalities. Thus we address two questions: how trajectories of wellbeing in later life vary for movers and non-movers, and how the event of moving affects wellbeing. In both cases we distinguish between “voluntary” and “involuntary” movers. We use 10 years (2002–2012) of the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) to analyse trends in wellbeing for age cohorts and to examine how wellbeing changes through the event of moving. The Control, Autonomy, Selfrealisation and Pleasure (CASP-19) measure of wellbeing is used. We find that, after controls for demographic and socio-economic characteristics, involuntary movers have lower levels of wellbeing than stayers or voluntary movers; and involuntary movers experience a stabilisation in the decline in wellbeing following migration which is not seen for voluntary movers. So, migration in later life is good for well-being, maintaining advantageous wellbeing trajectories for voluntary movers and improving wellbeing trajectories for involuntary movers. These findings imply a rich potential of ELSA and similar longitudinal datasets for examining residential mobility; the need for ageing inequalities studies to take more account of residential mobility; the need for internal migration scholarship to pay greater attention to reason for move; and for policy to consider the potentially beneficial effects of residential mobility in later life, particularly for those in adverse circumstances. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Edinburgh Research Explorer Is migration in later life good for wellbeing? A longitudinal studyof ageing and selectivity of internal migrationCitation for published version:Finney, N & Marshall, A 2018, 'Is migration in later life good for wellbeing? A longitudinal study of ageingand selectivity of internal migration', Area. https://doi.org/10.1111/area.12428Digital Object Identifier (DOI):10.1111/area.12428Link:Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research ExplorerDocument Version:Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of recordPublished In:AreaGeneral rightsCopyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise andabide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.Take down policyThe University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorercontent complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright pleasecontact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately andinvestigate your claim.Download date: 27. Jan. 2020S P E C I A L S E C T I O NIs migration in later life good for wellbeing? A longitudinalstudy of ageing and selectivity of internal migrationNissa Finney1 | Alan Marshall21School of Geography and SustainableDevelopment, University of St Andrews,St Andrews, Fife, UK2School of Social and Political Science,University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UKCorrespondenceNissa FinneyEmail: Nissa.Finney@st-andrews.ac.ukMigration scholarship has recently paid attention to lifecourse and non-economiceffects of moving house. Yet consideration of the effects of internal migration inlater life has been relatively neglected despite their implications for social and spa-tial inequalities. Thus we address two questions: how trajectories of wellbeing inlater life vary for movers and non-movers, and how the event of moving affectswellbeing. In both cases we distinguish between “voluntary” and “involuntary”movers. We use 10 years (2002–2012) of the English Longitudinal Study of Age-ing (ELSA) to analyse trends in wellbeing for age cohorts and to examine howwellbeing changes through the event of moving. The Control, Autonomy, Selfreali-sation and Pleasure (CASP-19) measure of wellbeing is used. We find that, aftercontrols for demographic and socio-economic characteristics, involuntary movershave lower levels of wellbeing than stayers or voluntary movers; and involuntarymovers experience a stabilisation in the decline in wellbeing following migrationwhich is not seen for voluntary movers. So, migration in later life is good for well-being, maintaining advantageous wellbeing trajectories for voluntary movers andimproving wellbeing trajectories for involuntary movers. These findings imply arich potential of ELSA and similar longitudinal datasets for examining residentialmobility; the need for ageing inequalities studies to take more account of residentialmobility; the need for internal migration scholarship to pay greater attention to rea-son for move; and for policy to consider the potentially beneficial effects of resi-dential mobility in later life, particularly for those in adverse circumstances.KEYWORD SEngland, English Longitudinal Study of Ageing, internal migration, later life, selective migration,wellbeing1 | INTRODUCTION: LATER LIFE, MIGRATION AND WELLBEINGThis paper engages with a field that has been relatively neglected by Geography and wider Social Science scholarship: theeffects of internal migration in later life. In migration literature, recent attention to lifecourse and longitudinal approacheshas focused on young adults and working ages (Coulter, van Ham, & Findlay, 2016; Finney, 2011), for understandable rea-sons of the high migration levels in these life stages. There has also been a growth in understandings of the internal migra-tion of children within the broader context of family migration studies and Children’s Geographies (e.g., Cooke, 2008;- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided theoriginal work is properly cited.The information, practices and views in this article are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the opinion of the Royal Geographical Society (with IBG).© 2018 The Authors. Area published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Royal Geographical Society (with the Institute of British Geographers).Accepted: 9 January 2018DOI: 10.1111/area.12428Area. 2018;1–9. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/area | 1Yarwood & Tyrrell, 2012). Although some important work on internal migration in later life exists, this is a relativelyneglected life phase, despite recognition of specificities of late-life migration (Rees & Hardill, 2015; Warnes, 1992) andhigh levels of desire to move among older people (Hillcoat-Nalletamby & Ogg, 2014). Evandrou, Falkingham, and Green(2010) provide a valuable account of the factors associated with migration in later life, pointing to the importance ofchanges in partnership status, health and economic activity as drivers of migration. They argue for a lifecourse perspectiveto understand how moves are triggered by particular events, such as retirement or widowhood.In addressing the question of the effects of internal migration on wellbeing in later life, we offer three original contribu-tions, substantive and methodological. The first is the empirical combination of analysis of later life, wellbeing and internalmigration, to date neglected; the second is the examination of how the effect of migration on wellbeing in later life variesaccording to reason for move, a rare approach in quantitative work; and the third is the use for these purposes of the Eng-lish Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) and longitudinal analyses. These contributions augment understanding of theselectivity of migration in later life and the potential of quantitative analysis to complement the existing body of work byevidencing processes of migration selectivity and their effect for the older population as a whole.The embracing of lifecourse approaches in migration literature has been accompanied by increased attention to theeffects of migration beyond the economic and material (Nowok, Van Ham, Findlay, & Gayle, 2013). Particularly notable inthis regard is work on health encompassing both physical and mental health, including wellbeing. It is in the health arenathat the ageing literature has most directly grappled with internal migration, with particular attention given to migrationexperiences of frail older adults in relation to care, both international (Hardill, Spradbery, Arnold-Boakes, & Marrugat,2005) and internal (Robards, Evandrou, Falkingham, & Vlachantoni, 2014). Indeed, ageing literature has tended to addressthese questions from the perspective of living arrangements, encompassing moves to care institutions (see Feng, Falking-ham, Liu, & Vlachantoni, 2017; for example). Internal migration in later life is, however, more diverse in its drivers, howit is experienced and how it is selective than this body of work implies. This paper views internal migration as a process ofsocial and spatial inequalities, both in its drivers and consequences (Smith, Finney, Halfacree, & Walford, 2015), and aimsto augment understanding of the significance for wellbeing of being able to move and of the reason for moving.Nowok et al. (2013) provide an excellent platform for this study in their analysis of the effect of internal migration onsubjective wellbeing for the population as a whole using the British Household Panel Study. They find a positive effect ofa residential move on happiness, at least in the short term, and that this tends to be accompanied by a decline in happinessprior to migration. However, the effect of the move itself on wellbeing will depend on the event, or driver, or reason, formigration; indeed “[i]t would be desirable to investigate the happiness consequences of migration by migration motives”(Nowok et al., 2013, p. 999). The ageing literature tells us that declines in wellbeing in later life are expected, and areexpected to be linked to events or changing circumstances associated with ageing, including loss of spouse, reduced socialnetworks and illness or disability (Jivraj, Nazroo, Vanhoutte, & Chandola, 2014). Concurrently, migration literature hasidentified similar later life events as drivers of migration (Evandrou et al., 2010; Rees & Hardill, 2015). Thus, we canexpect a decline in wellbeing in later life, and prior to migration, and can posit that the effect of migration on wellbeing inlater life will depend on the reason for the move.Migration in later life is associated with reasons other than those that dominate for the younger population, namely todo with work and study. Although retirement has been shown to be an important stimulus for migration, particularly interms of counterurbanisation (Stockdale, 2016), residential decisions cannot be disassociated from other family, health oreconomic changes in later life. It has long been recognised in the ageing literature that the Third Age – that of early laterlife – can be a time of opportunities or constraints (Laslett, 1994). In relation to migration, a move might offer a means tomaintain wellbeing in response to changing circumstances or may offer new life opportunities; or may be an undesired,involuntary response to deteriorating health, family or economic circumstances. The question we pose is whether migra-tion’s effect on wellbeing is different depending on the reasons for the move. Particularly, we address the followingresearch questions: in later life, are there differences in trajectories of wellbeing for those who move and those who do notmove? How do these trajectories vary for “voluntary” and “involuntary” movers? For later life movers, how does the moveevent affect trajectories (rates of decline) of wellbeing? How does the effect of the move event on wellbeing vary for “vol-untary” and “involuntary” movers?2 | DATA AND METHODSThe analysis in this paper uses the ELSA, a survey on the health and circumstances of a representative sample of the popu-lation aged 50 and over living in private households in England. The initial ELSA sample in 2002 comprised a nationally2 | FINNEY AND MARSHALLrepresentative sample of 11,391 people aged over 50 and living in private households and is drawn from the Health Surveyfor England. The baseline sample are re-interviewed every two years and six waves of data spanning the period 2002 to2012 are used in this paper. Methodological details on survey design and data collection are provided elsewhere (see Che-shire, Hussey, Phelps, & Woods, 2012). The survey contains rich detail on the health, wellbeing and circumstances of olderpeople, but crucially also detail on internal migration and the (self-reported) reasons for residential moves.Two different samples of ELSA are used within the two separate pieces of analysis reported in this paper. In order tocompare wellbeing trajectories (or change in wellbeing, 2002–2012) for migrants and non-migrants (research question 1),the first analysis uses the full ELSA sample. The second part of the analysis considers the impact of migration on wellbe-ing for a sub-sample of individuals who moved at some point during the ELSA survey period (2002 to 2012; researchquestion 2). We also include in our analysis the refreshment samples in wave 3 and wave 4. Thus for the second analysisour sample is 1,387 individuals.Our measure of wellbeing is the CASP-19 scale, which evaluates wellbeing (both hedonic and eudemonic) according todomains of Control, Autonomy, Self-realisation and Pleasure as developed and validated specifically for older people byWiggins, Netuveli, Hyde, Higgs, and Blane (2007). Summing scores across 19 Likert questions provides a continuous mea-sure of wellbeing with higher scores indicating higher levels of wellbeing. A selection of questions across domains is illus-trated in Table 1, with descriptive statistics illustrated in Table 2. One point to note from Table 2 is that the propensity tomake voluntary or involuntary moves appears to be related to social class, health, living alone and tenure. Involuntarymovers are more likely to be single, in poor health, in the poorest quintiles (of household wealth) and to rent their accom-modation. One implication of this is that we must control for socio-economic circumstances if we are to assess more accu-rately the influence of migration reason on wellbeing.Internal migration is identified using a variable indicating whether an individual’s address changed between surveywaves. We determined the timing of move by drawing on a survey question on the year in which an individual moved totheir current home. Based on year of move, we then constructed a variable indicating time to and from the move whichvaries from 10 (10 years before move) to 10 (10 years after move).English Longitudinal Study of Ageing is a valuable source for research on internal migration in that it includes informa-tion on self-reported reasons for moves. Respondents were able to select from a list of motivations for a residential move.We divided these into “voluntary” and “involuntary” reasons, as in Table 3, following the rule that if one involuntary rea-son was reported then the move was classed as involuntary. Inevitably there are issues around such classification. We mightexpect some bias in recollection of the reasons for a move after the move has occurred compared to before (post-hocrationalisation). And we might have followed other approaches in our definition of voluntary and involuntary mobility, par-ticularly in the categorisation of moves in with, or to be near to, friends or family or those to care institutions. TheTABLE 1 Sample question statements from the Control, Autonomy, Self-Realisation and Pleasure (CASP-19) measure of wellbeingControl and autonomyMy age prevents me from doing the things I would like to do.I feel that what happens to me is out of my control.I feel left out of things.I can do the things I want to do.I feel that I can please myself what I do.Shortage of money stops me doing things I want to do.Self-realisationI feel that life is full of opportunities.I feel full of energy these days.I feel that the future looks good for me.PleasureI look forward to each day.I feel that my life has meaning.I enjoy the things that I do.Respondents are asked to respond according to a Likert scale indicating the extent to which they agree/disagree with the statement. The CASP-19 is the sum of thescores across the 19 items with a higher score indicating higher wellbeing.FINNEY AND MARSHALL | 3principle we have followed in our categorisation with regard to these reasons for move is to assign those that implyincreased social networks as voluntary.In addition to our reason for migration variable, we include in our models a set of social and demographic control vari-ables comprising age, sex, wealth, economic activity, self-reported illness, tenure and cohabitation (living alone or withTABLE 2 Baseline characteristics of English Longitudinal Study of Ageing respondents at wave 1 (core members) with a CASP-19 score,2002–2003VariableFull sample (core)bNon-movers (2002–2012)Movers (2002–2012)Involuntarymovers (2002–2012)Voluntarymovers (2002–2012)Mean or % N Mean or % N Mean or % N Mean or % N Mean or % NCASP score (mean) 42.5 9,300 42.4 7,879 42.8 852 40.9 305 43.9 547Age (mean) 64.2 9,300 64.6 7,879 62.5 852 64.1 305 61.6 547Male (%) 46.5 4,325 47.1 3,712 43.8 373 42.6 130 44.4 243Wealth (%)aQuintile 1 (poorest) 16.8 1,534 16.1 1,249 19.3 163 24.7 74 16.4 89Quintile 2 19.2 1,758 19.8 1,536 15.9 134 21.7 65 12.7 69Quintile 3 20.6 1,882 20.9 1,623 17.4 147 17.7 53 17.3 94Quintile 4 21.4 1,960 21.5 1,669 20.7 175 18.0 54 22.2 121Quintile 5 (richest) 22.1 2,026 21.7 1,681 26.7 225 18.0 54 31.4 171Has limiting long-term illness (%) 32.8 3,052 32.7 2,575 31.0 264 43.6 133 24.0 131Single (wave 2) 27.9 1,905 27.3 1,544 30.0 207 33.2 78 28.5 129TenureOwns home outright 56.6 5,261 58.3 4,590 46.8 399 42.6 130 49.2 269Owns home with a mortgage 25.5 2,374 24.8 1,950 32.3 275 31.2 95 32.9 180Rents 17.9 1,665 17.0 1,339 20.9 178 26.2 80 17.9 98Economic activityRetired 49.3 4,564 50.3 3,952 41.5 352 46.2 141 38.9 211Employed 34.5 3,190 33.4 2,623 41.4 351 32.5 99 46.4 252Unemployed 1.0 91 0.9 73 1.4 12 1.3 4 1.5 8Sick/disabled 5.8 539 5.7 447 5.9 50 8.5 26 4.4 24Looking after home/family 9.5 877 9.6 755 9.8 83 11.5 35 8.8 48aWealth quintiles are based on the full ELSA sample who provided information to compute the wealth variable (N = 11,191) while we have CASP-19 scores for asub-sample (N = 9,300). For this reason the split of the (full) sample across quintiles deviates slightly from 20% in each category. Our substantive results are notaffected should we recalculate wealth quintiles for those who have a CASP-19 score.bMissing value for migration reason means that the counts of voluntary and involuntary moves don’t sum to the full sample with a CASP-19 score.TABLE 3 Categorisation of involuntary and voluntary residential moves as recorded in the English Longitudinal Study of AgeingInvoluntary (38% moves) Voluntary (62% moves)Job relocation (1.5%) Start new job (1.9%)Evicted, couldn’t afford rent, or home repossessed (0.9%) Moved to better area (14.5%)Health reasons (20.0%) Moved to more suitable home (42.2%)Split from partner (4.1%) Bought own home (1.7%)Other financial reasons (9.5%) Moved in with friends/family (3.4%)Home poor condition or demolished (0.7%) Moved to be nearer friends/family (17.6%)Nursing home (0.5%) Moved abroad (0.2%)Moved in with partner (3.2%)4 | FINNEY AND MARSHALLpartner). Our measure of wealth includes both net financial and physical wealth (such as art and jewellery) and the nethousing wealth for each household. We use a household measure of wealth because in the vast majority of cases older cou-ples pool finances. Pension wealth is excluded from our analysis because it is particularly age dependent, decliningthroughout retirement. The sample characteristics stratified by migration status are provided in Table 1.We fit two types of models; the first involves a multilevel growth curve (repeated observations nested within individu-als) to examine how trajectories (or change) of wellbeing evolve between 2002 and 2012 for age cohorts (based on age atwave 1 – 2002). The approach employs a similar methodology to that used by Yang (2007) to model trajectories of depres-sion, by Jivraj et al. (2014) to model wellbeing in later life and by Marshall, Nazroo, Tampubolon, and Vanhoutte (2015)for frailty. A key advantage of using a multilevel approach is that it offers one way of dealing with the correlation in anindividual’s wellbeing over time and the technique is capable of handling unequal time spaces, missing data and the inclu-sion of time varying and between subject covariates that are either continuous or discrete measures (Raudenbush & Chan,1992). We extend the analysis of wellbeing in later life reported by Jivraj et al. (2014) to include stratification by migrationstatus (non-movers, voluntary movers and involuntary movers) and we control for the set of socio-demographic controls(age, sex, self-reported illness, economic activity, tenure, economic activity, wealth). Essentially, the model produces a dif-ferent trajectory for the mean level of wellbeing for each age cohort between 2002 and 2012. Further, it allows for the tra-jectories of (age cohort-specific) wellbeing to vary across groups of non-movers, voluntary movers and involuntary movers.Such cohort-specific analysis is valuable to maximise the richness of the longitudinal ELSA data and to explore the possi-bility that the impact of migration on wellbeing might vary according to cohort. The socio-demographic control variablesprotect against the possibility that differences in socio-demographic profiles of non-movers and movers (voluntary andinvoluntary) (see Table 2), rather than factors to do with internal migration, are driving differences in trajectories of wellbe-ing across migration/non-migration groups. We explored the use of interactions between migration status and cohort andmigration status and time, but as these did not attain statistical significance we do not include these interactions in the finalmodels.The second model is concerned with how wellbeing evolves as individuals experience a move (voluntary or involun-tary). We model trajectories in the mean CASP score (wellbeing) using a repeated measures linear regression model fittedusing the generalised estimating equations method which takes account of the autoregressive correlation structure (Lipsitz,Kim, & Zhao, 1994). We used a spline model with a knot at the point at which a move occurred and assess whether thepre-move slope in mean CASP score with time differs to the slope of change after a move. In other words, we wish todetermine whether the change in wellbeing after a move is different to before a move and whether this depends on the nat-ure of the move (voluntary/involuntary). We interacted our pre and post-move slope terms with a variable distinguishingwhether a move is voluntary or involuntary. Again we control for a set of socio-demographic variables (which take thevalue observed at the time point prior to migration) to guard against the possibility that the social and demographic profilesof the two migration groups drive any differences in trajectories observed. Similar modelling strategies have been used tomodel wellbeing and health outcomes through events such as migration (Nowok et al., 2013) and retirement (Marshall &Nazroo, 2015; Westerlund et al., 2009).3 | RESULTSThree key results emerge from our analyses (see Figures 1 and 2 and Tables S1 and S2). First, we observe lower levels ofwellbeing for those who move for involuntary reasons compared with non-movers and voluntary movers and this is consis-tent across age cohorts. Thus, internal migration in later life is selective in that wellbeing is lower for older people whomove house for involuntary reasons. Second, for those people who moved for involuntary reasons, we observe a differencein the rate of change in wellbeing after a move compared with before. Specifically, the decline in wellbeing prior to a moveis followed by a levelling off in the trajectory of wellbeing after a move. In other words, those in adverse circumstanceswith poor wellbeing who are in some way forced to migrate benefit from that internal migration in terms of their wellbeingnot declining as much as expected without migration. Third, for those respondents who moved for voluntary reasons, thedecline in wellbeing before and after migration is identical. In sum, internal migration is good for wellbeing in later life:older people who move for voluntary reasons maintain their relatively high levels of wellbeing even after controlling forcorrelates of wellbeing and those who move involuntarily experience a slower decline in wellbeing after compared withbefore a move.In Figure 1a we see the evolution of wellbeing across age cohorts for the full ELSA sample. First, focusing on the levelof wellbeing in 2002 across age cohorts (the start of each trajectory of wellbeing), we observe an inverted U-shaped patternFINNEY AND MARSHALL | 5with progressively higher level of wellbeing moving from the cohort aged 50 in 2002 to the cohort aged around 65 in2002 followed by declines in wellbeing as one moves to earlier born cohorts (i.e., those aged 65 and over in 2002). Thedecline in wellbeing over time within age cohorts increases as one moves from later to earlier born cohorts and here weessentially replicate part of the cohort-specific analysis of Jivraj et al. (2014), who discuss the social determinants of well-being in detail. An interesting point to note in relation to Figure 1a is the evidence for a difference in levels of wellbeingacross cohorts when compared at the same age, such that earlier born cohorts tend to have higher wellbeing than later borncohorts, a similar finding to that reported for frailty by Marshall et al. (2015).Figure 1b shows stratification by the migration variable (non-mover, voluntary mover and involuntary mover) andTable S1 provides the coefficients that underpin the predicted CASP scores presented. While the trajectories of wellbeing(a) Base model: trajectories of wellbeing byage cohort (b) Mobility model: trajectories of wellbeingby age cohort and mobility group* 2530354045Casp score50 60 70 80 90 100Age2530354045Predicted Casp score50 60 70 80 90Age-CohortNon-movers Involuntary moversVoluntary moversFIGURE 1 Trajectories (or change) in mean wellbeing (CASP-19 score) between 2002 and 2012 by age-cohorts. *The model wellbeingscores control for wealth quintiles and sex differences in mobility groups. For regression coefficients see supplementary material (Table S1).Note: In (a) cohorts are based on single years of age at 2002, whereas in (b) the inclusion of additional explanatory variables (e.g., reason formove) reduces sample sizes and requires the use of cohorts based on 5-year age groups. (b) The modelled wellbeing scores control for gender,tenure, cohabitation, economic activity and self-reported illness taking the reference category for each of these independent variables. Modeltrajectories for non-movers and voluntary movers are almost identical and we found no evidence of any statistically significant difference in thelevel or gradient of wellbeing predicted.4042444648Casp12 score-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10Time to moveInvoluntary migration Voluntary migrationFIGURE 2 Trajectories (or change) in mean wellbeing (CASP-19) scores before and after a residential move. Model wellbeing scores relateto age (in wave prior to move) of 50 and the reference category of all other independent variables. Note: For model coefficients and statistics seeTable S2 (Mobility reasons model [controlled]). The model controls for economic activity, tenure, marital status, wealth, age and sex (for allthese variables we use the value immediately prior to the move in our models).6 | FINNEY AND MARSHALLare almost identical for voluntary movers and non-movers (no statistically significant differences), we see clearly lowerlevels of wellbeing for involuntary movers that are statistically significant and are independent of the social and demo-graphic control variables included in our model. The rate of change in wellbeing within age cohorts is comparable acrossmobility groups (we find no evidence of statistically significant differences).Figure 2 shows the trajectory of wellbeing for all those individuals who moved during the ELSA study (2002–2012),with Table S2 illustrating the model coefficients. For voluntary movers there is no evidence for difference in the slope ofwellbeing before and after a move, whereas for those who moved for reasons classed as “involuntary,” after a move weobserve a levelling off in the decline in wellbeing observed before the move. This difference in slopes of mean wellbeingeither side of a move is statistically significant (p = .04, see Table S2) and holds after controlling for a set of socio-demo-graphic controls. So, those in adverse circumstances with poor wellbeing who are in some way forced to migrate benefitfrom that internal migration in terms of their wellbeing not declining as much as expected without migration.4 | DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONSWe have addressed in this paper the questions of the differences in wellbeing in later life for those who move house andthose who do not, and the effect of the move event on wellbeing. In both cases, we have distinguished between moves forvoluntary reasons and moves for involuntary reasons. This paper thus adds to literature on non-economic effects of internalmigration, and in doing so contributes to the relatively neglected field of internal migration in later life, with implicationsfor understandings of how migration is selective and may thus affect ageing inequalities. We have employed longitudinalanalysis of the ELSA to allow us to identify trends in wellbeing, and how these vary across cohorts and before and after aresidential move.Our key result is that migration in later life is good for wellbeing: for those who move voluntarily, it maintains highlevels of wellbeing (independently of other socio-economic and demographic correlates of wellbeing) and for those whosemoves are involuntary it stabilises the decline in wellbeing associated with ageing. More precisely, our analyses found thatvoluntary movers have high levels of wellbeing, comparable with those who don’t move (stayers), which in turn are higherthan for those who move for involuntary reasons. The trajectory of wellbeing for those who move involuntarily is improvedcompared with the period prior to the move; there is no such change in wellbeing trajectory after a move compared withbefore for those who move for voluntary reasons, though their wellbeing levels remain above those of people who movefor involuntary reasons at all points. The differences in levels of wellbeing trajectories and the effect of an involuntarymove on the trajectory of wellbeing after a move (compared with before) are statistically significant and remain after con-trolling for the characteristics of the groups of voluntary movers/involuntary movers/stayers, including in terms of genderand wealth.There are a number of implications of our study, for methods, concepts of internal migration, studies of ageing inequali-ties and policy. On methods, this work supports others in demonstrating that large-scale, longitudinal data with migrationand reason for move information provide a rich opportunity for better understanding of migration as a process of selectionand social inequalities. ELSA has been shown to be an excellent resource in this respect and more use could be made ofthis survey, and its sister studies in other countries.For concepts of (internal) migration, our work reinforces the point often made – but rarely operationalised in quantitativestudies – that it is crucial to know reason for move in order to understand migration experiences and consequences. More-over, the findings offer an alternative conceptualisation of the impact of involuntary moves. In migration literature (asidefrom forced migration literature), involuntary moves have been most studied in relation to tied migrants, those who movefor reasons related to the partner’s work. Tied migrants (usually female) have been shown to experience economic disad-vantage after migration. The divergence in our findings and Nowok et al. (2013) also illustrates the importance of focusingon later life, and how not only drivers of internal migration but their consequences may differ from at other life stages.Finally, this study has demonstrated how internal migration studies can contribute to debates about inequalities by payinggreater attention to drivers of migration, and how they represent inequalities in choice and constraint, across the lifecourse.For scholarship on ageing inequalities, this paper illustrates the need to take into account residential experience andchange. Wealth inequalities in later life are part of the explanation of differential associations between migration and well-being (poor but not rich tend to be “involuntary” movers), but aside from the wealth of individuals, whether a move is vol-untary or involuntary is independently associated with wellbeing.For policy and practice, including place-based initiatives such as the WHO Age Friendly Cities movement, our analysisoffers a useful pointer for maximising wellbeing in later life. Policies that enable migration of older people may be valuableFINNEY AND MARSHALL | 7in maintaining wellbeing and, for those facing adverse circumstances, may stabilise decline in wellbeing, thus reducinginequalities in wellbeing in later life.Of course, there is much that we have not done in this paper that could usefully augment understandings of whethermigration is good for wellbeing and implications for inequalities in ageing. In particular, we do not capture anything aboutthe household or family links of movers or stayers, which are likely to be crucial for understanding drivers and impacts ofinternal migration in later life (van der Pers, Mulder, & Steverink, 2015). In this respect there are undoubtedly gender dif-ferences to explore. It would be useful also to be able to compare voluntary and involuntary movers to voluntary and invol-untary stayers. This would enable, for example, assessment of the extent to which there is unfulfilled moving desire(Coulter, 2013) among older people and how enabling migration may potentially enhance wellbeing. One important limita-tion of this study is attrition of sample members, which is more common for those with poorer wellbeing/health and in thelower social classes. We cannot entirely rule out the possibility that the levelling off in the trajectory of wellbeing after aninvoluntary move, compared with the trajectory before the move, is not driven to some extent by attrition of those withlow levels of wellbeing. We guard against this to some extent in that replication of our analysis using the ELSA wave 6longitudinal weights, which account for attrition (but lead to a much smaller sample size requiring observations at eachwave), does not alter our substantive findings. Similarly, we must acknowledge that ELSA is a household survey, excludingthose in care institutions for whom different drivers of migration and relationships with wellbeing are likely. Place isentirely absent from our study; where people move to and from and how this relates to family and social networks, servicesand suchlike is undoubtedly important for understanding the association between moving and wellbeing. For example, thebody of research that has demonstrated migration to be health-selective, with the effect of increasing spatial inequalities inhealth outcomes, might be further developed through stratification according to reason for migration (Norman & Boyle,2014; Norman, Boyle, & Rees, 2005). Additionally, this paper would ideally be developed with greater attention to reasonfor move beyond the rather crude categorisation of “voluntary” and “involuntary” that we have employed here. This initself could constitute a programme of work, qualitative and quantitative. We hope that further research will address thesedeficiencies. Given the declines in residential mobility over time, including for older age groups (Champion & Shuttle-worth, 2016), combined with our finding of the positive effects of migration for wellbeing, particularly for those facingadverse circumstances, the question of who gets to move becomes increasingly salient for those interested in challengingsocial inequalities.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThis paper is part of the research of the fRaill project (grant reference: G1001375/1) (www.ihs.manchester.ac.uk/MICRA/fRaill/) which is funded by the cross-research council Lifelong Health and Wellbeing Programme. The data were madeavailable through the UK Data Archive (UKDA). The English Longitudinal Study of Ageing was developed by a team ofresearchers based at the National Centre for Social Research, University College London and the Institute for Fiscal Studieswith funding provided by the National Institute of Aging in the United States, and a consortium of UK government depart-ments co-ordinated by the Office for National Statistics. We are very grateful to the two anonymous reviewers and to mem-bers of St Andrews Population and Health Research group whose comments improved this paper.REFERENCESChampion, T., & Shuttleworth, I. (2016). Are people changing address less? An analysis of migration within England and Wales, 1971–2011, bydistance of move. Population Space and Place, 23, e2026.Cheshire, H., Hussey, D., Phelps, A., & Woods, N. (2012). Methodology. In J. Banks, J. Nazroo & A. Steptoe (Eds.), Dynamics of ageing: Evi-dence from the English longitudinal study of ageing. London, UK: The Institute for Fiscal Studies.Cooke, T. J. (2008). Migration in a family way. Population Space and Place, 14(4), 255–265.Coulter, R. (2013). Wishful thinking and the abandonment of moving desires over the life course. Environment and Planning A, 45(8), 1944–1962.Coulter, R., van Ham, M., & Findlay, A. M. (2016). Re-thinking residential mobility: Linking lives through time and space. Progress in HumanGeography, 40(3), 352–374.Evandrou, M., Falkingham, J., & Green, M. (2010). Migration in later life: Evidence from the British Household Panel Study. Population Trends,141, 77–94.Feng, Z., Falkingham, J., Liu, X., & Vlachantoni, A. (2017). Changes in living arrangements and mortality among older people in China. Popula-tion Health, 3, 9–19.Finney, N. (2011). Life stage explanations of ethnic differences in internal migration of young adults in Britain. Transactions of the Institute ofBritish Geographers, 36(3), 455–470.8 | FINNEY AND MARSHALLHardill, I., Spradbery, J., Arnold-Boakes, J., & Marrugat, M. L. (2005). Severe health and social care issues among British migrants who retire toSpain. Ageing and Society, 25(5), 769–783.Hillcoat-Nalletamby, S., & Ogg, J. (2014). Moving beyond ‘ageing in place’: Older people’s dislikes about their home and neighbourhood envi-ronments as a motive for wishing to move. Ageing and Society, 34(10), 1771–1796.Jivraj, S., Nazroo, J., Vanhoutte, B., & Chandola, T. (2014). Ageing and subjective wellbeing in later life. Journals of Gerontology. Series B,Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 69(6), 930–941.Laslett, P. (1994). The third age. The Fourth Age and the Future Ageing and Society, 14(3), 436–447.Lipsitz, S. R., Kim, K., & Zhao, L. (1994). Analysis of repeated categorical data using generalized estimating equations. Statistical Medicine, 13,1149–1163.Marshall, A., & Nazroo, J. (2015). Inequalities in trajectories of self-reported illness at retirement. Journal of Population Ageing, 9, 11–48.Marshall, A., Nazroo, J., Tampubolon, G., & Vanhoutte, B. (2015). Cohort differences in the levels and trajectories of frailty among older peoplein England. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 69(4), 316–321.Norman, P., & Boyle, P. (2014). Are health inequalities between differently deprived areas evident at different ages? A longitudinal study of cen-sus records in England & Wales, 1991–2001. Health & Place, 26, 88–93.Norman, P., Boyle, P., & Rees, P. (2005). Selective migration, health and deprivation: A longitudinal analysis. Social Science & Medicine, 60(12), 2755–2771.Nowok, B., Van Ham, M., Findlay, A., & Gayle, V. (2013). Does migration make you happy? A longitudinal study of internal migration andsubjective wellbeing. Environment and Planning A, 45, 4.van der Pers, M., Mulder, C. H., & Steverink, N. (2015). Geographic proximity of adult children and the well-being of older persons. Researchon Aging, 37(5), 524–551.Raudenbush, S., & Chan, W. (1992). Growth curve analysis in accelerated longitudinal designs. Journal of Research in Crime Delinquency, 22(4), 387–411.Rees, P., & Hardill, I. (2015). Later-life and internal migration. In D. Smith, N. Finney, K. Halfacree & N. Walford (Eds.), Internal migration.Geographical perspectives and processes (pp. 129–148). Farnham, UK: Ashgate.Robards, J., Evandrou, M., Falkingham, J., & Vlachantoni, A. (2014). Mortality at older ages and moves in residential and sheltered housing:Evidence from the UK. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 68, 524–529.Smith, D., Finney, N., Halfacree, K., & Walford, N. (Eds.) (2015). Internal migration. Geographical perspectives and processes. Farnham, UK:Ashgate.Stockdale, A. (2016). From ‘trailing wives’ to the emergence of a ‘trailing husbands’ phenomenon: Retirement migration to rural areas. Popula-tion Space and Place, 23, e2022.Warnes, A. (1992). Migration and the life course. In A. G. Champion & A. J. Fielding (Eds.), Migration processes and patterns. Research pro-gress and prospects (Vol. 1, pp. 175–187). London, UK: Belhaven.Westerlund, H., Kiyimaki, M., Singh-Manoux, A., Melcior, M., Ferrie, J., Pentti, J., . . . Vahtera, J. (2009). Self-rated health before and afterretirement in France (GAZEL): A cohort study. The Lancet, 374(9705), 1889–1896.Wiggins, R. D., Netuveli, G., Hyde, M., Higgs, P., & Blane, D. (2007). The evaluation of a self-enumerated scale of quality of life (CASP-19) inthe context of research on ageing: A combination of exploratory and confirmatory approaches. Social Indicators Research, 89(1), 61–77.Yang, Y. (2007). Is old age depressing? Growth trajectories and cohort variations in late life depression. Journal of Health and Social Behavior,48, 16–32.Yarwood, R., & Tyrrell, N. (2012). Why children’s geographies? Geography, 97(3), 123–128.SUPPORTING INFORMATIONAdditional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.Table S1. Model statistics: trajectories (change) in wellbeing (CASP19) in later life, for non-migrants, voluntary moversand involuntary movers (the coefficients are used to generate the predicted wellbeing trajectories displayed in Figure 1).Table S2. Model statistics: trajectories (change) in wellbeing (CASP19) through a residential move (the coefficients areused to generate the predicted wellbeing trajectories displayed in Figure 2).How to cite this article: Finney N, Marshall A. Is migration in later life good for wellbeing? A longitudinal study ofageing and selectivity of internal migration. Area. 2018;00:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1111/area.12428FINNEY AND MARSHALL | 9