ABSTRACT: 
The justificatory force of empirical reasoning always depends upon the existence of some synthetic, a priori justification. The reasoner must begin with justified, substantive constraints on both the prior probability of the conclusion and certain conditional probabilities; otherwise, all possible degrees of belief in the conclusion are left open given the premises. Such constraints cannot in general be empirically justified, on pain of infinite regress. Nor does subjective Bayesianism offer a way out for the empiricist. Despite often-cited convergence theorems, subjective Bayesians cannot hold that any empirical hypothesis is ever objectively justified in the relevant sense. Rationalism is thus the only alternative to an implausible skepticism. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Empiricism may be defined as the view there is no a priori justification for any synthetic claim. Critics object that empiricism cannot account for all the kinds of knowledge we seem to possess, such as moral knowledge, metaphysical knowledge, mathematical knowledge, and modal knowledge. In some cases, empiricism try to account for these types of knowledge; in other cases, they shrug off the objections, happily concluding, for example, that there is no moral knowledge, or that there is no metaphysical knowledge. But empiricism cannot shrug off just any type of knowledge; to be minimally plausible, empiricism must, for example, at least be able to account for paradigm instances of empirical knowledge, including especially scientific knowledge. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 There Is No Pure Empirical Reasoning1. Empiricism and the Question of Empirical ReasonsEmpiricism may be defined as the view there is no a priori justification for anysynthetic claim. Critics object that empiricism cannot account for all the kindsof knowledge we seem to possess, such as moral knowledge, metaphysicalknowledge, mathematical knowledge, and modal knowledge.1 In some cases,empiricists try to account for these types of knowledge; in other cases, theyshrug off the objections, happily concluding, for example, that there is no moralknowledge, or that there is no metaphysical knowledge.2But empiricism cannot shrug off just any type of knowledge; to beminimally plausible, empiricism must, for example, at least be able to accountfor paradigm instances of empirical knowledge, including especially scientificknowledge.Empirical knowledge can be divided into three categories: (a) knowledge bydirect observation; (b) knowledge that is deductively inferred from observations;and (c) knowledge that is non-deductively inferred from observations, includingknowledge arrived at by induction and inference to the best explanation.Category (c) includes all scientific knowledge. This category is of particularimport to empiricists, many of whom take scientific knowledge as a sort ofparadigm for knowledge in general; indeed, this forms a central source ofmotivation for empiricism.3 Thus, if there is any kind of knowledge thatempiricists need to be able to account for, it is knowledge of type (c).I use the term “empirical reasoning” to refer to the reasoning involved inacquiring this type of knowledge – that is, to any instance of reasoning in which(i) the premises are justified directly by observation, (ii) the reasoning is non-deductive, and (iii) the reasoning provides adequate justification for theconclusion. I assume that non-deductive reasoning justifies its conclusion, if atall, by rendering the conclusion probable. I call a case of empirical reasoning“pure” if it also satisfies the further condition (iv) that the reasoning does notdepend upon or in any other way imply the existence of any a priori justificationfor any synthetic claim.I contend that there is no pure empirical reasoning. There are cases ofreasoning satisfying (i)-(iii), but none of them also satisfy (iv). All empirical1 BonJour 1998; Bealer 1992; Huemer 2005, ch. 5.2 Carnap 1932; Ayer 1952, chs. 1, 6.3 Think, for example, of the seemingly unconscious way in which Quine (1951, p. 39) conflates“the totality of our so-called knowledge or beliefs” with “total science” or “the whole ofscience,” and Schlick (1974, p. ix) conflates “the entire system of knowledge” with “all thesciences.” Schlick (p. x) immediately goes on to claim that work in epistemology should rest onexamining natural science as a model.1reasoning requires background cognitive attitudes that cannot be justified on thebasis of observations, logic, or the analysis of concepts. (Non-skeptical)empiricism is thus an untenable epistemological doctrine.2. Empiricism Has No Coherent Account of EmpiricalReasons2.1. Empirical Reasoning Requires Background ProbabilitiesAny empirical inference depends for its justificatory force on background,probabilistic information. This information is of two kinds: (i) informationreflected by the prior probability of the conclusion; (ii) information reflected incertain conditional probabilities, or in prior probabilities of certain conjunctivepropositions (these last two being interchangeable in probability theory).4 I startwith the theoretical justification of this point, followed by illustrative examples.The theoretical justification begins from Bayes’ Theorem:Equation 1Let e be some observational evidence and h be the conclusion of some empiricalreasoning (perhaps inductive or abductive) from that evidence. The reasoningsucceeds in justifying h only if h is rendered probable by e, which is true only ifP(h|e) is sufficiently high (and higher than P(h)). And that, according toEquation 1, depends on the values of P(h), P(e|h), and P(e|~h). Somecombinations of values for those three probabilities let h be highly probable inthe light of e, whereas others do not. Therefore, the justificatory force of theempirical reasoning from e to h depends on there being (justification for) asuitable probability distribution.This reasoning turns on no unduly strong assumptions. In particular, notei. The reasoning does not depend on the assumption that epistemicjustification can be reduced to probability. It requires at most theassumption that, for a conclusion to be justified via empirical reasoning, itis a necessary condition that the conclusion be probable (or at least, not highlyimprobable), given the premises.ii. Nor does the argument assume that the mathematical principles ofprobability tell us all we need to know about justification, or even aboutprobability. The argument requires only that the theorems of probability,4 That is, modulo some set of prior probabilities for atomic propositions, if one is given acomplete set of conditional probabilities, one can compute a complete set of probabilities ofconjunctions, and vice versa. So in empirical reasoning, one may rely either on credences forconjunctions or on conditional credences.2especially Bayes’ Theorem, are true.iii. Nor need we assume that, in empirical reasoning, subjects must reasonabout probabilities, hold beliefs about probabilities, or be able to assignprecise numerical values to the relevant probabilities. The claim is only thatthe reasoner must have available some justification (independent of theconclusion) that would suffice to reject probability distributions on whichthe conclusion of the inference is improbable in light of the evidence.For an illustration of the dependence of empirical reasoning on priorprobabilities, compare two hypotheses that might explain my sensoryexperiences:a. The brain-in-a-vat hypothesis (BIVH): I am a brain in a vat who is beingstimulated by the scientists in such a way as to create a perfect simulationof life in the early twenty-first century.b. The real-world hypothesis (RWH): I am a normal person living in the earlytwenty-first century.These hypotheses do not differ in their empirical predictions.5 Nevertheless, itis reasonable to believe RWH and reject BIVH. Indeed, if we met someone whobelieved BIVH, we would consider that person irrational to the point ofinsanity. But since the two theories are empirically equivalent, the reason whyone of them is rational and the other not cannot lie in differing empiricalsupport. It must therefore be a priori. When non-philosophers hear of BIVH,a common reaction is that it is a “crazy” scenario. This reaction can be naturallyinterpreted as communicating that one attaches to the BIV scenario a very lowinitial credence.For those who dislike flights of philosophical fancy, here is a more scientificexample. In 2011, the noted Cornell psychologist Daryl Bem published a paperreporting statistical evidence for the existence of psychic phenomena –specifically, a form of precognition involving backwards causation.6 Theprecognition hypothesis had passed tests of statistical significance in eight outof nine experiments. For example, in one experiment, subjects were to guesswhich of two curtains would have a picture behind it, where the picture and itslocation were randomly selected by a computer after the subject made theirguess. Bem found that, in the cases where an erotic image was going to be5 One might claim that the two hypotheses differ because RWH predicts that I will observephysical objects (where “observe” is a success term), while BIVH predicts that I won’t genuinelyobserve anything. The success of this move turns on what we count as our foundationalempirical evidence, whether physical-object propositions or propositions about experiences,internally construed. If you are tempted by this move, substitute another example of twoempirically equivalent theories, where one of the theories nevertheless strikes us as crazy – forexample, the sodium-uranium transmutation theory discussed in section 3.4 below.6 Bem 2011.3displayed, subjects did significantly better than chance at guessing where thepicture would appear – suggesting, according to Bem, that the attractiveness ofthe picture that the subject would later see influenced the subject’s guess.When I first heard these results, I was skeptical of the theory. More thanskeptical, in fact: I did not provisionally accept the theory pending furtherinvestigation, nor did I withhold judgment. Rather, I thought the theory wasfalse, and that is what I still think. In essence, I believe that Bem’s experimentalresults were due to chance, rather than to precognition. Why? Prior to thisexperiment, I find the existence of backwards causation and precognitionextremely improbable; thus, it is more plausible that Bem obtained statisticallysignificant results by chance.7This sort of reaction is common in response to alleged evidence for psychicphenomena: skeptics often cite “coincidence” as a hypothesis superior to thepostulation of psychic phenomena. But we would not react in this way if somemore initially plausible hypothesis were at issue. Extraordinary claims, as we say,require extraordinary evidence. The lesson is that the success of an empiricalargument depends on the prior probability of the conclusion.Now to illustrate the dependence on conditional probabilities, assume that Ihave observed 100 shamrocks (which I can identify independent of their color),all of which I found to be green. I might infer that, since all the observedshamrocks so far have been green, the next one will also be green.But now consider a new color predicate, “grue”, where it is stipulated thatan object counts as grue just in case: it is observed before now and is green, orit is not observed before now and is blue.8 It is true that every shamrock I haveobserved hitherto has been green, but it is also true that they have all been grue.So I might infer that the next one will be grue as well.Formally, the two inferences are analogous. But the rational conclusion isthat the next shamrock will be green, not grue. What is the difference betweenthe “green” hypothesis and the “grue” hypothesis? In this case, the difference lies either in conditional probabilities, or inprobabilities of certain conjunctions (these being mathematicallyinterchangeable here): the conditional probability of unobserved shamrocksbeing grue given that the observed shamrocks were grue is much lower than theconditional probability of unobserved shamrocks being green given that theobserved shamrocks were green. Alternately, we may say: the prior probabilityof both observed and unobserved shamrocks being uniform with respect togreenness is higher than the prior probability of their being uniform withrespect to grueness. Presumably, this contrasting treatment of “grue” and“green” hypotheses in our probability distributions reflects our tendency tothink such things as that green is a genuine, natural property in a sense in whichgrue is not, that the predicate “green” cuts nature at its joints in a way that7 For a more sophisticated version of this view, see Rouder and Morey 2011.8 Following Goodman (1955, pp. 74-81).4“grue” does not, and that the time at which an object is first observed does notaffect its color.None of this probabilistic information can plausibly be construed as analyticin any relevant sense: it is not logically inconsistent, nor is it inconsistent withthe axioms of probability theory,9 nor does it somehow conflict with themeanings of words, to assign a higher prior probability to BIVH than to RWH,or to assign a higher probability to objects’ being uniform with respect togrueness than to their being uniform with respect to greenness.2.2. The Inferential Background Is Not EmpiricalSo far, all of this is simply to say that an empirical inference requires somebackground information that is neither analytic nor directly observational. Theempiricist could accept this, provided that this background can itself be justifiedon the basis of observations. The background information is not logically entailedby any observations. Perhaps, however, it can be derived from observations vianon-deductive reasoning.How might this work? It is unclear what empirical evidence I could possiblybring to bear, without begging the question, on the issue of how likely it is thatI am a brain in a vat. But at least in the precognition case, I might cite thehistory of failed attempts to find psychic phenomena, the number of putativecases that have turned out to be hoaxes, the number of failed replicationattempts, and so on. I might use this sort of inductive evidence to establish avery low prior probability for the particular ESP hypothesis entertained by Bem.In the case of the shamrock inferences, perhaps I rely upon earlierexperiences in which I used non-grue-like predicates to make inductiveinferences, and the inferences turned out well. Or perhaps I have pastexperiences that inductively confirm that objects’ colors are generally notaffected by time of first observation.While these suggestions may seem reasonable enough, they fail to confrontthe underlying philosophical problem. By invoking further empirical inferences,they merely take the first step in a regress that the empiricist cannot complete.These further inferences will be subject to the same problem as the originalinference: every empirical inference depends for its cogency on a suitable initialprobability distribution. When e and h are logically independent (neither entailsor contradicts the other), it is always true that a sufficiently low prior probabilityfor h will leave h highly improbable in the light of e, and it is always true that9 Hereinafter, when I speak of the axioms of probability, I mean the Kolmogorov axioms: (i) theprobability of any proposition is greater than or equal to zero, (ii) the probability of a tautologyis 1, (iii) if A and B are mutually exclusive, then the probability that at least one of them is trueequals the probability of A plus the probability of B, and (iv) the probability of A and B bothbeing true equals the probability of A being true times the probability of B being true given thatA is true. An assignment of probabilities is “coherent” or “probabilistically coherent” providedthat it satisfies these four axioms.5there are coherent probability distributions on which e fails to raise theprobability of h. So we would always need an independent justification for rulingout such probability distributions. Since we cannot have an infinite series ofempirical reasons, the problem of the priors cannot in general be solved byempirical reasoning.2.3. The Straight Rule and Similar Proposals FailPerhaps the dependence on a priori information can be avoided by adoptingsomething like the straight rule: given n observations of A’s, out of which mturned out to be F, set the probability of the next observed A being F equal tom/n.10 This rule putatively avoids the threat of a priori prior probabilities byspecifying the correct credence in the inductive conclusion purely as a functionof the observed evidence, without regard to how likely an A that is F mayinitially seem to the observer.One problem with this rule is that it is inconsistent. Suppose I have justobserved three shamrocks, s1, s2, and s3. The first and third were green, while thesecond was brown. What is the probability that the next two shamrocks Iobserve (s4 and s5) will both be green? There are at least two ways of answeringthis based on the straight rule:1. Two thirds of observed shamrocks so far have been green, so theprobability of s4 being green is 2/3. If s4 does turn out to be green, theobserved frequency of green shamrocks will then be up to 3/4, at whichpoint the probability of s5 being green will therefore be 3/4. So theprobability of both being green is (2/3)(3/4) = 1/2.2. The frequency of observed pairs of shamrocks that are both green is 1/3:out of the pairs {s1, s2}, {s2, s3}, and {s1, s3}, only the last pair are both green.So the probability of the pair {s4, s5} both being green is 1/3.Perhaps there is a way of qualifying the straight rule to render it consistent.Or perhaps some other rule can be devised that, on its face, does not require usto employ any information beyond the sequence of observations. But here is ageneral problem with any such rule: either the results of the rule are consistentwith the results of conditionalization starting from some coherent priorprobability distributions (for short: “the rule is consistent with some priors”),or they are not. If the rule is not consistent with any priors, then the rule isincompatible with the axioms of probability theory and should be rejected forthat reason.If the rule is consistent with some priors, there will nevertheless be someother priors with which the rule is inconsistent. This must be true since, as10 A version of this rule is defended by Reichenbach (1938, pp. 340, 348-57) on quasi-pragmaticgrounds; however, the defense fails to support the straight rule over many alternatives. For briefbut effective criticisms of the straight rule, see Carnap 1980, pp. 85-6.6discussed above, different priors lead to different results in the light of the sameevidence. Therefore, the empiricist will still stand in need of a justification forrejecting those priors that conflict with the empiricist’s proposed rule. Onceagain, if the empiricist tries to provide empirical reasoning for that rejection, wewill be embarked on a regress. The regress can only be stopped by appeal to apriori probabilities.112.4. Objections to Russell’s Argument Do Not Apply to MineThe argument thus far is reminiscent of an old argument advanced by BertrandRussell and later reprised by Laurence BonJour.12 Russell argued that inductivereasoning presupposes a principle of induction – a rule that would tell one, in effect,what conclusions may legitimately be inductively inferred from what evidence.The correctness of such a rule evidently could not be directly observed ordeduced from direct observations. Nor could it be based on induction, on painof circularity (of a sort that intuitively seems vicious). So the rule would have tobe justified a priori.Here I want to examine how an empiricist might respond to Russell, andthen explain why that response does not apply to my own argument. Anempiricist could reply to Russell that, even if there are rules that codify cogentinduction, the subject who acquires inductive justification for a conclusion neednot first know, or have justification for believing anything about, these rules. Itsuffices that the subject have dispositions to accept inferences that in fact followthe correct rules. To think otherwise – to hold that inferential justificationrequires first having justification to believe in the rules of inference – is towrongly treat inference rules like premises of an inference.13To elaborate on this response to Russell, compare two related points: First,in order to justifiedly classify some object as falling under some concept, oneneed not first have justification for accepting some analysis of that concept.Epistemologists, for example, have yet to determine the correct analysis of“know,” yet we all make justified knowledge-ascriptions all the time. In a similarmanner, might we not be able to identify cases of cogent reasoning withoutknowing the rules describing such reasoning?Second, in order to acquire justification for believing P via method M, it isnot in general required that one first have justification for believing that M isreliable, or a source of justification, or in some other sense a good way of11 Thus, for example, even if Reichenbach could provide an epistemic reason for relying on thestraight rule rather than any of the other coherent rules that allow learning from experience, hewould not have vindicated an empiricist account of induction; he would rather have refutedempiricism by producing an instance of synthetic, a priori justification.12 Russell 1912, ch. 6; BonJour 1998, ch. 7.13 Arguments of this kind appear in Psillos 1999, pp. 82-9; Huemer 2002, pp. 332-3; Devitt 2014.Psillos and Devitt both argue that it is permissible to use abduction to infer that abduction isreliable, because “rule circularity,” unlike “premise circularity,” is permissible in reasoning. Onthe problem of treating inference rules as premises, see also Carroll 1895.7acquiring beliefs. Any such general requirement would lead to an infiniteregress, since one would have to acquire justification for believing that M isreliable using some other method, M', and one would then need justification forbelieving M' to be reliable. Now, if we reject the general requirement that onehave justification for believing one’s belief-forming method to be reliable, thenthere seems to be no principled reason for applying a version of the requirementto the special case where method M consists in a certain sort of inference.14 Forexample, if justified perceptual belief does not depend upon one’s havingindependent justification for believing that perception is reliable, then it isplausible to hold that justified inductive belief also does not depend on one’shaving independent justification for believing that induction is reliable (orcogent, etc.).My purpose here is not to assess the merits of this reply. The point I wantto make is that, whatever we might think of that reply as a reply to Russell orBonJour, it could not be made in response to my argument. For I do not treatrules of inference like premises, nor do I claim that inferential justificationrequires prior knowledge about the rules of inference. I do not suppose that therationality of some instance of reasoning turns on the subject’s holding, orhaving justification for holding, any attitude to any propositions about logical orepistemological relations, or about the subject’s own reasoning. Instead, I claim thatthe cogency of a piece of non-demonstrative reasoning depends upon a priorprobability distribution, where the probabilities in question are probabilities ofordinary, non-logical, non-epistemological propositions – propositions such as“the 100th observed shamrock will be green” or “two thirds of all shamrocks aregreen.” The only relevant attitudes that the subject might need to hold, or tohave justification for holding, would be credences in those ordinarypropositions (N.B., not beliefs about credences). This is much closer to finding apriori premises on which empirical reasoning depends than to merely findingpatterns of inference on which it depends.2.5. Skepticism Is an Unsatisfactory ResponseIf the problem facing empiricism is that empirical reasoning seems to dependupon synthetic, a priori information, an easy response to the problem is todeclare that there is no successful empirical reasoning, that non-demonstrativeinferences never in fact expand our body of justified belief beyond directobservation. There is thus no need to embrace synthetic, a priori justification.This is the path of inductive skepticism.15 Is this a reasonable way of preservingempiricism?It is not. An epistemological theory should explain paradigm instances of14 Huemer 2002, pp. 338-9. Fumerton (1995, ch. 7) recognizes the problem but nonethelessmaintains that inferential justification requires justification for endorsing the cogency of theinference.15 Hume [1758] 1975; Popper 1959.8knowledge and justified belief. Or perhaps more cautiously: a key desideratumof an epistemological theory is that it accommodate our pretheoreticalconvictions about what count as clear cases of knowledge, justified belief, goodreasons, and the like.16 Among these clear cases are many beliefs arrived at byempirical reasoning:@ If someone asks a chemist, “What is water composed of?”, the properresponse is, “Water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen.” The properresponse is not, “No one knows.”@ If someone asks a biologist, “Why should we believe the theory ofevolution?”, it would be correct to reply that we have a great deal ofevidence, drawn from such things as fossil records, physical similaritiesamong organisms of different species, and so on. It would not be correct toreply, “We have no reason to believe the theory of evolution.”@ If someone asks an astronomer what cosmological theories can reasonablybe held given our current evidence, it would be appropriate for theastronomer to mention the Big Bang Theory and brane cosmology. It wouldnot be appropriate to include Aristotle’s theory of the planetary spheres, orthe Native American theory that the Earth rests on the back of a giantturtle.These are not difficult cases; the above judgments are entirelyuncontroversial among scientists. It is in fact largely from the impressiveaccumulation of scientific knowledge of just that sort in the last few centuriesthat empiricism gained its popularity in the twentieth century. Whether rightlyor wrongly, it was thought that scientific knowledge progressed as a result of itsadoption of an empirical methodology and rejection of a priori intuitions, andempiricists sought to found all knowledge on the sources used by modernscience.17 It would therefore be irrational to jettison all of modern scientificknowledge in order to preserve the doctrine of empiricism. And it would be, ifnot quite contradictory, at least worrisome to treat empiricism in the mannertraditionally reserved for a priori axioms – holding it fixed and giving up anyand all particular judgments that are found to conflict with it. The empiricist, ofall people, should stand prepared to revise his theory to accommodate the cases.Note that there is no specially strong sense of “know”, “justified”, or“reason” in play here. The inductive skeptic is not merely one who denies16 This is (a more moderate version of) the view Roderick Chisholm (1982) defended under thename “particularism.” Chisholm held that epistemologists should begin from plausibleepistemological judgments about particular cases and then seek to formulate generalepistemological principles that account for those cases. As he notes, empiricism has generallyrested on the opposite approach, “methodism,” which starts from general principles and usesthem to arrive at judgments about cases. My view is more moderate than Chisholm’s, in that Iclaim only that accommodating the cases is an important desideratum for a theory.17 See again footnote 3 above.9absolute certainty to our scientific theories, or who denies the availability ofnon-circular metajustifications for our belief-forming methods, or who rejectssome other idealized, philosophical sort of knowledge. (In this, the skepticdiffers from the externalist, whose view is discussed in section 4 below.) Nor isthere an option for the skeptic to hold that scientific theories are probablycorrect, close to correct, or even probably close to empirically adequate – foreach of those claims would require empirical reasoning of just the sort theskeptic calls into question. Inductive skepticism, by definition, holds that thereis no reason whatsoever for believing the conclusion of any empirical reasoning.On this view, there is no reason at all for preferring Copernican astronomy over“giant turtle” cosmology, no reason for favoring the theory of evolution overCreationism, and so on. This view is not consistent with the fundamentalmotives of empiricism, nor is it on its face a believable position.3. Subjective Bayesianism Cannot Save Empiricism3.1. Subjective Bayesianism and the Convergence of OpinionSubjective Bayesians hold that any coherent distribution of initial probabilitiesis rationally permissible.18 Whatever one’s initial probabilities, one is rationallyrequired, upon acquiring new evidence, to update one’s beliefs byconditionalization; that is, one should set one’s new credence in a givenhypothesis equal to what one previously held as the probability of thathypothesis given the evidence: Pnew(h) = Pold(h|e).19 On this view, empiricalevidence can probabilistically justify a particular conclusion, not absolutely, butrelative to a particular individual’s initial credences. These initial credencesmight be described as “a priori” in one sense, since they are not based onexperience – but since there is no claim that they are in any sense objectivelycorrect, or any more correct than any other coherent credences, we mightconsider this doctrine to be consistent with empiricism.A leading objection to subjective Bayesianism is that the theory rendersepistemic rationality and empirical reasoning too subjective.20 On the subjectiveBayesian view, whether and how much some evidence non-deductively supportssome conclusion is relative to an observer and dependent on that observer’spsychology, as is the question of to what degree any proposition is overalljustified. Call this “the Subjectivity Objection.”In reply, subjective Bayesians offer the convergence theorems, which show that,18 de Finetti [1937] 1980; Savage 1954; Jeffrey 1992. Howson and Urbach (2006, p. 301),however, claim that the notion of rational priors is “incapable of being given any coherent orsustainable interpretation.”19 Jeffrey (1992, ch. 3) advocates a more general rule than conditionalization, which he calls“probability kinematics,” but the distinction is unimportant for our present purposes. Howsonand Urbach (2006, pp. 80-85) hold that the rule of conditionalization applies only on conditionthat one’s conditional probabilities are unchanged when one learns new evidence.20 Jaynes 1968, p. 228; Gelman 2008.10under certain conditions, individuals with disparate initial probabilities for somehypothesis will tend to converge toward certainty in the true view as evidenceaccumulates.21 For example, a pair of individuals with different initial opinionsabout the proportion of green marbles in a certain urn will tend to approachagreement (their subjective probability distributions will more closely resembleone another) as they progressively draw marbles from the urn andconditionalize on what they observe. More specifically, both individuals’probability distributions will come to resemble ever more closely thedistribution that assigns probability 1 to the correct estimate of the proportionof green marbles.3.2. The Convergence Theorems Do Not Address the Problem of SubjectivityEven if we grant all the assumptions of the convergence theorems, the theoremsdo not touch the core of the Subjectivity Objection. To address the realsubjectivity problem, what needs to be shown is something that these theoremsdo not even purport to show. Here is roughly what the theorems claim:The Convergence Principle: Given a pair of initial subjective probabilitydistributions, and given a desired degree of convergence in posteriorprobabilities in the light of evidence, it is possible to identify an amount ofevidence that would induce the desired degree of convergence, starting fromthose initial distributions.But that is perfectly compatible with the following:The Divergence Principle: Given any set of evidence, and any desired degree ofdivergence in posterior probabilities in the light of that evidence, it is possibleto find a pair of initial probability distributions that induce the desireddegree of divergence, after conditionalizing on the given evidence.Both the Divergence Principle and the Convergence Principle are true, acrossa wide range of relevant cases. But it is the Divergence Principle that matters;it is what underwrites the Subjectivity Objection, properly understood.Why is it the Divergence Principle that matters? The goal, presumably, is tosecure a kind of objectivity for what we pretheoretically regard as well-established scientific theories and other beliefs that are well-supported byempirical reasoning. To put it more clearly, the goal is to enable us to say, undercertain conditions, that a certain conclusion is objectively well-supported by theevidence. Now there are two important points about this:i) Objectivity is not secured merely by the possibility of some rational21 Savage 1954, pp. 46-50; Gaifman and Snir 1982; Hawthorne 2011. For a survey ofconvergence results, see Earman 1992, ch. 6.11observers agreeing on something. If we wish to understand objectivity interms of agreement, we must require agreement by all rational observers.ii) At any given time, an observer or community of observers has a specific,limited body of evidence. Therefore, if we wish to say that some beliefs areobjectively well-supported, we must be able to say that they are objectivelysupported by such a limited body of evidence. No actual belief is renderedjustified by features of some merely potential future evidence.Combining points (i) and (ii), we must be able to say: there are someconclusions and some (finite) sets of evidence such that, given that evidence, allrational observers must agree on that conclusion. That is what objectivity wouldmean. And that is precisely what the subjective Bayesian cannot say.3.3. Why the Divergence Principle HoldsWhy can’t the subjective Bayesian say that? Let h be some hypothesis and let ebe the entire body of evidence relevant to h that we have at some particulartime. Assume that P(e|~h) is nonzero (otherwise, the evidence conclusivelyestablishes h and the issue is trivial). Then the probability of h in the light of ecan be determined from just two pieces of information: (i) the prior probabilityof h, P(h), and (ii) the likelihood ratio, P(e|h)/P(e|~h). Letting “p” stand for theprior probability of h, and “L” stand for the likelihood ratio, we have thefollowing simple theorem:22Equation 2Figure 1 contains a graph of that equation, with six different possible values ofL.23 For each value of L, posterior probability (the probability of h in the lightof e, shown on the vertical axis), is given as a function of the prior probability(shown on the horizontal axis). When L is greater than 1, the graph curvestoward the upper left, indicating that the final probability is greater than theinitial probability, and thus that the evidence supports the hypothesis. When Lis less than 1, the graph curves downward to the right, indicating that theposterior probability is lower than the prior probability, and the evidenceundermines the hypothesis.Here is the important point: for any nonzero value of L, the function inEquation 2 maps the interval [0,1], continuously and one-to-one, onto theinterval [0,1]. For every possible value of the prior probability between 0 and 1,22 Proof: start with Equation 1 from section 2.1 above in the text, substitute (1 - P(h)) for P(~h),and divide both the numerator and the denominator on the right hand side by P(e|~h).23 Courtesy of the Desmos equation grapher, <https://www.desmos.com/calculator/yr6lojrklc>, accessed January 9, 2016.12Figure 1there is exactly one corresponding value of the posterior probability, and forevery possible value of the posterior probability between 0 and 1, there isexactly one corresponding value of the prior probability. In other words: you tellme what you want the posterior probability to be, and what you think thelikelihood ratio is, and I can tell you a prior probability that delivers exactly thatposterior probability. So: if there are no constraints on the prior, then there are noconstraints on the posterior.The preceding argument does not apply just to some special class of cases,or some particular model of inductive reasoning. Equation 2 is a simple, generaltheorem applicable to any hypothesis and any evidence, with the sole restrictionthat P(e|~h) is nonzero.Bayesians who are otherwise good subjectivists sometimes suggest specialconstraints on which hypotheses one may assign a prior probability of zero to.For instance, perhaps one should not assign probability zero to any theory thathas been seriously advanced in the scientific community.24 These sorts ofconstraints make no difference to the above point. If you like, in the graph ofFigure 1, delete just the points (x=0, y=0) and (x=1, y=1). The graph thenshows a set of one-to-one functions that map the open interval (0,1) onto theopen interval (0,1). It is then no longer possible to deliver a posterior probabilityof 0 by choosing a prior of 0, but it is still possible to deliver posteriorprobabilities arbitrarily close to 0. Given that every prior strictly between 0 and1 is rationally permissible, no posterior strictly between 0 and 1 can be ruled out24 Shimony 1970, pp. 97-103. The convergence theorems typically require all agents to initiallyagree on which propositions have prior probability zero.13for all rational agents.3.4. Evidential Relevance Must Be Subjective TooAs Figure 1 shows, individuals with different prior probabilities for a hypothesiswill disagree on the posterior probability of that hypothesis. But they mightnevertheless agree on the direction of change of the probability. That is, they mightagree, qualitatively, on whether the evidence probabilistically confirms,disconfirms, or is irrelevant to the hypothesis. In that case, the Bayesian mightlay claim to some objective epistemic judgments, of the form “e is evidencefor/against h,” albeit not of the form “h is justified.”Bayesian reasoners will agree on evidential relevance in this sense, if andonly if they agree on whether the likelihood ratio is greater than, equal to, or lessthan 1.25 (They needn’t agree on the precise likelihoods, nor the precise value ofthe ratio.) So the question now is whether the subjective Bayesian is entitled toassume such agreement.Here is one route to agreement. One might think that, in the case of manyinteresting scientific theories, the theory entails certain observational predictions.In that case, as all Bayesian reasoners will agree, P(e|h) = 1, where e reports suchan observation. At the same time, the negation of the theory will fail to entailthese same observational predictions. And one might think that, given that ~hfails to entail e, all rational observers should agree that P(e|~h) < 1. Therefore,in these cases, all rational observers should agree that P(e|h)/P(e|~h) > 1.There are two problems with this line of thought. First, it is unclear how thesubjectivist can assume that all rational agents will agree on whether P(e|~h) isless than 1 or is instead equal to 1. It does not follow from the axioms ofprobability that when A fails to entail B, P(B|A) must be less than 1; indeed, itis easy to see that there must be many cases in which this fails.26 So there is nopure probability-theory reason for rejecting the equation P(e|~h) = 1.Second, and more importantly, interesting scientific theories virtually neverentail observational predictions.27 They merely render observational predictionsplausible, sometimes extremely plausible, given our background probabilitydistribution. Consider two examples:25 This is the Directional Agreement Condition assumed by Hawthorne’s (2011) convergencetheorem.26 Suppose there is a continuous infinity of possible worlds in which A holds. Then it can’t bethe case that each of these worlds has a nonzero probability. So take a world that has probabilityzero, and let B be the proposition that the actual world is not that world. Then A does not entailB, but the probability of B given A is 1.27 Compare Duhem [1914] 1954, pp. 185-7; Quine 1951, pp. 39-43, but note that whereas Quineand Duhem hold that a scientific theory conjoined with many other beliefs enables one todeduce observational predictions, my claim is that a scientific theory renders observationaloutcomes more or less probable, relative to our background credences. There is no need for anypart of our belief system, including the whole of it, to entail any observational predictions.14i) Water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen: How do we know this? One type ofexperiment involves burning hydrogen in the presence of oxygen. A certainmass of water is produced, while an equal mass of hydrogen and oxygen isconsumed. Another experiment involves applying voltage to a sample ofwater. Bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen gas are produced at the negativeand positive terminals, while the mass of water present decreases by thesame amount as the total mass of hydrogen and oxygen produced.28Neither of these phenomena is entailed by the theory that water iscomposed of hydrogen and oxygen. Even if water were composed ofhydrogen and oxygen, it still could have been that we could find no way ofseparating water molecules into their constituent elements, nor ofsynthesizing the component elements into water.Nor is the experimental evidence incompatible with alternative theoriesof the composition of water. The cited evidence is not incompatible, forexample, with the hypothesis that water is a compound of sodium anduranium, since it could be that burning hydrogen causes a certain mass ofhydrogen to transmute into sodium, while a certain mass of oxygentransmutes into uranium, and it could be that electrolysis induces a reversetransmutation.ii) Human beings evolved by natural selection: This is suggested by, for example, thefossil record. But the theory of evolution does not entail that there wouldbe an available fossil record of human ancestors, or evolutionary ancestorsof any other species. Nor do alternative theories of human origins logicallycontradict the fossil record. It could be, for example, that God created theEarth and all its species in the year 4004 B.C., and that He planted thefossils in the ground at that time.29I think the alternative theories described above – the sodium-uranium theoryand the Creationist theory – are objectively unjustified. If someone held thosetheories, and proposed the hypotheses suggested above to account for theempirical evidence, I would deem that person unreasonable.But a subjective Bayesian cannot say this. The axioms of probability do notcondemn anything about those theories. The axioms of probability only dictatethe value of P(e|h) in the special case where h entails e or h entails ~e: in theformer case, one must assign P(e|h) = 1; in the latter, P(e|h) = 0. In all othercases, any value between 0 and 1 inclusive is possible.These are not unusual examples. The same point could be made for manyother examples of scientific evidence: the observation of Foucault’s pendulumas evidence for the rotation of the Earth; the matching of the shapes of the eastcoast of South America and the west coast of Africa as evidence for continentaldrift; the observation of the Chicxulub crater as evidence for the asteroid-impact28 Lavoisier 1783; Nicholson 1800.29 See the theory of Philip Gosse [1857] (2003).15theory of the extinction of the dinosaurs; and so on. Hardly any of modernscience – perhaps none – can be described as objectively rationally supportedon a subjective Bayesian account.3.5. Subjective Bayesianism Is a Form of SkepticismHow bad is all of this? I think the subjective Bayesian’s position is similar to thatof the skeptic; indeed, subjective Bayesianism is a form of skepticism. Considerfour paradigmatic epistemological judgments:1. There are good reasons to think that water is composed of hydrogen andoxygen.2. We are justified in believing that water is composed of hydrogen andoxygen.3. Given current evidence, it would be irrational to think that water iscomposed of sodium and uranium.4. We know that water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen.All of those are uncontroversial in normal contexts. But on the subjectiveBayesian view, a rational person apprised of all current scientific evidence coulddeny all of them. In that sense, none of them is objective. Furthermore, thereis a case to be made that, given certain tenets of subjective Bayesianism, all of(1)-(4) must be false.Subjective Bayesians would most likely wish to embrace (1)-(4). Perhapsthey would adopt semantic theories according to which the terms of epistemicappraisal – “good reason,” “justified,” “irrational,” and “know” – haveapplication conditions that are relative to the speaker’s subjective probabilitydistribution: if I happen to have a credence function on which [Water iscomposed of hydrogen and oxygen] is highly probable on current evidence,then I can correctly affirm (1)-(4). At the same time, of course, someone witha different credence function might correctly deny all of (1)-(4).The question is how plausible such a view would be. Start with the idea ofgood reasons. Intuitively, there is a distinction to be drawn between what aperson is committed to and what the person, all things considered, has good reasonto believe. If I believe P, and P entails Q, then I am committed to Q. However,it does not follow that I have good reason for believing Q, since my initial beliefin P might be purely arbitrary. If I believe P arbitrarily and without justification,it seems, then I do not, all things considered, have good reason to believe Q,nor am I justified in believing Q.Subjective Bayesianism is more plausible as a theory of rational commitmentthan as a theory of justification or good reasons: if you have a certain initialdistribution of credences, then it is plausible to hold that those initial credencescommit you, on receiving new evidence, to the credences that result fromconditionalizing on that evidence. But the claim that this process results inepistemic justification or good reasons is only plausible if the initial distribution16of credences was somehow justified. To hold that a purely arbitrary set ofcredences results in justification once we follow what that set of credencescommits us to, is comparable to holding that a purely arbitrary premise justifiesa conclusion, as long as one validly deduces the conclusion from the premise.One might reject the latter analogy on the grounds that, in the Bayesiancase, the subject would be conditionalizing on some genuine evidence, so theconclusion would not be reached solely on the basis of arbitrary credences. Thisis true. So a better analogy would be one in which, in a traditional, non-probabilistic setting, an epistemologist claims that if one validly deduces C fromthe conjunction of A and B, and A is justified but B is completely arbitrary, thenC winds up justified.Another reply on behalf of the subjective Bayesian: on the subjectiveBayesian view, it is not that an unjustified starting point renders a conclusionjustified. Rather, the initial credences are perfectly justified; it is just that manyother (incompatible) starting points are equally justified.But this is an extremely implausible view of justification. What could beconferring the justification in this case? The initial credences one starts with areexplicitly said, in subjective Bayesian doctrine, to be no better than any othercoherent set of credences. All that can be said for one’s actual distribution isthat it is not ruled out by the constraints of probability theory. For example, agood Bayesian reasoner might start with an extremely high confidence that thereare eleven purple lions within one million miles of herself, and when asked tojustify this, she might reply that no law of probability precludes thatproposition’s having a probability of 0.999999. This really cannot be describedas an adequate source of justification.A related problem is that, if I am a subjective Bayesian, I believe that I haveno rational reason for preferring my own prior probability distribution over anyother coherent distribution. But I also know that some of these otherdistributions would lead to radically different beliefs from my current beliefsystem, given the same evidence. I must hold these other belief systems to beless well calibrated to reality, though an equally rational reaction to the identicalevidence. It therefore seems that I must hold that I just got lucky by happeningto have priors calibrated with reality.30I conclude that subjective Bayesians have no plausible way ofaccommodating judgments (1), (2), or (3). Since knowledge requires justification,the subjectivists also cannot account for (4). If this is true, then there is anenormous range of paradigmatic epistemological judgments that the subjectiveBayesian cannot plausibly accommodate.4. Externalism Cannot Save EmpiricismEpistemological externalists hold that factors external to a subject’s mind can30 Related concerns are raised by Hanson and Cowen (n.d.).17affect whether and to what degree the subject is justified in a given belief. Forexample, whether a belief is justified might turn on whether it was formed bya process that in fact (whether the subject has reason to believe this or not) tendsto produce true beliefs.31Why think externalism might be true? One sort of argument concerns casesin which a subject suffers some cognitive malfunction but is unable to detect themalfunction. For example, a subject might have false memories (while havingno reason to think the memories false) of having proved that P. In such a case,many intuitively judge that the subject lacks justification for P. Even arch-internalist Laurence BonJour conceded this point, thus apparently allowing anexternal factor – whether one’s memories are veridical – to affect one’sjustification for belief.32Though I do not find the case for externalism persuasive, adjudicating theinternalist/externalist dispute is too large a task to undertake here.33 Here, I shallmerely argue that whether externalism is correct or not, there is no help for theempiricist. For the only form of externalism that explains the epistemologicaldata that we want explained is a rationalist form of externalism.The epistemological data consists of such facts (taken from section 3.5above) as 2. We are justified in believing that water is composed of hydrogen andoxygen.3. Given current evidence, it would be irrational to think that water iscomposed of sodium and uranium.As we have seen, to accommodate such facts, we must constrain the range ofrationally permissible prior probability distributions. How might an externalistjustify such constraints? The externalist might argue that the “justified” or“rational” priors are simply those that reliably lead to correct conclusions in thelight of the sort of empirical evidence that we humans tend to receive.Alternately, generalizing on the notion of reliability for outright beliefs, theexternalist might propose that a justified/rational credence distribution is onethat is well-calibrated (meaning, roughly, that the things to which one assigns a31 Goldman 1979. More sophisticated versions of reliabilism incorporate internal constraints onjustification; however, such qualifications are not relevant to my argument in the text.32 BonJour 1998, pp. 124-9. BonJour also introduces the requirements that, to obtain a priorijustification for a belief, one must have reflected sufficiently carefully, and one must have anadequate understanding of the concept of necessity. Hilary Kornblith (2004) has seized theopportunity to announce the death of internalism.33 I believe BonJour was wrong to concede the point about memory. For an extended defenseof internalism in general, see [----]. On the role of memory in justification, see [----].18probability of x% tend to be true about x% of the time).34 The externalist canthen hold that our actual priors, which led us to accept modern science, arejustified because they are in fact well-calibrated or because they in fact tend tolead us to true beliefs. As far as the externalist is concerned, it doesn’t matterwhy they are well-calibrated or truth-conducive, nor does it matter if subjectslack independent reasons to believe that they are well-calibrated or truth-conducive.Now leave aside the question of whether that is a good epistemologicaltheory or not. The question is, is it an empiricist theory? Here the answer issimply no. An empiricist theory is one that accounts for all justification forsubstantive (non-analytic) propositions in terms of observation and inferencefrom observations. An empiricist externalist is of course possible – for example,a reliabilist who holds that the only unconditionally reliable belief-formingprocesses are observation-based. But that simply is not the theory describedabove. The above-described theory holds that prior probabilities are justified invirtue of their calibration or truth-conduciveness; the idea of deriving thesepriors from observation plays no role at all in the account of their justification.It is a theory of innate justified beliefs.On one account, suggested by Robert Nozick, the explanation for thereliability of our inductive reasoning is to be found in evolution: naturalselection favored those who saw inductive reasoning as cogent, because in ourevolutionary history, inductive reasoning usually led people to form correctbeliefs, which promoted their survival and reproduction.35 Adapting this viewto a probabilistic framework, we can hypothesize that natural selection favoredwell-calibrated prior probability distributions. Again, this is a theory ofsomething like innate knowledge (or rather, innately justified and calibratedcredences), not a theory of knowledge derived from experience.Of course, epistemological internalists would reject this as a possible accountof how our prior credences are justified, since they would say that the reliabilityof our credences by itself does nothing to render them justified. But externalistscould not say that. Nor could anyone who endorses the evolutionary accountcoherently deny justification to our prior credences. For the evolutionaryaccount itself could be justified only if the theory of evolution in general isjustified, which could be true only if the prior credences that led us to acceptthat theory (in the light of our current evidence) are justified. Nozick avoidedself-defeat by embracing an externalist account of reasons, according to whichthe evolutionary account of the source of our priors is simultaneously an34 More precisely, one may define a well-calibrated probability measure as one with a low Brierscore, calculated as the mean squared difference between (a) the probability assigned to a givenproposition, and (b) the truth-value of the proposition, where a true proposition has a value of1, and a false proposition has a value of 0 (but note that this way of measuring calibrationcombines the desiderata of reliability and informativeness). See Brier 1950.35 Nozick 1993, pp. 108-9.19account of why those priors are justified.36 None of this gets us out of thedependence on non-observational sources of justification.5. RationalismHaving rejected empiricism, skepticism, and subjectivism, we are left with arationalist view of probabilistic reasoning. On this view, there are nontrivialcredences, or credence ranges, that are justified a priori, and these underwriteprobabilistic inferences from observations. Different accounts, both internalistand externalist, can be given of how these credences are justified; thejustification will count as a priori provided that it is not based on observation.My own preferred account, which I lack space to discuss in detail here, wouldappeal to necessary constraints on logical probabilities, constraints that, I claim,can be seen intuitively to be correct.37Any rationalist view of probabilistic reasoning is open to well-knownobjections. Among the challenges is the sheer difficulty of plausibly answering,for nearly any proposition that we care about, the question of what its a prioriprobability would be.38 For example, what is the initial probability, prior toobtaining any empirical information about the world at all, that water would becomposed of hydrogen and oxygen?I am not about to solve these problems here. This paper concerns theproblems facing empiricism, not those facing rationalism. But I will concludewith a few remarks about how it might be rational to embrace rationalism in theface of such unresolved difficulties.To begin with, it is worth noting that the rationalist does not need thestrong thesis that, for any proposition whatever, there is a unique numericalvalue that is its a priori probability. The rationalist need only maintain that, formany interesting propositions, including, say, scientific theories, there is a limitedrange of initial credences one can reasonably hold.39 For example, perhaps thereis no particular number that is the unique rational a priori credence for theproposition that the Earth rests on the back of a giant turtle. But it also is notthe case that the entire range of credences from 0 to 1 could rationally be held– it would not, for example, be rational to believe with 99% confidence thatthere is such a world turtle, prior to all relevant experience.This view avoids the problem raised for subjective Bayesianism in section3.3. Consider again the graph from section 3.3, but this time assume that the36 Nozick 1981, pp. 248-61, 264-8; 1993, pp. 108, 111.37 In [----], I defend a version of the Principle of Indifference, appealing to an explanatorypriority relation to resolve some of the problems with interpreting the Principle. On theproblems facing the Principle of Indifference, see van Fraassen 1989, p. 303; Howson andUrbach 2006, pp. 266-72.38 Ramsey 1931, pp. 160-7; Shimony 1970, p. 87.39 For present purposes, “limited” means having an upper bound strictly less than 1 and lowerbound strictly greater than 0.20Figure 2prior probability of the hypothesis, instead of being permitted to assume anyvalue in [0,1], is restricted to the interval [0.1, 0.9]. For illustration, focus on thecase where L = 100. In Figure 2, I have added shaded rectangles correspondingto the restricted range of priors and the correspondingly restricted range ofposterior probabilities. The allowed range of posterior probabilities is muchnarrower than the allowed range of prior probabilities: given that the prior isbetween 0.1 and 0.9, the posterior must be between 0.917 and 0.999.This phenomenon is what the Bayesian convergence theorems are reallyabout: in a wide range of circumstances, given a limited range of allowablepriors, the range of allowable probabilities narrows when we conditionalize onevidence e. This does not help the subjective Bayesian, because the subjectiveBayesian is not entitled to assume that the range of permissible priors isanything less than the full range from 0 to 1. But it does help a modestlyobjective Bayesian who holds that there are a priori constraints that limit tosome degree the range of permissible prior probabilities.This phenomenon also explains an otherwise puzzling feature of ourprobabilistic intuitions: we have more definite intuitions about the probabilitiesof certain hypotheses in the light of our current evidence than we do about their apriori probabilities. If someone asks me to estimate the a priori probability ofthe theory of evolution, I have very little to say. (I’m pretty sure it is not morethan 90%. But I am not sure whether it is more than 1%.) But if someone asksme to estimate the current probability, based on everything we know, of thetheory of evolution, I have a much better idea of the answer. (I am quiteconfident that one should say something strictly between 90% and 100%.)The empiricist explanation: probability judgments depend upon empiricalevidence for their justification. The questions about a priori probability are21harder to answer because there is no justification for any answer.My explanation: rational probabilities become more determinate (that is, spana narrower range), the more relevant evidence we have. Typically, a wide rangeof subjective probabilities is rationally permissible to start with, but the rangenarrows as we gather more evidence. With a sufficient amount of evidence, therange of permissible credences approximates to a single value. As the rangenarrows, so our confidence that we can make a reasonable estimate increases.All of this is by way of saying that the rationalist’s commitments areconsiderably weaker than might at first glance appear. This does not resolve thedifficulties raised for rationalism above, since I have not described how one maydetermine the acceptable ranges of prior probabilities.This, however, is at best a weak reason for denying rationalism. If we haveto choose between the propositions1. There are rational and irrational (though coherent) ways of assigning priorprobabilities, but no one has yet been able to systematically describe whichways are rational and which irrational. and:2. No one is justified in believing that water is made of hydrogen and oxygen,rather than sodium and uranium.it is clear which of the two is less plausible. (2) is incredibly implausible. (1) isinconvenient but not particularly implausible. It is not especially surprising thatwe should have proved so far unable to adequately describe the rationalconstraints on assignment of prior probabilities. (Consider the range of otherthings that philosophers have had trouble adequately describing, from themeaning of “knowledge,” to the principles of right conduct, to the justificationfor perceptual beliefs.) The difficulties critics have raised for objective Bayesiansare serious and important difficulties. But they are not strong evidence for the falsityof the view, certainly not strong enough to rationally lead us to prefer a theorythat engenders an extreme philosophical skepticism.ReferencesAyer, Alfred Jules. 1952. Language, Truth and Logic. New York: Dover.Bealer, George. 1992. “The Incoherence of Empiricism”, Proceedings of theAristotelian Society 66, supplement: 99-138.Bem, Daryl. 2011. “Feeling the Future: Experimental Evidence for AnomalousRetroactive Influences on Cognition and Affect,” Journal of Personality andSocial Psychology 100: 407-25. BonJour, Laurence. 1998. In Defense of Pure Reason. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Brier, Glenn. 1950. “Verification of Forecasts Expressed in Terms of22Probability,” Monthly Weather Review 78: 1-3.Carnap, Rudolf. 1932. “The Elimination of Metaphysics Through LogicalAnalysis of Language,” trans. Arthur Pap, pp. 60-81 in Logical Positivism, ed.A.J. Ayer. New York: Free Press.Carnap, Rudolf. 1980. “A Basic System of Inductive Logic, Part II,” pp. 7-155in Richard Jeffrey, ed., Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability, vol. 2. Berkeley:University of California Press.Carroll, Lewis. 1895. “What the Tortoise Said to Achilles,” Mind 4: 278-80.Chisholm, Roderick. 1982. “The Problem of the Criterion,” pp. 61-75 in TheFoundations of Knowing. Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press.de Finetti, Bruno. [1937] 1964. “Foresight: Its Logical Laws, Its SubjectiveSources,” tr. Henry Kyburg, pp. 99-158 in Henry Kyburg and HowardSmokler, eds., Studies in Subjective Probability. New York: Wiley.Devitt, Michael. 2014. “There Is No A Priori,” pp. 185-94 in ContemporaryDebates in Epistemology, 2nd edition, ed. Matthias Steup, John Turri, and ErnestSosa. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell.Duhem, Pierre. [1914] 1954. The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, trans. from2nd edition by P. W. Wiener. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Earman, John. 1992. Bayes or Bust? Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Fumerton, Richard. 1995. Metaepistemology and Skepticism. Lanham, Md.: Rowman& Littlefield.Gaifman, Haim, and Marc Snir. 1982. “Probabilities over Rich Languages,”Journal of Symbolic Logic 47: 495-548.Gelman, Andrew. 2008. “Objections to Bayesian Statistics,” Bayesian Analysis 3:445-50.Goldman, Alvin. 1979. “What Is Justified Belief?”, pp. 1-23 in Justification andKnowledge, ed. George Pappas. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.Goodman, Nelson. 1955. Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.Gosse, Philip. [1857] 2003. Omphalos: An Attempt to Untie the Geological Knot.London: Routledge.Hanson, Robin and Tyler Cowen. n.d. “Are Disagreements Honest?”, MercatusCenter working paper, <http://mercatus.org/publication/are-disagreements-honest>, accessed January 7, 2016.Hawthorne, James. 2011. “Confirmation Theory,” pp. 333-90 in Philosophy ofStatistics, ed. Prasanta S. Bandyopadhyay and Malcolm R. Forster.Amsterdam: Elsevier.Howson, Colin and Peter Urbach. 2006. Scientific Reasoning: The BayesianApproach, 3rd ed. Chicago, Ill.: Open Court.Huemer, Michael. 2002. “Fumerton’s Principle of Inferential Justification,”Journal of Philosophical Research 27: 329-40.Huemer, Michael. 2005. Ethical Intuitionism. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Huemer, Michael. 2009. “Explanationist Aid for the Theory of InductiveLogic,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 60: 1-31.23Huemer, Michael. 2016. “Inferential Appearances,” pp. 144-60 in IntellectualAssurance: Essays on Traditional Epistemic Internalism, ed. Brett Coppenger andMichael Bergmann. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Hume, David. [1758] 1975. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Reprintedin Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles ofMorals, edited by P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Jaynes, Edwin T. 1968. “Prior Probabilities,” IEEE Transactions on Systems Scienceand Cybernetics 4: 227-41.Jeffrey, Richard. 1983. The Logic of Decision, 2nd ed. Chicago: University ofChicago Press.Kornblith, Hilary. 2004. “Conditions on Cognitive Sanity and the Death ofInternalism,” pp. 77-88 in The Externalist Challenge, ed. Richard Schantz.Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.Lavoisier, Antoine. 1783. “Report of a Memoir Read by M. Lavoisier at thePublic Session of the Royal Academy of Sciences of November 12, on theNature of Water and on Experiments which Appear to Prove that thisSubstance Is Not Strictly Speaking an Element but that it Is Susceptible ofDecomposition and Recomposition,” Observations sur la Physique 23: 452-5.English translation by Carmen Giunta available at <https://web.lemoyne.edu/giunta/laveau.html>, accessed January 9, 2016.Nicholson, William. 1800. “Account of the New Electrical Apparatus of Sig.Alex Volta, and Experiments Performed with the Same,” Journal of NaturalPhilosophy, Chemistry and the Arts 4: 179-87. Available at<https://books.google.com/books?id=HdkPAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA179>,accessed January 9, 2016.Nozick, Robert. 1981. Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.Nozick, Robert. 1993. The Nature of Rationality. Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press.Popper, Karl R. 1959. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: Basic Books.Psillos, Stathis. 1999. Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth. London:Routledge.Quine, W.V. 1951. “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” Philosophical Review 60: 20-43Ramsey, Frank. 1931. “Truth and Probability,” pp. 156-98 in The Foundations ofMathematics and other Logical Essays, edited by R. B. Braithwaite. London:Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.Reichenbach, Hans. 1938. Experience and Prediction: An Analysis of the Foundationsand the Structure of Knowledge. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.Rouder, Jeffrey N. and Richard D. Morey. 2011. “A Bayes Factor Meta-analysisof Bem’s ESP Claim,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 18: 682-9.Russell, Bertrand. 1912. The Problems of Philosophy. New York: Oxford UniversityPress.Savage, Leonard. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.Schlick, Moritz. 1974. General Theory of Knowledge, tr. Albert Blumberg. New24York: Springer-Verlag.Shimony, Abner. 1970. “Scientific Inference,” pp. 79-172 in Robert G.Colodny, ed., The Nature and Function of Scientific Theories: Essays inContemporary Science and Philosophy. Pittsburgh, Penn.: University of PittsburghPress.van Fraassen, B. 1989. Laws and Symmetry. Oxford: Clarendon Press.25