ABSTRACT: 
The debate between economic and political explanations of the adoption of proportional representation has yielded mixed results. We re-examine this debate and argue that one has to take the different levels on which the causal mechanisms are located into account. This leads to a novel reformulation of Rokkan?s hypotheses: we claim that PR is introduced when legislators face strong district level competition and when their parties expect to gain seats from a change of the electoral law. In the empirical part, we model legislators? support for the PR adoption and evaluate the relative importance of district level competition and vulnerability resulting from electoral inroads made by social democratic candidates; partisan calculations arising from disproportionalities in the allocation of votes to seats; and economic conditions at the district level, specifically variation in skill profiles. Support for the adoption of PR is explained by a combination of district vulnerabilities and seat-vote disproportionality. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article tests two competing explanations for the adoption of proportional representation in Germany. The first hypothesized that politicians respond either to their increased electoral vulnerability or to calculations about the translation of votes into seats. By contrast, the second hypothesis locates the salient constraint at the level of the party. An important task for the analysis is to identify the relative importance of district-specific vulnerabilities and partisan variables in affecting the preferences of legislators for changes in the design of electoral institutions. Our empirical analysis allows us to bring competing explanations about the adoption of proportional representation to a common empirical unit of analysis and assess, for the first time, the relative effect of structural economic conditions at the level of the district, electoral competition and partisanship on individual level support for the adoption of proportional representation. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 The study of the process of reform of electoralinstitutions during the first decades of thetwentieth century and the adoption of pro-portional representation (PR) by some countries hasbeen at the center of comparative research in recentyears (Ahmed 2012; Benoit 2004; Blais, Dobrzynskaand Indridason 2005; Boix 1999; Calvo 2009; Colomer2005; Cusack, Iversen and Soskice 2007, 2010; Kreuzer2010).1 This renewed interest in the origin of thesepolitical choices has been partly motivated by a relatedliterature examining the importance of proportionalrepresentation in affecting a range of politicaloutcomes, including the level of government expendi-tures, the types of social-spending programs, levels ofinequality, and so on. While these studies have advanceda wide range of competing hypotheses about the eco-nomic and political determinants of these electoralreforms, the empirical tests formulated to adjudicateamong these competing explanations remain inade-quate. This empirical deficit arises because the coretheoretical concepts of the literature have been eithermeasured at a level of aggregation that is, we believe,uninformative or not measured at all.Like any change in electoral rules, the adoptionof proportional representation poses an immediatepuzzle: why do politicians engage in risk-takingbehavior and decide to replace the institutional ruleson the basis of which they have been elected? Existingexplanations for the reform of electoral institutionsand the adoption of proportional representation clusterin two broad explanatory families, stressing either eco-nomic transformations or changes in the broaderpolitical environment as the source of political anxietyamong right-wing politicians. Let us consider thelarger political changes first.Both hypotheses—stressing either the rise of SocialDemocracy or disproportionality in the allocation ofvotes to seats—as determinants for demand for changesin electoral institutions can be traced back to the workof Braunias and Rokkan (Braunias 1932; see alsoRokkan 1970, 157–58). Contemporary studies seekingto explain the adoption of proportional representationhave tested one of the two Rokkanian hypotheses. Boix(1999) has provided a cross-national test of the firstRokkanian hypothesis. In recent years, Calvo (2009)has revived this second Rokkanian explanation and hasprovided simulations informed by comparative cases toillustrate this logic.In Rokkan’s original study, the two politicalhypotheses acted as substitutes. Rokkan conjecturedThe Journal of Politics, Vol. 76, No. 2, April 2014, Pp. 461–478 doi:10.1017/S0022381613001394 Southern Political Science Association, 2014 ISSN 0022-38161Support for this research was provided by the Center for the Study of Democratic Politics at Princeton University (2011). An onlineappendix with supplementary material for this article is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0022381613001394. Data and supportingmaterials necessary to reproduce the numerical results will be made available at http://isabelamares.org and http://www.columbia.edu/;ltl2108/ upon completion of the research project.461This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).that in some countries—such as Germany, Norway, orSweden—the socialist mobilization played a significantrole in accounting for the adoption of proportionalrepresentation, while in other countries—such asBelgium, Denmark, or Switzerland—considerationsabout the disproportionality of the translation of seatsto votes were the primary factor in accounting for themotivation of politicians to adopt changes in electoralinstitutions (Rokkan, 1970, 157). In this article weargue, however, that the two political hypotheses arecomplements, rather than substitutes. Both explana-tions can operate within the same case, but captureconstraints on the activity of legislators that operate atdifferent levels. The first political explanation locatesthe salient constraint at the level of the electoral district,in district-specific electoral vulnerabilities encounteredby candidates on the political right that face SocialDemocratic challengers. By contrast, the secondRokkanian explanation locates the salient constraintat the level of the party. An important task for theanalysis is to identify the relative importance ofdistrict-specific vulnerabilities and partisan variablesin affecting the preferences of legislators for changesin the design of electoral institutions.The alternative economic perspective has beenarticulated by Cusack, Iversen, and Soskice (2007).2According to this approach, ‘‘the choice of electoralsystems is endogenous to the structure of economicinterests’’ (388). The key structural economic conditionsthat are hypothesized to generate differences in polit-ical preferences and variation in political outcomes(adoption versus nonadoption of proportionalrepresentation) are the presence of ‘‘co-specific assets,’’in other words, investments in human capitalthat are jointly made by employers and workers(Cusack, Iversen, and Soskice 2007). Cusack and hiscolleagues hypothesize that in economies characterizedby ‘‘consensual labor relations’’ and high levels of‘‘co-specific’’ assets, economic actors consider major-itarian electoral rules as potentially detrimental to theirlong-term economic interests. First-past-the-postelectoral systems allow groups with a narrow geographicbase to capture political power and enact legislation thatcould potentially harm actors that had made long-termeconomic investments. In the presence of significantinvestments in skills, Cusack, Iversen, and Soskicepredict that the most significant interest groups andthe political parties to which they are tied will demandthe adoption of proportional representation. By con-trast, majoritarian institutions persist in economies withlower levels of co-specific assets. In contrast to the firstfamily of explanations, economic hypotheses about theadoption of proportional representation derive theirpolitical predictions about the demand for changes inelectoral institutions from the distribution of economicendowments and less from partisan or electoralconsiderations.All explanations, political or economic in nature,are framed at a theoretical level that is quite abstract.Ultimately, they seek to explain choices made by in-dividual legislators. As a consequence, many of thesepersistent disagreements cannot be resolved with theexisting cross-national data. Additional leverage canbe gained, however, by shifting to a lower level ofempirical aggregation, the individual politician. Thismove to the individual level is desirable for a numberof reasons.First, the dominant empirical strategy pursued incontemporary research which is premised on quan-titative analysis of variation among a small number ofcountries is severely constrained by the small numberof observations. The number of observations in cross-national studies is relatively low, varying from 24in the original Boix article of 1999 to 12 in some ofthe specifications presented in Cusack, Iversen, andSoskice (2007). This small number of cases, coupledwith a high multicollinearity among competing variableshas limited our ability to assess the relative importanceof competing explanations. This constraint might alsoexplain why so far scholars have been unable to test allthree explanations of the adoption of proportionalrepresentation but have tested only one or two theoriesat a time. Second, an analysis that is situated at theindividual level is also preferable because some of thecentral predictions of the first political hypothesis—stressing the importance of electoral vulnerabilities—are located at the level of the electoral district. Existingstudies that have relied on cross-national data havemeasured many of the relevant variables capturingpolitical competition at a level of analysis that is tooaggregated and, thus, uninformative Cox (1997). Ratherthan assuming that parties are the decisive level, we startat the lowest level and use hierarchical models whichallow for parties being the decisive actor while notpresupposing it.The difficulty and real challenge for an empiricalevaluation of competing explanations of PR adoptionusing roll-call data is the development of measuresof the core explanatory variables of the economicexplanation, the level of ‘‘co-specific assets.’’ We takeup this challenge in this article and develop precise2See Rogowski (1987) for an economically motivated alternativeexplanation, of PR adoption. In this explanation it is not the skilllevel but the degree to which a country is involved in in-ternational trade.462 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).estimates of the ratio of skilled workers at the level ofthe electoral district. This allows us to bring competingexplanations about the adoption of proportional repre-sentation to a common empirical unit of analysis andassess, for the first time, the relative effect of structuraleconomic conditions at the level of the district, electoralcompetition and partisanship on individual level sup-port for the adoption of proportional representation.Our article examines a decisive vote taken by theGerman Reichstag as a result of which Germanyadopted proportional representation.3 The Germancase occupies a central position in all explanationsthat have been advanced to explain the adoption ofproportional representation. Consider first its impor-tance for political explanations of changes in electoralinstitutions. The existing literature treats Germany asthe paradigmatic case that illustrates the importanceof the Social Democratic threat as the catalyzing factorleading to a change in the position of right-wing partiesover the desirability of proportional representation.This interpretation of the German case goes back tothe classic studies of the adoption of proportionalrepresentation, such as Braunias (1932) or Rokkan(1970). As Rokkan argued, in countries where hostilityand distrust among existing parties on the right was toostrong, the latter found it impossible to make commoncause against the socialist threat. As such, they preferredproportional representation, a system that guaranteedthem the ability to compete independently (1970, 158).This account, however, has difficulties in explaining thediverging positions taken by different parties on thepolitical right over the question of electoral-reformchange. While the Catholic Zentrum and the GermanConservative Party opposed the adoption of propor-tional representation, both the National Liberals andthe Free Liberals supported the adoption of changes inelectoral institutions. Thus, it appears that both politicalexplanations seem to capture important determinantsof the motivations of politicians to support changesin electoral institutions, but so far no study hasattempted to disentangle the relative explanatorypower of these two explanations. Germany is a greatcase to test hypotheses about the effect of SocialDemocratic mobilization on the adoption of propor-tional representation. Germany expanded the suffrageearly (1871); the left did not burst on the politicalscene so dramatically as in other countries that adoptedthe franchise much later. Moreover, the early franchiseexpansion generated lower political uncertainty aboutelectoral outcomes, as compared to the countries inwhich franchise expansion was much closer to PRadoption (Ahmed, 2010; Andrews and Jackman 2005).4Germany is also the case that motivates the eco-nomic explanation of the adoption of proportionalrepresentation. The extensive network of vocationaltraining (Thelen 2004) that was well-established duringthe Nineteenth century led to the development of aworkforce characterized by high ratios of skilled workersand an unusually high level of vocational skills(Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt 1899, 73; Bade 1980).The central hypothesis advanced by Cusack, Iversen,and Soskice (2007) suggests that the regional variationin the distribution of human capital has importantpolitical consequences both for the adoption of pro-portional representation and for democratizationmore broadly. Germany takes high values on themeasures of economic coordination developed byCusack and his colleagues (2007). Our own measureof skills—which tests the theoretical mechanism thatunderpins this argument directly—shows that Ger-many exhibited very high levels of skills in manyindustrial occupations. Germany occupies, thus, anasymmetric position for economic and political ex-planations and represents a ‘‘hard’’ case for Rokkanianexplanations (George and Bennett 2005). Due to thisasymmetry, empirical results that disconfirm impor-tance of human capital as a predictor of the adoptionof proportional representation in the German case canweaken our confidence in the comparative explanatorypower of the economic approach to the origin of pro-portional representation.The following section explores the tensions amongthe two political hypotheses concerning the determi-nants of support of changes in electoral institutions andformulates both the hypotheses and the empirical strat-egy used to assess the relative importance of partisanconsiderations and district-level electoral competitionon legislator support for changes in electoral institutions.We turn next to the economic explanation, discuss itsempirical predictions, and then discuss our measures ofhuman capital distributions across electoral districts.Economic Conditions, PoliticalCompetition, and the Change ofElectoral InstitutionsStein Rokkan’s shadow looms over much of the con-temporary research seeking to explain the adoption3This represents the only recorded vote on the issue of pro-portional representation taken by the German Reichstag duringthe period between 1870 and 1918 (see also Hatschek 1920).4We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for stressing thisaspect.adoption of proportional representation 463This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).of proportional representation in Europe during thefirst decades of the twentieth century (Rokkan 1970).Two of the dominant hypotheses concerning the adop-tion of proportional representation can be traced backto his work. The first of these argues that incumbentelites support the adoption of proportional representa-tion to avoid a complete electoral disaster in the faceof Social Democratic mobilization (Rokkan 1970).Boix takes up this hypothesis and argues that ifparties on the political right are equally balanced intheir electoral strength, but unable to coordinate ona common candidate (either at the level of the constit-uency or nationally), then they are likely to support theadoption of proportional representation. By contrast,the incentives to adopt changes in electoral institutionsare weaker if one party dominates the electoral arenaBoix (1999, 612).Rokkan’s second hypothesis—taken up in currentresearch by Ernesto Calvo (2009)—attempts to specifyconditions under which incumbent parties on the rightfavored changes in electoral institutions even in theabsence of Social Democratic threats. This hypothesissuggests that parties with a geographical dispersed dis-tribution of votes also faced incentives to demandchanges in electoral institutions, as multiparty compe-tition increased the seat-vote disproportionality of theelectoral results. According to this logic, the adoption ofproportional representation is regarded as a mechanismto reduce the ‘‘severity of the partisan bias and ofelectoral regimes to districting problems’’ (Calvo 2009,256).5The two Rokkanian hypotheses differ in therelative importance placed on the Social Democraticthreat. Both hypotheses stress, however, ‘‘electoralcoordination’’ (or failure thereof) of incumbentparties as a critical variable influencing the decisionof incumbents to support or oppose changes in elec-toral rules and the adoption of proportional represen-tation. Critics have noted that the notion of electoralcoordination is theoretically unclear and poorly oper-ationalized empirically. Cusack et al. note two limi-tations of the test of electoral coordination presentedin Boix (Cusack, Iversen, and Soskice 2007, 375).The first is the failure to take account of theopportunities for coordination created in electoralsystems that used runoffs. Runoffs allowed partieson the political right that competed in the firstround to form electoral alliances in the secondround to oppose a Social Democratic candidate.Cusack and his colleagues note some limitations ofthe empirical test of the Rokkanian notion ofelectoral coordination employed by Boix and arguethat the variable used by Boix, the ‘‘effective numberof parties’’ fails to distinguish between cases in whichone party on the right is dominant from cases whereparties of the right are equally sized (2007, 375). Asimilar critique is presented by Blais, Dobrzynska, andIndridason (2005) who argue that the incentives of allparties to switch to proportional representation arestronger in countries which require a majority ratherthen just plurality of the votes to take a district.While raising these criticisms, Cusack, Iversen,and Soskice (2007) do not propose a superior empir-ical solution. It is impossible to measure district-levelelectoral competition with cross-national data. Usingaggregate data we cannot learn whether or not therewas coordination on the right. Clearly, runoffs couldalleviate potential coordination problems among par-ties on the right. However, while runoffs induce someelectoral coordination during the second round, theydo not necessarily produce electoral coordinationamong right-wing parties (Bertram 1964; Fairnbairn1990; Reibel 2007). Parties on the political right havea range of possible strategies during runoffs. Theseinclude the formation of preelectoral coalitions whichare restricted to right-wing parties, political supportfor the left–wing candidate over the right-wing oppo-nent (in districts where a candidate on the rightencounters a candidate on the left during runoffs) orrecommendation to their voters to abstain during thesecond round (and their de facto refusal to endorseany of the remaining candidates). We provide a numberof examples in the online appendix to illustrate howabstention recommendations contributed to the SocialDemocratic victories.Studies emphasizing the economic foundationsof proportional representation do not derive the de-mand for the adoption of proportional representationfrom partisan expectations about their electoral survival,but from the expectations of leading economic groups(employers and labor) about the different regulationsthat might emerge under different electoral rules.Thus, what distinguishes the trajectory of PR fromnon-PR adopters is the level and depth of investment inskills made during the early stages of industrialization.As Cusack, Iversen, and Soskice formulate, theirhypothesis linking specific assets and proportionalrepresentation:Two broad alternative patterns of labor and skillregulation in industry can be found at this criticalperiod in the early twentieth century. They relate to thequestion of the control of skilled formation and the5This hypothesis is sometimes alternatively labeled ‘‘minorityrepresentation thesis’’ (Caramani 2004) or ‘‘electoral geographythesis’’ (e.g., Norris 1997).464 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).content of skilled jobs. The first possible alternative,which we find subsequently in each of the PR adopters,was some form of cooperative agreement betweenbusiness and unions: in exchange for collective bargain-ing rights and monitoring of skill formation, businesswould have managerial control of the shop floor anddetermine training levels. This alternative had majorimplications for the politics of regulation because skillsin this system are co-specific assets. . . . Unions andemployers become vulnerable to opportunism andholdup and they consequently need credible long-runguarantees which include an appropriate frameworkagreement at the political level to underwrite therelevant labor market and social security institutionsand rules. The political system has to be such that theagreement cannot be changed by a change of govern-ment without the consent of other groups. This requiresnot just a system of proportional representations toenable the different groups to be represented throughparties, but also a political system that allows forconsensus decision making in the regulatory areas thatconcern them. (2007, 328)We interpret the argument as generating two testableempirical implications. The first is that in countriesor regions where investments in specific skills are higher,economic actors seek to establish proportional systemsof representation either independently or through theirpartisan representatives. By contrast, the demand forproportional levels of representation is lower in regionswith lower levels of co-specific assets. Secondly, regionscharacterized by high levels of investment in skills alsoexperience more consensual relations in the industrialsphere and among parties.Yet, despite the straightforward nature of thisempirical implication, Cusack, Iversen, and Soskicehave not yet provided a direct empirical test of theirtheory. In their cross-national analysis, the variableused to test the importance of ‘‘co-specific assets’’ isa composite variable that includes the strength ofemployer associations and the existence of ruralcooperatives and preexisting guilds. The other indi-cator, the strength of employer associations, is aproblematic empirical measure. As Kuo (2010) hasillustrated, most employer associations that existedin Europe prior to World War I (and thus prior tothe adoption of proportional representation) wereestablished with the explicit goal to repress labormovements. The existence of a coordinated em-ployer association does not proxy for harmoniouslabor relations and co-specific investments, thecritical variable of this theory.The most recent American Political Science Reviewarticle which restates the asset-specific explanationand offers limited qualitative evidence discussing elec-toral reforms in Imperial Germany does not provideany direct measures of human-capital developmentacross German regions. Saxony, Wu¨rttemberg, andBaden are used interchangeably as being, presumably,cases that share similarly high endowments of humancapital (which is the hypothesized factor leading to theadoption of proportional representation). Cusack,Iversen, and Soskice (2007) provide no empiricalevidence to support these conjectures. At the turn ofthe century, Baden and Wu¨rttemberg are relativelyunderdeveloped regions of the German Empire, dis-playing levels of agricultural employment that arehigher than the respective levels in the Reich (Hohlsand Kaelble 1989, 167–87).6 Our estimates of human-capital development—which computes ratios of skilledworkers to total workforce—present roughly similarpatterns. The national average is 36.2% (sd5 9.0) andwhile Saxony reaches 52.7% (sd 5 3.01), we find thatBaden has 36.8% (sd 5 2.8), and Wu¨rttemberg isslightly below average with 35.8% (sd 5 1.47). Thesemeasures do not support the argument that all threeregions (Saxony, Baden, and Wu¨rttemberg) sharehigh endowments in human capital (see alsoFremdling and Tilly 1979). Thus, qualitativeassessment of nineteenth-century economic reali-ties (which are likely to be based on twentieth-century outcomes) turn out to be inaccurate.Given that the core explanatory variable (distribu-tion of ‘‘asset specific investments’’) takes differentvalues across these regions, it cannot serve as thecommon explanation for subnational electoral reforms.While the debate between economic and politicalexplanations of the adoption of proportional repre-sentation has occupied a visible place in prominentpublications, it has not yet been resolved. Quite thecontrary. This inconclusiveness has several reasons.Existing explanations have been brought to the dataonly imperfectly. Ambiguity exists as to what con-stitutes electoral coordination and how it should beoperationalized. Many of the existing tests of the firstRokkanian hypotheses have only assessed the effects6At the time of the 1895 census, the share of the labor forceemployed in agriculture in Baden and Wu¨rttemberg stood at 44and 45%, respectively. The average agricultural share for theentire Reich stood at 37%. By contrast, Saxony’s share ofagricultural employment stood at 17%. These relative levels ofeconomic development did not change much until 1905–1907,the period when the last economic census prior to World War Iwas assessed. The employment shares in agriculture in Badendeclined from 45 to 40% but remained relatively stable inWu¨rttemberg at 45%. In both regions, levels of industrialdevelopment continued to be below that of the Empire (whichstood at 35% in 1905). By contrast, Saxony’s share of agriculturalemployment stood at 13% in 1905. The figures are based on theaggregate results of both economic censuses presented in Hohlsand Kaelble (1989, 167–208).adoption of proportional representation 465This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).of variation in national-level competitiveness on theprobability of transition to proportional representa-tion. This remains both an imperfect test of the firstRokkanian hypothesis which has to be tested usingmore disaggregated subnational and district-level meas-ures. The empirical assessment of economic explana-tions is a necessary step in the evaluation of competingexplanations for the adoption of proportional represen-tation. For this endeavor, the lack of a measure of thecore explanatory variable, the co-specific assets, is anoutstanding difficulty.A Theoretical Reformulation ofthe Rokkanian HypothesesThe two political hypotheses locate the prime de-terminant of legislators’ calculations about the attrac-tiveness of different electoral rules at different levels ofanalysis, the individual district versus the party. Thefirst hypothesis highlights electoral vulnerabilities at thelevel of the district. In this hypothesis, the generalcontestation of a race, the availability or absence ofcoalition partners, the strength of the contender on theleft, and the potentially scarring experience of a runoffare likely to affect the decision of a politician to supportchanges in electoral institutions. By contrast, the secondpolitical hypothesis locates the important determinantat the level of the party and not the district. Partisanpreferences over the desirability of different electoralrules are influenced by the attractiveness (or its absence)of the way in which the policy status quo allocates votesto seats. In their calculation about the relative attrac-tiveness of different electoral rules, politicians are con-strained both by district-specific factors and by thegeneral considerations of their party. The partisan anddistrict-level incentives can reinforce each other forsupport of particular electoral rules, but they can alsocome into tension. Consider the case of a politicianrepresenting a party from the right that experiences anunfavorable distribution of votes to seats and who hasbeen elected by a narrow margin in a runoff against aSocial Democratic opponent. For this particular politi-cian, the constituency-level incentives and the partisanincentives reinforce each other, and one expects thispolitician to support the adoption of proportionalrepresentation. Partisan and district-specific electoralincentives may, however, come into tension.By hypothesizing that the two political explanationsabout the origin of proportional representation high-light political incentives that are located at differentlevels of analysis, we challenge a number of statementsmade by Rokkan. Instead of viewing the two politicalhypotheses as separate roads to proportional represen-tation undertaken by different countries, we argue thatboth logics can be at work within the same country.The two hypotheses specify different constraints onthe behavior of legislators. To formulate this pointmore starkly, there are no two roads to proportionalrepresentations, but two distinct sets of politicalconstraints on the behavior of politicians, whichoperate at the level of the district and party, re-spectively. A legislator-based account of the origin ofproportional representation allows us to disentanglethe relative effects of these constraints.District-Level Vulnerabilities versusPartisan ConstraintsTo test the implications of the first Rokkanian hypoth-esis, we examine the consequences of district-specificfactors on the probability of support of changes inelectoral institutions. We hypothesize that threevariables linked to the contestability of a race arelikely to affect the support of the legislator forchanges in electoral institutions. The first is whetherthe politician is elected in the first round or a runoff.All things equal, we hypothesize that politicianselected in runoffs are more vulnerable than politicianselected during the first round. Runoffs are themselvesan indicator of coordination difficulties for parties onthe right. As such, we hypothesize that politicians on theright elected during runoffs are more likely to supportchanges in electoral institutions than politicians electedduring the first round. A second district-specific factorthat is likely to affect preferences towards electoralinstitutions is the margin of victory. All things equal,politicians elected in races with larger margins are morelikely to support the policy status quo than politicianselected in more contested races with narrower margins.A final prediction of the first Rokkanian hypothesisis that the magnitude of the threat of the SocialDemocratic Party (as measured by the vote share ofthe Social Democratic candidate during the firstround) is likely to increase support for changes inelectoral institutions.We include three variables to test for thesehypotheses linking electoral vulnerability in the districtand preferences for changes in electoral institutions.They include a variable that takes the value of 1 whenthe politician was elected during runoffs, a measure ofthe margin of victory during the decisive electoralround and a measure of the vote share of the SocialDemocratic candidate. In combination, these variablesallow us to capture only the theoretical expectations laid466 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).out by the first Rokkanian hypothesis. They capturedistrict-specific electoral constraints. They remain in-sufficient in capturing the full set of political constraintsand considerations facing the politician. To understandthe latter, we need to consider partisan considerationsabout the effects of the electoral formula on the electoralfate of the party. We turn to a discussion of theseconsiderations next.Partisan Preferences about Changesof Electoral RulesThe second political hypothesis formulates its pre-dictions at the level of the party rather than district.In this hypothesis, the key variable that is likely toaffect the preferences of parties about the adoption ofproportional representation is the disproportionalityin the allocation of seats to votes under the existingelectoral rules. Parties that benefit from the currentallocation of seats to votes (by obtaining a higher seatthan vote share) are likely to favor the policy statusquo. By contrast, parties that lose from the allocationof seats to votes are likely to favor changes in electoralinstitutions and the adoption of proportionalrepresentation.Table 1 presents descriptive information on theeffects of disproportionality for the major politicalparties during the 1912 election of the Reichstag,which elected the deputies that ultimately adoptedthe legislation introducing proportional representation.We group existing deputies in six partisan families,which include Social Democrats (who at the timeobtained the largest number of votes), the Zentrum,National Liberals, Free Liberals, Conservatives, andparties representing minorities (such as Poles or theElsass independents). Column 2 presents informationon the number of votes cast for these candidates,column 3 on the number of seats held by the respectiveparty during the last session of the Reichstag. Column 4presents the measure of seat-vote disproportionality forthe party and column 5 the prediction about supportfor changes in electoral institutions.As Table 1 illustrates, the Social Democratic Partyexperienced the most disfavorable ratio in the allocationof votes to seats. Industrialization which led to the con-centration of voters in urban areas aggravated the dis-proportionality experienced by the Social DemocraticParty (Boix 2010). The disproportionality worsenedfrom (22.6) in 1871 to (27.1) percent in 1912.As a result, the Social Democratic Party became thestaunchest advocates for the introduction of pro-portional representation. During the period leadingto World War I, Social Democratic candidatescosponsored legislation recommending the intro-duction of proportional representation in nationalelections for the Reichstag and actively advancedsimilar proposals during discussions of electoralreforms of the subnational parliaments (Schma¨deke1995). Several studies assume that Social Democraticparties were supportive of the adoption of propor-tional representation. As recent studies have pointedout, this assumption may be inaccurate and cannotadequately account for the observed empirical varia-tion in the preferences of Social Democratic partiesacross Europe on the question of electoral reform(Ahmed 2012; Penade´s 2008). We can, however, derivetheoretically the preferences of Social Democrats bytaking seat-vote disproportionality into account.Among the parties on the right, the two prom-inent losers in the allocation of votes to seats were theFree Liberals and National Liberals. The dispropor-tionality index during the 1912 elections stood at(22.5) for Free Liberals and at (22.3) for NationalLiberals. In contrast to Social Democrats that hadbeen disfavored by the allocation of votes to seatsduring all elections of the period, for the two partieson the right the disproportionality in the allocation ofvotes to seats was a more recent phenomenon that cameTABLE 1 Seat-Vote Disproportionality for the Largest Parties in the Reichstag during the 1912 ElectionPartyVoteShareSeatShare DisproportionalityPrediction ofRokkan IISocial Democrats 34.8 % 27.7 % -7.1 Support of PRZentrum 16.8 % 22.9 % 6.1 Opposition to PRNational Liberals 13.6 % 11.3 % -2.3 Support of PRConservatives 11.6 % 14.1 % 2.5 Opposition to PRFree Liberals 13.1 % 10.6 % -2.5 Support of PRMinorities 4.5 % 8.3 % 3.8 Opposition to PRSource: Reibel (2007) based on Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt (1913, 4-103) and www.wahlen-in-deutschland.de.adoption of proportional representation 467This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).into place during the last elections of the Reichstag(Duverger 1963, 375). Party leaders from these twoparties embraced the idea of proportional representa-tion later than the Social Democrats, and the questionabout the advantage of this electoral reform remainedthe subject of significant intra-party disagreement Gagel(1958, 125–41). For Free Liberals, the push for theadoption of proportional representation originated withparty leaders from Southern German states where thepresence of Catholic minorities in some districts couldlead to the waste of votes won by the Free Liberalcandidates under the existing single-member electoralsystem (Simon 1969).The two large political parties on the right thatbenefited from the allocation of seats to votes werethe Zentrum and the Conservatives. Party leadersfrom both parties understood the electoral advan-tage of existing electoral institutions and rejected theintroduction of proposals calling for the adoption ofproportional representation (on Zentrum: Penade´s2011; on Conservatives: Ku¨hne 1994). This opposi-tion to any reform of the electoral system remainedone of the issues that brought these two parties—which had been bitter enemies during theKulturkampf—together and led to the creation ofthe ‘‘black-blue’’ electoral alliance during the 1912election (Bertram 1964; Reibel 2007).An internal report commissioned by the GermanInterior Ministry (Reichsamt des Innern) in the im-mediate aftermath of the 1912 election noted thedivergent rates of success of different parties of theright in translating their votes into seats. The reportobserved that while the ‘‘Liberal Party obtained over3 million votes in 1912, it was able to obtain only 4seats in the first round, while the Zentrum obtainedover 80 seats with only 2 million votes. ‘‘The explana-tion for this fact is’’, the report noted, ‘‘that there areno areas where there are only Liberals; rather there areareas where there are Liberals and either Conservatives,or Zentrum or Social Democrats’’ (Bundesarchiv BerlinLichterfeld R1501/192–193). Prominent liberalpoliticians also noted the worsening seat-votedisproportionality encountered by their partyand began to advocate the adoption of propor-tional representation (Brandenburg 1917, 30; Gagel1958, 128).Social Democrats had militated for changes inelectoral institutions beginning with the 1891 Erfurtcongress. By contrast, Free Liberal and National Liberalpoliticians began to advocate the adoption of propor-tional representation only much later (Gagel 1958). Thisshift in the position on the desirability of electoralreform advocated by these two parties on the rightguaranteed the formation of an encompassing politicalcoalition supporting the adoption of proportionalrepresentation. The political factor that motivated thischange in strategy among these two parties on the rightwas the worsening of their seat-vote disproportionalities.Let us consider how considerations about thetranslation of votes to seats affected the policy posi-tions of a range of parties on the question of electoralreform. From the perspective of the Social DemocraticParty, calculations of their expected vote share underthis alternative electoral rule (that used as input thenumber of votes received during the 1907 election)revealed an expected gain of 76 seats (from 43 to 117seats; Andersen 2000, 343; Fricke 1961). Both NationalLiberal and Free Liberal Parties that experienced lossesin the translation of votes to seats under the existingelectoral rules also favored the adoption of propor-tional representation (Andersen 2000, 343; Gagel 1958,143). By contrast, the two other parties on the rightthat gained from the allocation of the votes to seatsunder single member electoral rules—the conserva-tives and the Zentrum—opposed changes in electoralrules. A recommendation of the Ministry of Interiorsummarizes the fear of Conservatives about changesin electoral rules. The adoption of proportionalrepresentation, this study showed, would reducethe seat share of conservative parties by eight seats(as compared to the 1912 results) and ‘‘cannot beregarded as a cure against the existing inequalities inrepresentation’’. The expected loss of seats for theZentrum, as compared to its 1912 electoral results,stood at 32 seats (Bundesarchiv Berlin LichterfeldR1501/343).We have begun to explore the implication of thesecond Rokkanian logic for the preferences on reformof electoral institutions. Parties losing from the allo-cation of votes to seats (Social Democrats, NationalLiberals, and Free Liberals) supported the introductionof proportional representation. By contrast, winnersof vote seat disproportionality (Conservatives andZentrum) opposed it. How constraining were thesedesiderata of party leaders on the decisions made byindividual legislators during the actual vote of electoralreforms? Our empirical analysis allows us to explorethese questions and examine whether individual legis-lators internalized these needs of their respectiveparties and of the relative effect of district specificvulnerabilities in affecting their calculations. To testhow the disproportionality in the allocation of votesto seats affects the preferences of party leaders, weinclude the measure of disproportionality (SEATVOTE DISPR.) as additional control in our analysisof the vote choice of legislators.468 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Asset Specific Investments and theAdoption of Proportional RepresentationBoth Rokkanian explanations are political explana-tions. They locate the source of demand for changes inelectoral institutions in either electoral vulnerabilitiesat the district or in partisan calculations. The causalchain presupposed by these hypotheses is relativelyshort: politicians, it is hypothesized, respond either totheir increased electoral vulnerability or to calculationsabout the translation of votes into seats. By contrast,economic explanations locate the source of politicaldemand for electoral change in economic conditionsat the local level or the regional level. The causal chainlinking these economic factors the actions of legislatorsis long and tenuous. In this alternative explanation,politicians favor the adoption of proportional repre-sentation not because it serves an immediate politicalneed but because they expect that proportional repre-sentation will produce more favorable labor regulationthat will protect the ‘‘asset specific investments’’ madeby employers and firms in their districts (Cusack,Iversen, and Soskice 2007, 2010). Let us suspendpossible questions about the farsightedness of politi-cians and assume that this logic captures plausiblepolitical constraint on the activity of legislators (e.g.,Andrews and Jackman 2005). The empirical questionthat we seek to answer is whether structural conditionsat the district level affect the political choices made bylegislators once we control for all the other relevantpolitical factors (Rokkan 1 and Rokkan 2) that pre-suppose a much shorter causal chain. As the argumentrests on local economies that differ in their levels ofco-specific investments and where politicians respondto the political demands of firms and workers thathave made these specific investments in skills. As such,the district level—a level where individual politicianscome into direct contact with these economic actors—isan essential level of analysis at which the argument canbe tested. However, given that this theoretical contri-bution is vague about the specific level at which thismechanism applies, we also investigate empiricallywhether the mechanism operates at the level of theregion or at the level of the party.Above, we have noted that non-Rokkanianapproaches have not yet tested the core element oftheir explanation—which hypothesizes that supportfor proportional representation can be predicted byhigh levels of ‘‘asset specific’’ investment. We seek toremedy these shortcomings and replace the imprecisecharacterizations of variation in ‘‘co-specific assets’’with actual measures of human-capital developmentacross German electoral districts, regions, and parties.While difficult and computationally intensive, it ispossible to compute measures of the distribution ofhuman capital across German regions prior to theadoption of proportional representation.We use two distinct sources of the Germanoccupational census to compute this measure. First,we start with tables of the ratio between skilled andunskilled workers. As part of its 1895 census, theGerman Statistical Agency has collected informationon the ratio between skilled and unskilled workersin 183 occupations, which includes 161 industrialoccupations and 22 occupations in services. Thedefinition of skilled workers (‘‘gelernte Arbeiter’’)employed by the Statistical Agency is straightforward(but somewhat laconic): ‘‘skilled workers (gelernteArbeiter) are those workers that require some training.By contrast, unskilled workers (ungelernte Arbeiter)—inother words manual workers, handymen, and otherworkers in services—which do not have ‘‘existingtraining’’ (Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt 1899, 73).The study noted that the number of skilled workersis very high in Germany (nearly 50% of workersemployed in industry). ‘‘The economic relations inindustry—which requires particular abilities andskills which can be learned or acquired throughpersistent exercise are the decisive factor whichexplain these high ratios of skills’’ (KaiserlichesStatistisches Amt 1893, 73). We present the disag-gregated levels of skills for all 161 occupations in theonline appendix (Table A8; further information is inSection A2 of the online appendix).Our second input is Germany’s occupationalcensus. In addition to the information on skillprofiles of occupation, the 1895 occupational census(Gewerbeza¨hlung) contains extremely disaggregatedinformation on the employment shares across these180 occupations in 1,003 German localities.7 Thesetwo sources allow us to estimate the ratio of skilledto unskilled industrial workers across each locality.In a final stage, we aggregate localities at the districtlevel to obtain measures of the density of humancapital across the 397 electoral districts of ImperialGermany. Using the number of skilled workers ineach district as an input, we compute two measuresof skill profiles that differ in their respective denom-inator. The first is a measure of skills as a percentage of7The occupational census—which is the main source for theconstruction of our skill variable—presents the information ata very disaggregated level of analysis, the commune. To aggregateinformation from over 1000 communes to the level of theelectoral districts, we rely on Reibel (2007), who presents detailedinformation of the boundaries of the 397 electoral districts.adoption of proportional representation 469This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).workers employed in industry (SKILL). The second isa ratio of skilled workers to all employed persons inthe district (SKILL LEVEL). Finally, we also use ameasure of skills aggregated at a higher level whichcorresponds to the 29 subnational political units(SKILL REGION).8 We present the results using thesecond and third measure of skills in the onlineappendix of the article (Table 1, Table 2, Table 3,and Table 4).Empirical Analysis: ExplainingSupport for the Adoption of PRThe dependent variable in our analysis is the supportfor a bill recommending the adoption of proportionalrepresentation and ‘‘the creation of larger electoraldistricts’’ (Stenographische Berichte des DeutschenReichstages 13). The bill was approved by a rathernarrow political margin of 10% points, with 55%of deputies voting in favor, 45% deputies opposingit, and three casting invalid ballots. The vote inthe Reichstag represents the endpoint of an intense(but relatively short) period of parliamentary negotia-tions of changes in electoral institutions for electionsto the second chamber of the national parliament.We conducted an extensive search of all legislativebills recommending the introduction of propor-tional representation throughout the 13 legislativesessions of the Reichstag between 1870 and 1912,but we only found legislative initiatives recom-mending the adoption of proportional represen-tation during the 13th Reichstag that was electedin 1912.Empirical Evidence for Motivationsto Change Electoral SystemsWe attempt to solve the puzzle presented by theexisting literature on the origin of proportionalrepresentation; competing explanations of this politicalchoice differ widely in their postulated causal mecha-nisms. Our test is decisive in adjudicating among thesecompeting explanations for a number of reasons.First, it has the crucial advantage that it is carriedout at the lowest possible level of analysis, the indi-vidual level, and subsequently we can aggregate andmove further up. This allows us not to presupposea level but to actually test which level can contributeto the explanation. Since the decision to change anelectoral system is made by a politician representinga district, we should be relying on district-specificmeasures; we can use the margin of victory in a districtinstead of relying on a country wide average to gaugethe closeness of vote outcomes. Secondly, it allows us totest for a range of additional factors—most notably thepartisan concerns about disproportionality—that havenot yet been incorporated into a economic modelsexplaining electoral system change. Finally, our meas-ures of the theoretical concepts invoked by variousexplanations (such as asset specific investments) are,we believe, more precise than the existing indicatorsof coordination used in cross-national research.9The latter measures are both quite distant from the corevariables that are hypothesized to affect the outcomes(‘‘skills’’) and also susceptible to measurement error(Kreuzer 2010).We carry out a full test that includes the salientvariables in each of the main hypotheses in the lit-erature, including the second Rokkanian hypothesis.We use predictors originating from all three politicalexplanations: district specific vulnerabilities and socialistthreat (Rokkan I), seat-vote disproportionalities(Rokkan II), and levels of skills acquired throughthe vocational training system Cusack, Iversen, andSoskice (2010). This is not only the first test thatincludes all the variables but also the first time thatthese hypotheses are tested at the district level, theregional level, and the partisan level.The models presented in Table 2 operationalize allthree hypotheses. Our test of the second Rokkanianhypothesis is the degree of disproportionality in thetranslation of votes to seats. We use the dataset onelectoral politics in Imperial Germany (1871 to1912) which we cross-check with Reibel (2007) todetermine the partisanship of the winning politician ineach district.The measure of disproportionality (SEAT VOTEDISPR.) takes higher values if the share of seats held8The online appendix presents yet another operationalizationwhich is based on parties. We compute the average value ofdistrict skill levels over all districts a party holds (see the onlineappendix for more details).9The variable used by Cusack, Iversen, and Soskice (2007) to testthe importance of ‘‘co-specific assets’’ is a composite variable thatincludes the strength of employer associations and the existenceof rural cooperatives and preexisting guilds. The other indicator,the strength of employer associations, is a problematic empiricalmeasure. As Kuo (2010) has illustrated, most employer associa-tions that existed in Europe prior to World War I (and thus priorto the adoption of proportional representation) were establishedwith the explicit goal to repress labor movements. The existenceof a coordinated employer association does not proxy forharmonious labor relations and co-specific investments, thecritical variable of this theory.470 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).TABLE 2 Regular Probit and Hierarchical Probit Models on PR VoteModel 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8PartisanSEAT VOTE DISPR. -0.301***(0.037)-0.391***(0.056)-0.406***(0.058)-0.414***(0.061)-0.317***(0.102)-0.362***(0.112)-0.381***(0.107)-0.393***(0.106)DistrictSOCIALVOTE 0.026**(0.011)0.026**(0.013)0.111**(0.044)0.100**(0.047)0.033***(0.013)0.035**(0.015)0.087*(0.048)0.088*(0.053)SECOND*SOC.VOTE -0.095**(0.039)-0.093**(0.043)-0.072(0.045)-0.079(0.049)RIGHT MARGIN*SOC.VOTE -0.507(0.469)1.149(0.822)1.197(0.862)-0.965(0.616)0.475(1.001)0.724(1.048)RIGHT MARGIN 0.008(0.005)0.005(0.006)0.001(0.006)-0.001(0.008)-0.004(0.008)-0.008(0.009)SECOND 0.025**(0.012)0.024*(0.013)0.027*(0.015)0.021(0.013)0.020(0.013)0.021(0.016)EconomicSKILL -3.719(3.244)-2.773(3.596)-2.487(3.680)-3.803(4.328)-2.965(3.780)-2.774(4.338)-2.351(4.403)-2.643(5.040)ControlCATHOLICS -0.003(0.009)0.015(0.015)0.021(0.016)-0.004(0.010)0.006(0.017)0.016(0.018)NON AGRICULTURAL -0.001(0.001)-0.001*(0.001)-0.000(0.001)-0.001(0.001)CONSTANT 1.769(1.954)-0.079(2.348)-1.367(2.523)0.983(2.943)1.001(2.299)0.306(2.920)-0.609(3.026)0.978(3.366)ln s2j 0.007(0.856)0.089(0.851)-0.070(0.870)-0.169(0.930)Regional fixed effects 3 3 3 O 3 3 3 OCorretly predicted cases 95.07% 94.72% 94.72% 96.48% 95.07% 95.07% 95.07% 96.13%N 284 284 284 284 284 284 284 284Bayesian information criterion 143.706 157.356 162.232 176.313 128.995 146.127 153.951 172.358Note: Standard errors in parentheses; baseline 55.28%. *p , 0.10; **p , 0.05; ***p , 0.01.adoptionofproportionalrepresentation471This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).by each party is higher than its share of votes. Thus, apositive number reflects a party that gains from theexisting electoral arrangement. Negative numbersindicate parties whose fortunes might improve underproportional representation (see Table 1). We use threevariables to test for the effects of the district-specificuncertainties postulated by the first Rokkanianhypothesis on the decision of legislators to supportproportional representation: a measure of thestrength of the Social Democratic party in a district(SOCIALVOTE), a measure of the decisive electoralround which takes the value of 1 if the politician iselected during the second round (SECOND) anda measure of the closeness of the race amongnonsocialist parties in the first round (RIGHTMARGIN).10Three additional explanatory variables modeldifferences in economic and social conditionsacross districts. We use our skill measure (SKILL)to account for the consequences of different ‘‘invest-ments in co-specific assets,’’ the critical explanatoryvariable proposed by Cusack, Iversen, and Soskice(2007). Our measure of differences in economicdevelopment is a variable that captures the share ofthe labor force that is not employed in agriculture(NON AGRICULTURE). We also measure the shareof Catholics (CATHOLICS) in a district to accountfor the possible effects of religious heterogeneity.This measure is consistent with cross-nationalanalyses of the effects of religious fragmentation withthe probability of adoption of proportional represen-tation (Boix 1999).We first estimate four different model specifica-tions. In all models the outcome is whether a memberof the Reichstag voted yes or no on the proposal tointroduce proportional representation. All four mod-els are presented in Table 2. The first specification,Model 1, is a probit model which includes variablesrelating to the three theoretically interesting concepts;the seat-vote disproportionality, the strength ofleft parties, and the average skill level in a district.The second specification, Model 2, adds a numberof controls for the tightness of the election in adistrict (RIGHT MARGIN, SECOND) as well as thecontrols (CATHOLICS11, NON AGRICULTURAL).The third model also includes two interactions, onebetween SOCIALVOTE and SECOND and one be-tween RIGHT MARGIN and SOCIALVOTE. Theseinteractions reflect the theoretical argument; whenpoliticians are elected in a second round, their districtis already competitive. Hence the strength of the leftparties or the right margin should add less to theirpropensity to support Proportional Representationthan if they were elected in the first round. Finally,in Model 4, we also include regional fixed effects as anillustration of the robustness of the results.As hypothesized, we find a negative effect forseat-vote disproportionality across all specifications.The more disadvantageous the seat-vote ratio undermajoritarian elections is for a party, the more likelyit will be that its members support a change to pro-portional representation (Rokkan II). An increase inthe strength of the left parties in a district increasesthe likelihood that the politicians will support achange in electoral rules (Rokkan I). Finally, thereis no effect for the average skill level in a district on thewillingness of the representative to support changes inelectoral institutions. A comparison of the estimatesfromModel 2 (without interactions) and Model 3 (withinteractions) shows how the size of the coefficient forSOCIALVOTE more than triples while the interaction(with SECOND) is negative and significant. The expla-nation for the increase in the size of the coefficient forSOCIALVOTE is that we now allow the model to havetwo different effects for SOCIALVOTE: one for politi-cians elected in the first round and one for thosepoliticians elected in the second round. The left threatexerts an effect for politicians which were elected inthe first round while those representatives whichhad to face a run-off are already in competitivedistricts, and the left threat should affect them less.The change of b^SOCIALVOTE from Model 2 to Model 310Capturing the potential for coordination with the measureof RIGHT MARGIN, rather than using effective number ofright parties, is also in line with more recent research whichfinds that alliances are more likely when there is a clear strongparty and a clearly weaker one (e.g., Blais and Indridason2007).11Rokkan’s second hypothesis comes in fact in two differentspecifications. The first of these specifications suggests that oneof the motivations for the adoption of proportional representationis the protection of the minorities. The second explanationsuggests that the geographic efficiency of votes is the maindeterminant of the preferences of parties (Calvo 2009). To testfor the first hypothesis, we include a measure of the share ofCatholics in a district. One expects that politicians from districtswith a higher percentage of Catholic voters should support theadoption of proportional representation. We find no support forthis hypothesis. Moreover, our analysis suggests that the interpre-tation of the second Rokkanian hypothesis as one about seat-votedisproportionality is the appropriate one in this case. The Zentrum,the party representing Catholic voters did, in fact, oppose theadoption of proportional representation. Zentrum politicians wonfrom the seat-vote disproportionality of the electoral system andhad thus reasons to oppose changes in electoral rules.472 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).is consistent with the theoretical predictions of thefirst Rokkanian hypothesis. Finally, adding fixedeffects does not change the estimates in any mean-ingful way with the exception that the interactionbetween RIGHT MARGIN and SOCIALVOTEachieves statistical significance.12To fully illustrate these effects, we present a figurewith predicted probabilities to clarify the interactioneffects (see Figure 1). We plot the predicted proba-bilities for two hypothetical cases where the onlydifference is that one legislator was elected in thefirst round and the other was elected in a run-off.Simulation results rest on estimates from Model 3and the predicted probabilities are displayed with 6one standard deviation. The marginal effect of thestrength of the SPD in a district has a positive andsignificant effect. In addition, the magnitude of effectis stronger in those districts which did not require arunoff election.Finally, we turn our attention to the economicpredictors. In all specifications, we find that the averageskill ratio of a district has no significant influence on theprobability of a legislator voting ‘‘yes’’ on the adoptionof proportional representation. But we do find an effectfor economic modernization (NON AGRICULTURE),but this effect is not robust and disappears in alternativemodel specifications. The nonfinding for SKILL doesnot depend on the inclusion of NON AGRICULTURE;all models support the null hypothesis that there is norelation between the probability of a ‘‘yes’’ vote and theaverage skill level.13In addition to these results, we perform a numberof robustness checks and present all the estimationresults in the online appendix. We present the samemodels but use two alternative measures of skilledlabor force—skill level of total work force as well asa measure of skill that is aggregated over regions.The results are presented in Table 1 and Table 3 in theonline appendix. Among these alternative models pre-sented in the appendix, we also estimate a model thatexamines the vote choice of nonsocialist representa-tives in the Reichstag only and excludes the SocialDemocratic candidates. The results reinforce ourconfidence in the explanatory value of the electoralthreat of the left on the political support for changesin electoral rules (see Table 7 in the online appendix).Finally, we also reestimate alternative models wherewe include a measure of population size to controlfor possible effects of malapportionment (Table 5 inthe online appendix). In all specifications the resultsremain stable; the seat-vote disproportionality has asignificant and negative effect on support for pro-portional representation, the strength of the left votein a district has a positive and significant effect, andthere is no statistical relation between skill levels andvoting behavior.The two Rokkanian arguments do not apply tothe same level of analysis. The left threat is a districtlevel variable whereas the seat-vote disproportionalityis a party-level variable. To take these different levelsfully into account empirically, we reestimate Models 1FIGURE 1 Support of Proportional Adoption12A x2 test whether SECOND and SECOND*SOC.VOTE aresignificant predictors or not yields a test statistic of x22 ¼ 13:28and a p–value of 0.001 based on Model 3 (for Model 4:x22 ¼ 10:24 and a p–value of 0.005).13In an estimation of Model 4 that excludes NON AGRICULTURE,we find b^SKILL ¼ 4:5 and a p–value of 0.289.adoption of proportional representation 473This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).through 4 including respecifications that take thehierarchical data structure into account (Gelman andHill 2007; Steenbergen and Jones 2002). Table 2 presentsthe estimation results for Models 5 through 8 which arehierarchical probit models, where the first level is thedistrict level and the second level is the partisan level.Again, the outcome variable in both models is thevote of a single member of parliament. The specifi-cation is identical to the models in Table 2 with theexception that we model the seat-vote disproportion-ality (SEAT VOTE DISPR) as a level two variable andinclude a random effect which varies over parties.14The substantive effects and statistical significance of thethree most important variables that model the threecompeting explanations about the adoption of propor-tional representation (seat-vote disproportionality, skilllevel, and left strength) remain unchanged when com-pared to previous specifications presented in Table 2.Moreover, the effects of these variables do notchange across all models presented in Table 2. In thesespecifications, the measure of economic development(NON AGRICULTURAL) no longer reaches statisticalsignificance at conventional levels, when comparedto Models 1–4. The coefficients of the interactionbetween the second round and the Social Democraticvote and the right margin and the Social Democraticvote also do not reach statistical significance. Thesechanges notwithstanding, we find that the tests of therelevant theoretical hypotheses remain unchanged.The skill level in a district has no effect on the prob-ability that a legislator in the Reichstag will support achange of the electoral system. By contrast, politicalvariables exercise a considerable effect. Increases inseat-vote disproportionality and the strength of theleft-wing candidate competing in a district increase theprobability of support for proportional representation.Figure 2 presents predicted probabilities for sup-port of changes in the electoral system. The light greycurve presents changes in the probability of supportfor proportional representation of a legislator repre-senting the National Liberal party for different levelsof electoral strength of the Social Democratic challenger(left threat). The dark grey curve represents similarprobabilities for members of the Zentrum.National Liberal legislators are more likely tosupport a change in the electoral system even if thereis no left threat at all. This can be explained by theunfavorable allocation of seats to votes experiencedby this party during the 1912 election. By contrast,a hypothetical legislator representing the Zentrumfound the existing electoral rules more attractive.The Zentrum, a party with strong regional strong-holds in Bavaria, Baden, and the Ruhr benefitedfrom allocation of votes to seats under the existingelectoral rules throughout the Imperial Period.During the 1912 elections, the Zentrum ended upreceiving a surplus in the allocation of seats of(16.1%-points). Despite these differences across parties,the plot reveals that an increase in the left-wing threatincreased the probability of support of changes inelectoral rules for both the National Liberal and theZentrum representatives.One might object to the operationalization ofskill level as a district variable and claim that the skillmechanism rather works through the party. In thatlogic, the individual representative might be respon-sive even if his own district is not endowed with ahigh skill level but rather most other members of hisparty have districts with above-average skill levels.We also provide estimation results for that opera-tionalization where we first aggregate average skilllevel for each party separately to the party level(average of skill level for all districts held by a party)and add this variable as a party-level variable tothe hierarchical model. The results are substantivelyidentical to the models presented in Table 2. There isa negative and significant effect for seat-vote dispro-portionality, a positive and significant effect for thestrength of the left in a district, and no relationshipbetween the skill level and the propensity to supportproportional representation (see Table 6 in the onlineappendix).15Party Defection and Left ThreatThe two political variables that impinge upon thepolitical decisions of legislators—the left threat inindividual districts versus party interests—reinforceeach other on some occasions, but can, on other occa-sions, pull in different directions. In this section, weexamine those cases where legislators defected from theirparty position and voted against the party’s interest.Can such defections be explained by individual-districtmotivations?To illustrate how district-level and partisan consid-eration can come into conflict with each other, consider14Subscript i describes legislators and subscript j pertains to parties:Pr(Voteij 5 1) 5 F(b0j 1 bXij); b0j 5 a0 1 a1  SVDj 1 uj; anduj; N(0, su). The first equation describes the level 1 model whereXij denotes the matrix of the explanatory variables and b is a vectorof regression coefficients with the same number of elements asthere are explanatory variables.15We also estimated a model in which we let the coefficients varyover parties and uncover the same estimates with respect tosignificance level and direction of effect.474 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).the case of politicians from the two parties opposing theadoption of proportional representations—Zentrumand Conservatives—who face a strong SocialDemocratic threat in their district. In this case,partisan considerations pull the politician towardssupport for existing electoral rules, while district-levelcalculations pull in the direction of changes inelectoral systems. The defection of these politiciansfrom the position advocated by their party can beexplained by district-level competition. This is thecase, for example, of Eugen Schatz—a Zentrum poli-tician from Saargemu¨nd-Forbach who supported theadoption of proportional representation. Schatz hadwon his seat with a narrow margin against a SocialDemocratic opponent. Albert Thumann, a politicianfrom Gebweiler and another Zentrum politician whodefected from the position of his party—had alsoclinched victory narrowly (with a majority of 55% ofthe votes) against a Social Democratic challenger.In Table 3, we present an array of five differentmodels explaining defection from the party line forthe Catholics (Zentrum) and the Conservatives. AsFIGURE 2 Seat-Vote DisproportionalityTABLE 3 Logit Models on Party DefectionModel 9 Model 10 Model 11 Model 12 Model 13SOCIALVOTE 0.092**(0.040)0.118**(0.052)0.110**(0.052)SKILL -18.703(12.452)-15.080(13.562)-12.926(15.403)RIGHT MARGIN 0.006(0.026)-0.018(0.027)0.012(0.028)NON AGRICULTURAL 0.002(0.032)0.018(0.030)-0.009(0.036)CATHOLICS -0.058(0.043)-0.025(0.044)-0.067(0.045)SECOND -3.116(1.976)-2.121(1.769)-2.747(1.980)CONSERVATIVE -2.911*(1.599)-1.840(1.482)-5.336(3.549)-2.759(3.454)-5.983(3.922)Constant -3.754***(0.883)8.769(7.251)0.554(3.522)8.811(10.099)9.473(11.487)N 108 108 108 108 108Bayesian information criterion 43.789 57.927 37.577 52.378 46.577Note: Standard errors in parentheses; – Logit model with penalized maximum-likelihood function, ‘‘firthlogit’’ Firth (1993).*p , 0.10; **p , 0.05; ***p , 0.01.adoption of proportional representation 475This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).hypothesized, the strength of the vote of the SocialDemocratic candidate in a district (SOCIALVOTE)can explain party defection. All specifications includethe alternative explanatory variable proposed byCusack, Iversen, and Soskice (2007, 2010) which isthe district skill level (SKILL) as well as the controlvariables from Models 1–8. We also add a dichoto-mous indicator for Conservatives to allow for partydifferences. In the online appendix, we present thesame models estimated only on members of Zentrumas well as with an alternative underlying model(see Table 8, Table 9, and Table 10). Since the variable(SECOND) causes perfect separation (it perfectly pre-dicts the outcome), we use a logit model based on apenalized maximum-likelihood function to overcomethis problem (Firth 1993) which is similar to a Bayesianestimation of the model.Regardless which model specification, all resultsin Models 9 through 13 (and the alternative specifi-cations in the appendix) support the first Rokkanianhypothesis that legislators facing a strong raising leftsupport proportional representation. Those membersof Zentrum and the Conservatives who defected fromthe party line were facing considerably stronger leftcandidates in their districts.Those members of Zentrum who voted againsttheir party line faced significantly stronger left con-tenders in their districts. This illustrates the strengthof Rokkan’s two hypotheses when they are allowed tojointly explain the same observations on the partylevel as well as the individual district level. We havenow not only established that the two Rokkanianhypotheses can explain the overall vote outcome andthe adoption of PR, but we also illustrated thatRokkan I (Social Democratic vote share as threat)explains party defection among those parties that sharean electoral advantage from using SMD and therebyshows that these two explanations are not two differ-ent roads leading to PR but arguments which applysimultaneously at different levels of analysis within thesame case.ConclusionWe have started this article by noting a paradoxicalsituation in the recent literature examining the originof proportional representation. The flurry of articlesin prominent publications notwithstanding, one wasleft wondering which of explanations does a betterjob in accounting for the choice of electoral rulesin European countries during the first decades of thetwentieth century. The current debate has been framedas a horse-race between the first Rokkanian hypothesisand the economic arguments formulated by Cusack,Iversen, and Soskice (2007), to the neglect of alternativeexplanations (which are also Rokkanian in origin) thatattribute an important role to partisan calculations (anexception is Calvo 2009).In this article, we have argued that politicaldemand for the adoption of proportional represen-tation can be attributed to factors that operate at twodistinct levels. One set of considerations operate atthe level of the party. Disproportionalities in the trans-lation of votes to seats and perceptions of possible gainsin the allocation of seats under the new electoral rulesaffect partisan considerations about the desirability ofchanges in electoral rules. These factors explain variationin positions among parties on the right and the positionof Social Democratic parties on the issue of electoralreforms. A second set of factors that impinge upon thedecisions of politicians operate at the level of theelectoral district. Here vulnerability to electoral compe-tition from left-wing candidates can explain someadditional variation in political support for changesin electoral rules among candidates on the politicalright and the willingness of the latter to support ordeviate from the position advocated by their parties.While these political hypotheses go back to the work ofRokkan, we reformulate and clarify the Rokkanianconjectures. We argue that it is more useful to thinkabout the two political hypotheses about the adoptionof proportional representation as identifying com-plementary constraints on politicians, rather thanas ‘‘separate paths’’ chosen by different countries.Empirically, we demonstrate that both logics are atwork within the same case and that they identifydifferent sources of demand for changes in electoralrules.Our article also proposes a new empirical strategyto examine the question of changes in electoral rulesthat departs from a reliance on a cross-national anal-ysis. We propose to change the unit of analysis fromcountries to individual legislators and bring backindividual politicians to the center of the analysis.This empirical strategy has several advantages overcross-national research. The first is that it allowsus to test existing explanations at the salient level,the level of the district, rather than the level ofthe country. Secondly, it allows to consider allthe relevant political and economic hypothesesand not just a subset of the latter. Finally, weimprove upon existing studies by developing moreprecise measures of the salient political andeconomic variables.476 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).We find that political support for the adoption ofproportional representation was affected by partisanconsiderations about the disproportionality in the trans-lation of seats to votes and by political conditions ina district. We do not find that legislative support canbe explained by skill levels regardless of the manyalternative specifications we employ. Our empiricalanalysis disconfirms the economic hypothesis aboutthe adoption of proportional representation. But giventhat Germany is a ‘‘hard case’’ for Rokkanian explan-ations, we believe that our findings weaken significantlyour confidence in the comparative explanatory power ofeconomic hypotheses for the adoption of proportionalrepresentation. Our findings also qualify the Rokkanianhypothesis about the importance of the SocialDemocratic threat as a determinant of the adop-tion of proportional representation in Germany.We show that political choices made by German leg-islators over the adoption of proportional represen-tation can be explained by a combination of partisandissatisfaction and district-level vulnerabilities. ContraRokkan, we show that choices over electoral rules areaffected by a combination of partisan and electoralconsiderations and not by district-level vulnerabilitiesto the Social Democratic threat only.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the editors and three anonymous reviewersas well as Kate Baldwin, Pablo Beramendi, MatthewCarnes, Holger Do¨ring, Miriam Golden, Shigeo Hirano,John Huber, Kimuli Kasara, Jeff Lax, Yotam Margalit,Kevin Mazur, Pierce O’Reilly, Susan Stokes, PavithraSuryanarayan, Didac Queralt, Fabio Wasserfallen,Steven Wilkinson, and seminar participants atPrinceton University, Lund University, and SciencesPo Paris for helpful comments and ideas.ReferencesAhmed, Amel. 2012. Democracy and the Politics of ElectoralSystem Choice: Engineering Electoral Dominance. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Anderson, Margaret Lavinia. 2000. Practicing Democracy:Elections and Political Culture in Imperial Germany. Princeton,NJ: Princeton University Press.Andrews, Josephine T., and Robert W. Jackman. 2005. ‘‘StrategicFools: Electoral Rule Choice under Extreme Uncertainty.’’Electoral Studies 24 (1): 65–84.Bade, Klaus. 1980.Massenwanderung und Arbeitsmarkt im deutschenNordosten 1880-1914. Archiv fu¨r Sozialgeschichte.Benoit, Kenneth. 2004. ‘‘Models of Electoral System Change.’’Electoral Studies 23 (3): 363–89.Bertram, Juergen. 1964. Die Wahlen zum deutschen Reichstag vomJahre 1912: Parteien und Verba¨nde in der Innenpolitik desWilhelminischen Reiches. Du¨sseldort, Ger.: Droste.Blais, Andre´, Agnieszka Dobrzynska, and Indridi Indridason.2005. ‘‘To Adopt or Not to Adopt Proportional Representation:The Politics of Institutional Choice.’’ British Journal of PoliticalScience 35 (1): 182–90.Blais, Andre´, and Indridi H. Indridason. 2007. ‘‘MakingCandidates Count: The Logic of Electoral Alliances inTwo-Round Legislative Elections.’’ Journal of Politics 69 (1):193–205.Boix, Carles. 1999. ‘‘Setting the Rules of the Game: The Choice ofElectoral Systems in Advanced Democracies.’’ The AmericanPolitical Science Review 93 (3): 609–24.Boix, Carles. 2010. ‘‘Electoral Markets, Party Strategies, andProportional Representation.’’ American Political Science Review104 (2): 404–13.Brandenburg, Erich. 1917. 50 Jahre Nationalliberale Partei: 1867-1917. LeiptiGer.: Schriftenvertriebsstelle der NationalliberalenPartei Deutschlands, Kalkoff.Braunias, Karl. 1932. Das parlamentarische Wahlrecht: EinHandbuch u¨ber die Bildung der gesetzgebenden Ko¨rperschaftenin Europa. Vol. 2. Berlin: W. de Gruyter.Bundesarchiv, Berlin Lichterfeld. 1912. Betrachtungen u¨ber dieEinteilung der Reichstagswahlkreise. R 1501/309–363.Calvo, Ernesto. 2009. ‘‘The Competitive Road to ProportionalRepresentation. Partisan Biases and Electoral Regime Changeunder Increasing Party Competition.’’ World Politics 61 (2):254–95.Caramani, Daniele. 2004. The nationalization of politics: Theformation of national electorates and party systems in WesternEurope. Cambridge University Press.Colomer, Josep M. 2005. ‘‘It’s Parties That Choose ElectoralSystems (or, Duverger’s Laws Upside Down).’’ PoliticalStudies 53 (1): 1–21.Cox, Gary W. 1997. Making Votes Count: Strategic Coordinationin the World’s Electoral Systems. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Cusack, Thomas, Torben Iversen, and David Soskice. 2007.‘‘Economic Interests and the Origins of ElectoralSystems.’’ The American Political Science Review 101 (3):373–91.Cusack, Thomas, Torben Iversen, and David Soskice. 2010.‘‘Coevolution of Capitalism and Political Representation:The Choice of Electoral Systems.’’ American Political ScienceReview 104 (2): 393–403.Duverger, Maurice. 1954. Political Parties: Their Organization andActivity in the Modern State. New York: John Wiley.Fairbairn, Brett. 1990. ‘‘Authority vs. Democracy: Prussian Offi-cials in the German Elections of 1898 and 1903.’’ HistoricalJournal 33 (4): 811–38.Firth, David. 1993. ‘‘Bias Reduction of Maximum LikelihoodEstimates.’’ Biometrika 80 (1): 27–38.Fremdling, Rainer, and Richard Tilly. 1979. Industrialisierungund Raum. Studien zur regionalen Differenzierungim Deutschland des 19.Jahrhunderts.Stuttgart, Ger.:Klett-Cotta.Fricke, Dieter. 1961. ‘‘Der deutsche Imperialismus und dieReichstagswahlen von 1907.’’ Zeitschrift fu¨r Geschichstwissen-schaft 9 (3): 538–76.Gagel, Walter. 1958. Die Wahlrechtsfrage in der Geschichte derdeutschen liberalen Parteien: 1848-1918. Vol. 12. Du¨sseldort,Ger.: Droste Verlag.adoption of proportional representation 477This content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Gelman, Andrew, and Jennifer Hill. 2007. Data Analysis UsingRegression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.George, Alexander L., and Andrew Bennett. 2005. Case Studiesand Theory Development in the Social Sciences. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.Hatschek, Julius. 1920. Kommentar zum Wahlgesetz und zurWahlordnung im deutschen Kaiserreich. Berlin, Ger.: Walterde Gruyter.Hohls, Ru¨diger, and Hartmut Kaelble. 1989. Die regionaleErwerbsstruktur im deutschen Reich und in der BundesrepublikDeutschland. St. Katharinen, Ger.: Scripta Mercaturae Verlag.Kaiserliches-Statistisches-Amt. 1899. Die berufliche und sozialeGliederung des deutschen Volkes nach der Berufsza¨hlung vom14. Juni 1895. Berlin: Verlag des Ko¨niglich PreussischenStatistischen Bureaus.Kaiserliches-Statistisches-Amt. 1913. Die Reichstagswahlen von1912. In Statistik des Deutschen Reiches, Band 250, ZweitesHeft. Berlin: Von Puttkammer und Mu¨hlbrecht.Kreuzer, Marcus. 2010. ‘‘Historical Knowledge andQuantitative Analysis: The Case of the Origins ofProportional Representation.’’ American Political ScienceReview 104 (2): 369–92.Ku¨hne, Thomas. 1994. Landtagswahlen zwischen korporativerTradition und politischemMassenmarkt. In Dreiklassenwahlrechtund Wahlkultur in Preussen 1867–1914. Du¨sseldorf, Ger.: Droste.Kuo, Alexander. 2010. ‘‘The Political Origin of Firms’ Strategies.’’PhD thesis, Stanford University.Norris, Pippa. 1997. ‘‘Choosing Electoral Systems: Proportional,Majoritarian and Mixed Systems.’’ International PoliticalScience Review 18 (3): 297–312.Penade´s, Alberto. 2008. ‘‘The Institutional Preferences or EarlySocialist Parties: Choosing Rules for Government.’’ InCambridge: Cambridge University Press, 202–46. ControllingGovernments – Voters, Institutions, and Accountability, eds. Jose´Marıa Maravall.Penade´s, Alberto. 2011. ‘‘Electoral Reform in EarlyDemocracies: The Right Wing.’’ Presented at the Conferenceon Historical Political and Economic Development inWestern Europe: Recent Advances in Comparative Politics,Madrid.Reibel, Carl-Wilhelm. 2007. Handbuch der Reichstagswahlen1890– 1918. Bu¨ndnisse, Ergebnisse, Kandidaten. Du¨sseldor,Ger.: Droste.Rogowski, Ronald. 1987. ‘‘Trade and the Variety ofDemocratic Institutions.’’ International Organization 41 (02):203–23.Rokkan, Stein. 1970. Citizens Elections Parties. New York: DavidMcKay.Schma¨deke, Jurgen. 1995. Wa¨hlerbewegung im WilhelminischenDeutschland: Die Reichstagswahlen von 1890 bis 1912. Berlin,Ger.: Akademie Verlag.Simon, Klaus. 1969. Die wu¨rttembergischen Demokraten: Ihre Stellungund Arbeit im Parteien- und Verfassungssystem in Wu¨rttembergund im Deutschen Reich 1890–1920. Vol. 52. Stuttgart, Ger.:Kohlhammer.Steenbergen, Marco R., and Bradford S. Jones. 2002. ‘‘ModelingMultilevel Data Structures.’’ American Journal of PoliticalScience 46: 218–37.Thelen, Kathleen. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: ThePolitical Economy of Skills in Germany, Britain, theUnited States and Japan. New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Lucas Leemann is a Ph.D. candidate in theDepartment of Political Science, ColumbiaUniversity, New York City, NY.Isabela Mares is a Professor in the Department ofPolitical Science, Columbia University, New YorkCity, NY.478 lucas leemann and isabela maresThis content downloaded from 155.245.046.221 on February 07, 2017 09:05:52 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).