ABSTRACT: 
This article explores the importance of videogames and their associated promotional media for both militarism and the resulting opposition. It focuses on the games Medal of Honor and Medal of Honor Warfighter - two mainstream, commercially successful military combat games which purport to offer an 'authentic' experience of post 9/11 military action to the player - to develop a framework to explore the role of videogames in this area. First, in terms of the military industrial and military entertainment complex, it shows the close association between the game developers and the military, with the military providing consultancy services, access to military hardware and openly celebrating their mutual associations. Second, these associations take on an important spatial dimension with the developers and weapons makers producing promotional materials which literally show both parties 'enjoying one anothers company' in the same physical space; games also 'transport the player' into the virtual battlefield and allow them to embody the soldier. Finally, gendered militarism is shown in the gameplay and narratives within these games, alongside their associated promotional materials, all of which place significant emphasis on the links between militaristic values and masculinity. In both games, the celebration of militarism was highly controversial, prompting heated debate and active opposition - albeit varying in the two cases - from the military, politicians and players on the appropriateness of using videogames for militaristic entertainment. This suggests that there are limits to society's acquiescence in militarism and a continuing capacity to critique militaristic popular culture. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article explores the importance of videogames and their associated promotional media for both militarism and the resulting opposition. It focuses on the games Medal of Honor and Medal of Honor Warfighter – two mainstream, commercially successful military combat games which purport to offer an ‘authentic’ experience of post 9/11 military action to the player – to develop a framework to explore the role of videogames in this area. First, in terms of the military industrial and military entertainment complex, it shows the close association between the game developers and the military, with the military providing consultancy services, access to military hardware and openly celebrating their mutual associations. Second, these associations take on an important spatial dimension with the developers and weapons makers producing promotional materials which literally show both parties ‘enjoying one another’s company’ in the same physical space; games also ‘transport the player’ into the virtual battlefield and allow them to emotionally body the soldier. Finally, gendered militarism is shown in the gameplay and narratives within these games, alongside their associated promotional materials, all of which place significant emphasis on the links between militaristic values and masculinity. In both games, the celebration of militarism was highly controversial, prompting heated debate and active opposition – albeit varying in the two cases – from the military, politicians and players on the appropriateness of using videogames for militaristic entertainment. This suggests that there are limits to society’s acquiescence in militarism and a continuing capacity to critique militaristic popular culture. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttp://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcss20Download by: [University of Leeds] Date: 27 January 2017, At: 04:06Critical Studies on SecurityISSN: 2162-4887 (Print) 2162-4909 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rcss20Militarism and opposition in the living room: thecase of military videogamesNick RobinsonTo cite this article: Nick Robinson (2016) Militarism and opposition in the livingroom: the case of military videogames, Critical Studies on Security, 4:3, 255-275, DOI:10.1080/21624887.2015.1130491To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21624887.2015.1130491© 2016 The Author(s). Published by InformaUK Limited, trading as Taylor & FrancisGroupPublished online: 18 May 2016.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 550View related articles View Crossmark dataMilitarism and opposition in the living room: the caseof military videogamesNick Robinson *School of Politics and International Studies, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK(Received 23 March 2015; final version received 8 December 2015)This article explores the importance of videogames and their associated promotionalmedia for both militarism and the resulting opposition. It focuses on the games Medal ofHonor and Medal of Honor Warfighter – two mainstream, commercially successfulmilitary combat games which purport to offer an ‘authentic’ experience of post 9/11military action to the player – to develop a framework to explore the role of videogamesin this area. First, in terms of the military industrial and military entertainment complex,it shows the close association between the game developers and the military, with themilitary providing consultancy services, access to military hardware and openly cele-brating their mutual associations. Second, these associations take on an important spatialdimension with the developers and weapons makers producing promotional materialswhich literally show both parties ‘enjoying one another’s company’ in the same physicalspace; games also ‘transport the player’ into the virtual battlefield and allow them toembody the soldier. Finally, gendered militarism is shown in the gameplay and narrativeswithin these games, alongside their associated promotional materials, all of which placesignificant emphasis on the links between militaristic values and masculinity. In bothgames, the celebration of militarism was highly controversial, prompting heated debateand active opposition – albeit varying in the two cases – from the military, politiciansand players on the appropriateness of using videogames for militaristic entertainment.This suggests that there are limits to society’s acquiescence in militarism and a continu-ing capacity to critique militaristic popular culture.Keywords: military video games; militarisation and militarism; gender; militaryentertainment complex; spatiality and geography of militarism; political controversyand oppositionIntroductionPost 9/11, concern has grown over the rise of both militarisation and militarism. Whileboth militarism (here, ‘the prevalence of warlike values in society’) and militarisation(here, ‘the contradictory and tense social process in which civil society organises itself forthe production of violence’) significantly predate 9/11 (Gillis 1989, 1; see also; Berghahn1981; Enloe 1988), they have arguably taken on a more pronounced aspect since then. AsBacevich (2005, 1) argues, ‘[t]oday as never before in their history Americans areenthralled with military power’. While much of the recent scholarship is focused on theUSA, tensions over the legitimate role for the military, the extent to which society is beingmilitarised and the acceptability of the promotion of warlike values are preoccupying*Email: N.Robinson@leeds.ac.ukCritical Studies on Security, 2016Vol. 4, No. 3, 255–275, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21624887.2015.1130491© 2016 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupThis is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properlycited.security scholars (see, for example, Stavrianakis and Selby 2013 for a highly usefulcollection).Concurrent with these developments has been an increasing acknowledgement of theimportance of the interrelationship between popular culture and the military and theconsequences for militarism and militarisation (see, for example, Boggs and Pollard2006, 2007; Der Derian 2009). Davies and Philpott’s (2012) discussion of militarisationand popular culture is particularly important, providing a comprehensive analysis whichteases out the different roles popular culture performs and presenting a call for furtherresearch. Here, I distinguish between two potential roles of popular culture: as a vehiclefor militarism (militarism through popular culture) and as contributor to militarisation(militarisation by popular culture). The focus of this article is on militarism throughpopular culture; thus it does not explicitly engage with analysis of the contribution ofpopular culture to the militarisation process.Davies and Philpott also alert us to the importance of political contestation: ‘theanalysis of militarization is politically incomplete – and wrong – if it neglects thecontradictions and dissent it produces in popular culture and the possibilities for contesta-tion and demilitarization it enables through popular culture’ (2012, 43). Reflecting theircall, this article seeks to demonstrate that popular culture can offer critiques of militarisa-tion and/or militarism. Shapiro (2009, 37), for example, talks of ‘cinema’s increasinglypolitical and anti-militarization impetus’, emphasising that Hollywood and independentfilm makers have produced a number of films which explicitly critique the growth ofmilitarised violence. Whilst seldom mainstream, the production of videogames designedto critique war can also be seen, for example in September 12th, This War of Mine, andSpec Ops: The Line (Robinson 2012, 515–519). Citizens and activists, too, have madecritical interventions targeted against militaristic popular culture, evidenced by Haynes’sand Delappe’s political activism against the US military’s recruitment-focused videogameAmerica’s Army (Haynes 2006; on Delappe see Chan 2010. See Robinson 2012, 513–519for the scope of these interventions) and Crowe’s (2011) analysis of player behaviour inonline games which examines how players conform to or resist the rules of the game, sochallenging militarism.This article offers a specific focus on the contribution of military videogames tomilitarism and the ensuing opposition to militarism. Videogames are particularly appro-priate for this task as contemporary war games are played by millions of people in Europe,North America and Australasia: five of the last six games in the Call of Duty series haveeach sold approximately 25–30m copies, grossing revenues of over $1bn each.1 As Stahl(2006, 118) identified, these are not isolated cases: ‘September 11, 2001 and the ensuingwars in Afghanistan and Iraq ushered in a boom in sales of war-themed video games forthe commercial market’. Such games offer strongly militaristic messages to their players(and hence contribute to militarism). Chan (2005), Höglund (2008), Šisler (2008),Huntemann and Payne (2009), Mantello (2012), Schulzke (2013) and Robinson (2015)all examined the messages within military games, demonstrating how these gamesdifferentiate between the allies of the player and the enemy, often offering Orientalistdepictions which position the latter as a ‘rogue state’ beyond the boundaries of reason anddiplomacy so legitimating the use of overwhelming force.This article explores the interrelationship between videogames, militarism and opposi-tion through discussion of two recent first-person shooter games, Medal of Honor andMedal of Honor Warfighter. These were chosen in part because they are typical of thegenre, with the player acting as a serving US military operative fighting in the contem-porary War on Terror. Yet, they also place a very particular emphasis on offering an256 N. Robinson‘authentic’ experience of that war and openly celebrate their collaborations with themilitary, so allowing for exploration of how this manifests itself in terms of militarism.Medal of Honor (MoH) was released in October 2010, selling approximately 5.9mcopies across PS3, Xbox 360 and PC (data from http://www.vgchartz.com). The narrative ofMoH centres on the initial phase of the war in Afghanistan in late 2001. Originally thedevelopers had proposed to use the game to tell a ‘real story’ based on the Afghan conflict.However, given sensitivities surrounding this, and following discussion with the SpecialOperations personnel who were acting as advisers to the developers, a decision was taken tochange the setting from one which was ‘accurate and realistic’ to one which was ‘authenticand plausible’ (Suellentrop 2010). In the single player story, the player plays four differentcharacters – two Special Ops (‘Tier 1’) personnel, one US Army Ranger, and one Apachehelicopter gun pilot. The story focuses primarily on the Special Ops missions and centres ontheir insertion to perform reconnaissance of enemy positions based on information suppliedby an Afghan informant. Due to the poor direction from Washington-based officials, theoperation goes wrong, resulting in two Tier 1 operatives becoming stranded. The subse-quent rescue mission reveals that the Tier 1 personnel have been captured and are beingtortured, with the US Army Rangers arriving only in time to save one of them – one of thekey playable characters (‘Rabbit’) dies while awaiting extraction.Medal of Honor Warfighter (MoHW), was released 2 years after MoH in October 2012.Unlike the previous game it is generally seen as a commercial and critical failure, withcombined sales of only 2.8m units across Xbox 360, PS3 and PC and a metacritic aggregatedrating in the mid-low 50s across all three formats.2 MoHW is set soon after events in the firstgame yet it takes a very different tack – rather than engaging in the contemporary Afghan war,the player undertakes a series of covert operations within countries such as Somalia, thePhilippines and Pakistan to foil a terrorist threat. In the single player campaign, the player isprimarily cast as a Tier 1 operative codenamed ‘Preacher’ who works covertly alongside avariety of national Special Forces operatives to trace the source of a large quantity of a highlyexplosive compound called PETN. This leads them eventually to a Saudi Arabian bankernamed Hassan (aka ‘the Cleric’) who is the leader of a Jihadist network based in Pakistan.While ‘Preacher’ and his colleagues ultimately succeed in killing Hassan and his associates soaverting the terrorist threat it comes at a terrible price – ‘Mother’ (also featured in MoH) iscaptured and tortured to death by one of Hassan’s accomplices.In the context of the increasing acknowledgement of the importance of popular culturefor world politics, this article argues that a focus on military videogames – exemplified bythese two games – opens up key insights for our understanding of militarism andopposition to militarism. It shows this through the development of a three-part frameworkbased on the military-entertainment complex; the spatial dimension of militarism, andgendered militarism, which together demonstrate how these games aim to offer an‘authentic’ experience to the player and contribute to militarism.3 However, the articlealso highlights that the search for authenticity was not uncontroversial, with the gamesprompting heated debate from the military, politicians and players on the appropriatenessof using videogames for military entertainment.Analytical frameworkMilitarism and militarisation – definition and overviewDifferentiating between militarism and militarisation is essential to this article. As Gillis(1989, 1) states, ‘Militarism is the older concept, usually defined as either the dominanceCritical Studies on Security 257of the military over civilian authority, or, more generally, as the prevalence of warlikevalues in society’. Stavrianakis and Selby (2013, 3) point out that militarism is surpris-ingly understudied within politics and IR: ‘sustained research and reflection has largelydisappeared since the 1990s’. To address this shortfall, they offer a five-fold typology ofmilitarism which covers: ideology (the celebration and glorification of war); behavioural(the use of force to resolve disputes); military build-ups (measuring the growth of militarybudgets, equipment or personnel); institutional conceptions (the links between the militaryand government), and sociological understandings (the embeddedness of militarismwithin society). Offering a preference for a sociological approach, which they argue canin principle capture all of these other elements, they emphasise the importance of furtherwork to study militarism (Stavrianakis and Selby 2013, 14–15).This article, with its focus on the politics of military videogames, explicitly speaks tothis agenda. In particular, it explores at least three facets of Stavrianakis and Selby’stypology: ideology (these games glorify war); behavioural (force is essential within thesegames to ‘win’); and institutional conceptions (shown by the formal links between thevideogame producers and the military). Militarism is thus observable through both thestructural power of the military and also in the active promotion of militaristic solutions topolitical problems (see also Bacevich 2005, 227).In deconstructing militarism, Enloe’s work is particularly useful in indicating ‘thosedistinctively militaristic core beliefs’, among which she identifies:(a) that armed force is the ultimate resolver of tensions;(b) that human nature is prone to conflict;(c) that having enemies is a natural condition;(d) that hierarchical relations produce effective action;(e) that a state without a military is naive, scarcely modern and barely legitimate;(f) that in times of crisis those who are feminine need armed protection;(g) that in times of crisis any man who refuses to engage in armed violent action isjeopardizing his own status as a manly man. (2004, 219. For an expanded listbuilding on Enloe see; Bernazzoli and Flint 2009, 400–402)Such beliefs are occasionally ‘put under public scrutiny and examined; often, though, theyare left unproblematized, as if they were “natural”. Whatever one treats as “natural” isclose to the core of one’s own ideology’ (Enloe 2004, 219).The desire to understand how militarism becomes ‘natural’ is central to militarisation,which is seen as the process by which militarism secures social and political penetration.Enloe makes the contrast with militarism particularly clear: ‘Militarism is an ideology.Militarization, by contrast, is a sociopolitical process. Militarization is the multitrackedprocess by which the roots of militarism are driven deep down into the soil of a society –or of a non-governmental organization, a governmental department, an ethnic group, or aninternational agency’ (Enloe 2004, 219–220). Sherry (1995, xi) also places a strongemphasis on process, with militarisation ‘the process by which war and national securitybecame consuming anxieties and provided the memories, models and metaphors thatshaped broad areas of national life’ (see also Geyer 1989, 79).This brief review of the literature serves to reaffirm the importance of a separationbetween militarism and militarisation. This article does not make any claims about howgames contribute to the militarisation process, instead focusing exclusively on militarism.It aims to emphasise the crucial contribution which popular culture makes to militarism258 N. Robinsonand expose the importance of ‘open, visible and conscious’ displays of militaristicideology which military videogames provide (Åhäll 2015, 68).Militarism, popular culture and videogames: an analytical frameworkit is important to recognize that the specific content of a militaristic ideology, and theprocesses of militarization that produce militaristic societies, are multi-faceted. Hence, thereare many ways that militarism can be, or fail to be, embedded within society. (Bernazzoli andFlint 2010, 158)As Bernazolli and Flint make clear, the potential sources of militarism and militarisa-tion are numerous. Here, I build a framework – encapsulating the military-industrial andmilitary-entertainment complexes, spatial aspects of militarism and gendered militarism –which is utilised throughout the remainder of the article to demonstrate the importance ofpopular culture, and in particular videogames, to militarism (see Table 1 for an overview).The military-entertainment complex provides the first element of the analytical frame-work developed here. The MEC is derived from the military-industrial complex whichcame to prominence in 1961 when President Eisenhower warned in his ‘Farewell Addressto the Nation’ of the dangers to American liberty from ‘the acquisition of unwarrantedinfluence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex’. Such concernsare reflected in Mills’ (1958, 32–33) earlier conceptualisation of a ‘power elite’, whichsaw American power concentrated within a triangle between political, military andindustrial institutions so making America ‘a permanent war economy’: ‘Virtually allTable 1. Militarism and videogames – an analytical framework.Indicators of militarism Key aspect Videogame-based exampleMilitary-entertainmentcomplex.Power located in a symbioticrelationship between political,military and industrial/popularcultural industries for mutualgain.Use of military as consultants andlicensing of weapons in thedevelopment of military games;story-lines written in closecollaboration with militarySpatial analysis Physical proximity of militaryindustry/services sector resultsin shared interests with localpopulace; popular culturedeveloped in close collaborationwith the militaryPromotional films whichdemonstrate that weaponsmanufactures and gamedevelopers are closely workingtogether; story-line andgameplay presents the player‘in-game’ as a member of theUS military activelyparticipating in the War onTerror.Gendered militarism Violence seen as the ‘normal’ wayto resolve conflict; violenceseen as masculine; powerstructured to promote maleauthority whereas women seenas needing protection;discourses of strong nuclearfamilies seen as crucial todomestic stability in the War onTerror.Militarised masculinities presentboth within the promotionalmaterial for the games and thein-game narrative and gameplay.Critical Studies on Security 259political and economic actions are now judged in terms of military definitions of reality’(see also Turse 2008; Der Derian 2009).Building on this work, a number of popular culture scholars have identified theimportance of what is generally termed the ‘military-entertainment complex’, identifyinga symbiotic relationship between the military, academic institutions and industry, withresearch funded and driven by military priorities and extensive labour mobility betweenthem (Lenoir 2000, 292–298; Lenoir and Lowood 2000). Der Derian (2009, xxxvi), forexample, maps out the close affinities between the military and popular cultural industries,arguing that in the contemporary era ‘the production, representation and execution of war’have merged seamlessly, with war becoming increasingly technology driven and mediatedto its citizens through TV news coverage as a form of virtual spectacle (see also McInnes2002; Debrix 2008). While the implications of the military-entertainment complex aremade clear in analysis of Hollywood’s production of films that are strongly supportive ofthe military, containing hyper-masculine heroes and celebrating techno-fetishism (Boggsand Pollard 2006, 2007. See Robb 2004; Turse 2008, 103–112 for a list of the filmssupported by the Pentagon), since the early 1980s this symbiotic relationship has alsobeen visible in increasing collaborations between the military and the games industry.While the military initially developed much of the technology that drove the industry(Herz 1997, 201–205), by the mid-1990s the position had reversed, with the militarycommissioning adaptations to commercial videogames such as tank and helicopter simu-lators (e.g. Battlezone and Apache, respectively) and military combat games (e.g. Doom)for military use (Herz 1997, 209–211; Lenoir and Lowood 2000, 26–28; Robinson 2012,507–510).Work from within political geography also offers important insights into the spatialdimension, emphasising distinctions between militarisation and militarism – this forms thesecond key element of the analytical framework offered here (on militarisation, see forexample, Bernazzoli and Flint 2010). Scholarship on popular culture emphasises the wayin which spatiality is integral to the production of militaristic content (militarism). Forexample, research on the Institute for Creative Technologies, situated in close proximity toHollywood film makers, demonstrates the symbiotic link between the military, entertain-ment and university sectors, reflecting what Shapiro has termed ‘the tertiary spatializationof terrorism’ (Shapiro 2009, 30). Similarly, Herz (1997) emphasised that the flourishing oflinks between the military and videogame makers was contingent on their physicallocation. For example, Interactive Magic, developers of the 1994 helicopter simulatorgame Apache, were located ‘right down the road from Fort Bragg’ (Herz 1997, 209).Production of the game drew extensively on links to McDonnell Douglas (makers of theApache Longbow helicopter) who allowed the developers access to the helicopter’stechnical specifications in order to enhance its realism. Of arguably greater importance,however, were the links which the developers had to helicopter pilots based at Fort Bragg.As Interactive Magic’s then spokeswoman put it: ‘They had about twenty-five of theirApache pilots stationed across the road from our offices here . . . they came over and flewthe aircraft and said how cool it was. They loved the game. In fact, they’re trying to getthe army to use Apache to train some of their pilots, as an initial weeding-out tool,because it’s a lot cheaper to have these guys play the computer game than fly thehelicopters’ (cited in Herz 1997, 210).Finally, feminist scholarship contains a strong commitment to interrogating thedevelopment of militarism, forming the third element of the framework developedhere in order to explain the role of videogames in militarism. This scholarship isparticularly clear in terms of identifying indicators of militarism, as personified by260 N. RobinsonEnloe’s work (see above) with its focus on identifying ‘those distinctively militaristiccore beliefs’ such as ‘that armed force is the ultimate resolver of tensions’ and ‘that intimes of crisis those who are feminine need armed protection’ (2004, 219). Hunt andRygiel similarly examine post 9/11 official war stories as ‘told by Coalition leaders,governing and business elites, and the mass media’ to show how they have beengendered ‘in order to legitimise and gain consent for the war on terror’ (2007, 4). Inparticular, they emphasise discourses centred on waging war in Iraq and Afghanistan‘to protect women’s rights and liberate Muslim and Arab women’ by ‘hyper-masculinerescuers’ (9) alongside discourses centred on the protection of the West against thosewho seek to destroy Western values (13). Both mask malevolent motives for militarisedviolence. Goldstein (2001) similarly differentiates between the portrayals of men andwomen, particularly with reference to group interactions and military heroism – thelatter seen as a strongly masculine trait.Feminist scholarship also provides useful models for engagement with popular cul-ture. Shepherd, for example, offers a framework which encompasses spoken language (i.e.textual engagement with the script, song lyrics, captions and graphics etc.), body language(i.e. the physical performance of each character and the framing of the on screen imagesand characters) and non-linguistic signifiers (i.e. visual tropes, the built environment,lighting, music etc.) (2013, 7–11). Her book thus clearly delineates what she is looking at,and how she is seeing and hearing, when she watches a collection of TV series todemonstrate that ‘gender and violence are mutually constitutive of identities, relation-ships, (world) politics, and each other’ (Shepherd 2013, x. See also Rowley 2010, 314–318). Such thinking is reflective of work on militarism and popular culture: Åhäll (2012,287), for example, looks at film and media depictions of female heroines to explore how‘female agency in political violence is enabled through gender’ showing that these stories‘involve a tension between life-giving [e.g. giving birth] and life-taking identities, and thatagency is only enabled if this tension is removed [e.g. through a miscarriage] or overcome[e.g. through a return to motherhood]’.Military videogames and militarismThrough discussion of the two Medal of Honor videogames, the remainder of this articleexplores the contribution of videogames to militarism and shows the importance of theirmilitaristic messages based on insights offered by the above framework. It demonstratesthat military videogames contribute in important ways to militarism (militarised messagesfrom popular culture), yet also shows that there remains a powerful space for criticalreaction to, and rejection of, militaristic popular culture.The military-entertainment complexThe military-entertainment complex is manifest in the links between the videogamedevelopers, serving military personnel and the military equipment and weapons manu-facturers. The developers of both MoH and MoHW made explicit reference to the accesswhich they enjoyed to serving military personnel (here, in the shape of the Special Forcescommunity and US Marine Corps). In relation to MoH, the claims for the games’credibility were strongly rooted in the ‘authenticity’ of the gameplay and story whichstemmed from a combination of its Afghanistan setting, its rescue-based narrative and theaccess which the development team enjoyed to both ‘Tier 1’ operatives and the USArmy’s Public Affairs Office:Critical Studies on Security 261It has been pretty unprecedented the amount of access we have had to these guys and howthey have helped us define and help us find our narrative – the soul of this game. They dohave editorial control . . . They knew we were going to tell this story and this is their chance tomake sure we are doing it right with the right tone; the right intent. (MoH Executive ProducerGreg Goodrich in GameSpot 2010)A series of eight films (The Medal of Honor Tier 1 Interview Series), released on YouTubeand other social media platforms as part of the promotional campaign for the game – eachlasting 2–3 minutes and made with the Tier 1 operatives – were designed to demonstratethe authenticity of the game and the closeness of the links of the developers to thoseoperatives. With over 1m views on the games’ official YouTube channel, these filmsclearly demonstrate the developer’s desire to offer an authentic experience of contempor-ary war through the game.4 Cumulatively, they purported to offer the player insideknowledge of the nature of Tier 1 activities, provide some psychological insight intothat ‘community’ and through that insight, enhance the empathy between the player andthe military.A strong theme of these videos, the associated promotional campaign, and the gameitself was respect for the military and the Tier 1 personnel in particular, with the gameclaiming to be telling the soldiers’ story. MoH is thus not only demonstrative of themilitary-entertainment complex because of the close access which the developers had tothe military but also celebrates those links as central to the game’s capacity to deliver a‘positive’ and ‘authentic’ experience to the player.The second game (MoHW) similarly emphasised that links to the military were centralto the delivery of a ‘positive’ and ‘authentic’ experience to the player. The developersagain commissioned a series of films made in collaboration with the Special Forcescommunity to promote the games (The Seal Team Six Series) which were hosted onYouTube and have been watched nearly 1m times. The developers emphasised that theyhad had even greater access to these personnel in writing the story:This story in this game is actually written by the Tier 1 operators while they were deployedoverseas. We had about a dozen on the last game helping us craft that narrative, in this gamewe have got twice that many . . . everything from the dialogue to the chatter to the environ-ments to the character – the best traits of all the guys are all infused into this product.(Gametrailers.com 2012: timings 0.24–0.56)Thus, while the story may appear to be largely fantastical, given the globe trotting,counter-terrorist narrative, the developers emphasise their strong desire to present anauthentic story throughout. Aside from the Tier 1 links, the plot reaffirms the commonlyheld view within both popular culture and the media of an organised network of terroristswho are willing (and able) to acquire significant quantities of deadly explosives whichpose an imminent threat to the USA and its allies: ‘The line between reality and fiction is,especially in the case of this game, it is sometimes hard to tell which side of the line youare on’ (Interview, Greg Goodrich, executive producer of MoHW in Gametrailers.com2012: timings 3.27–3.36).In a notable and significant addition to the promotional campaign, the game devel-opers also made a series of 2–3 minute films announcing official partnerships between thedevelopers of the game and weapons and military equipment manufacturers. Starting on 7March 2012 (6 months before the game’s release), the films were released, generally on aweekly basis, with ‘partners’ such as London Bridge Partnership (7 March 2012, who‘make the best tactical nylon gear, harnesses, backpacks and protective gear on the planet’262 N. Robinson(EA 2012a, 1)), Mechanix (14 March 2012, protective gloves), McMillan (21 March2012, Sniper Rifles), SureFire (29 March 2012, weapons technology), LaRue Tactical (19April 2012, optimised battle rifles) and US Optics (26 April 2012, long range sniperoptics/scopes).5Each film contained interviews between Greg Goodrich and senior personnel withinthe featured company in which they described the functionality of their equipment andformally endorsed their involvement with the game: they were thus key to the claims forthe game’s authenticity. Openly celebrating and making explicit the links between thegame and the manufacturers of military weapons, these films provide compelling evidenceof the contribution of military games in producing pro-military messages (militarism).This association with the weapons companies was also highly gendered, and it resulted insignificant political controversy, as discussed below.Spatial/representational dimensions of militarismMilitaristic popular culture is also evidenced through the spatial and representationalaspects of militarism. The promotional videos for MoHW demonstrate that the symbioticrelationship between the game developers and the military had a crucially importantspatial dimension: in capturing the partnerships with the weapons and equipment manu-facturers on film, the videos emphasised that the developer (in the form of ExecutiveProducer Greg Goodrich) and senior staff within the military equipment and weaponscompanies were within ‘touching distance’ of one another. In these films, Goodrich ispresented as enjoying a very familiar relationship with the military partners, conversingwith them in a natural way and utilising their equipment/weapons alongside them. Byplacing Goodrich and the corporate partners together on film – and subsequently placingtheir weapons and equipment directly within the game – the films and game thus create apowerful political geography of militarism. The game, and the associated promotionalfilms, emphasise that spatiality and proximity are integral to the credibility of the game.The political geography of militarism (i.e. the militaristic messages within the games)also contains important representational dimensions. Both games portray the player as aserving US military operative and the story and gameplay emphasise the ‘soldier’s eyeview’, with a strong celebration of the soldier on the battlefield. This occurs through fourinter-related themes:(a) the story of the game. In MoH, the game’s rescue narrative is linked to a strongsense of camaraderie between the ‘heroic’ troops. The Tier 1 operatives/US ArmyRangers are willing to take great personal risk to rescue their ‘buddies’. Thistheme of respect for the soldier is also promoted within the narrative cut sceneswhich show the battlefield commander (Colonel Drucker) willing to risk the wrathof ‘Washington’ (represented by the figure of General Flagg) to rescue hiscaptured personnel;(b) the narratives which occur between the soldiers during the gameplay sequencesand within the cut-scenes which advance the story. Both games engage explicitlywith the theme of loss and sacrifice, showing a number of cases of soldiers killedin action, including two of the playable Spec Ops characters, ‘Rabbit’ and‘Mother’;(c) the first person perspective of the game which aims to enhance the immersion ofthe player;Critical Studies on Security 263(d) battlefield authenticity and realism – shown through ‘realistic’ radio chatter;extensive visceral battlefield action; the setting of the game within the contem-porary War on Terror, and the strong desire to replicate the weapons and tactics ofbattlefield personnel.Spatiality takes on a particular aesthetic quality, as the player embodies the role of amember of the military (inhabits the world of the soldier) and ‘partakes’ in the War onTerror. When combined, these demonstrate the importance and affective power of the pro-military messages within these games (militarism) through their capacity to place theplayer in a scenario and environment in which they gain some capacity to understand therealities confronting contemporary soldiers: the player shares the same physical terrainand, increasingly, the same empathetic space of the playable Special Forces operative. Inthe case of MoH, as discussed below, such representation resulted in significant oppositionto militarism centred on the appropriateness or otherwise of representing the Afghanconflict in a game, and the question of whether or not the player should be able to play asthe Taliban – and hence kill US soldiers – within the multiplayer element of a contem-porary military combat game.Gendered militarismGendered militarism, which is also extremely important to this analysis, was manifest inboth the promotional campaign for these games and their stories and gameplay, in whichmasculine soldiers were clearly demarcated from the feminine. The contributions fromindividual Special Forces personnel to the Tier 1 interview series produced to accompanyMoH set out the attributes required to achieve Tier 1 status, emphasising physical fitness,resourcefulness and intelligence. These were juxtaposed with insights into the sacrificesmade to achieve this position, which were framed in strongly masculine terms, as thefollowing example demonstrates:I wish that the public in general could have an understanding of what guys do. Not just whatthey do operationally, but what they sacrifice for years and years and years in order to be theguy who is at the tip of a spear. For me, I am not a very sociable person – to be quite honest,ask my wife – I don’t consider a lot of people friends, but if you are any innocent personthat’s in harms way, we wanted to be the guys that came and tried to do their best to stop thebully. (Medal of Honor 2010: timings 2.03–2.38)The films associated with MoHW, in particular, those which announced the collaborationsbetween the developers and equipment manufacturers, similarly demonstrated an aestheticand narrative interaction which was strongly gendered:At first, we didn’t think a video game company could ‘get it’, but we were wrong. Once wediscovered their genuine support for the Warfighter, respect for the folks in uniform, and theirexcruciating attention to detail – we had to get involved. Their passion to get things right isinfectious, and it shows in everything they do. Not only can these guys design amazing games,Greg is merciless on actual steel targets at 400 meters with the 5.56 and 7.62 OBRs [OptimisedBattle Rifle]. Saw it with my own eyes. We can’t wait for folks to see what they’ve got planned.It’s going to be epic! (Mark Fingar, Marketing Director, LaRue Tactical in EA 2012b, 1)The above example, which is typical, is focused on an interview between the games’executive producer Greg Goodrich and senior male staff from the respective company264 N. Robinson(here, weapons manufacturer LaRue Tactical). No women feature in any of these films.The films all demonstrate considerable enthusiasm for the collaboration, display a highlyrelaxed inter-personal style of communication and openly celebrate militarism.In terms of the games themselves, there are however striking differences between the twonarratives. In the case ofMoH – which is typical of the military shooter genre – the game haslittle explicitly to say about the interaction between participation within war (a ‘masculineact’) and the maintenance of stable family life (a ‘feminine act’). Gendered militarism is thusconfined to the battlefield and is seen in the ‘realistic’ representations of battlefield life.The one female character who is represented in the game (call sign Gunfighter 11)appears in a single mission (mission 6: Gunfighters) and is an Apache helicopter pilotrather than an elite Tier 1 operative (US Special Forces were until recently exclusivelymale). The player takes on the role of Captain Hawkins, the male gunner who is in theaccompanying helicopter (call sign Gunfighter 6). The in-game narratives within thismission do not objectify the female pilot in anyway, instead taking the form of battlefieldtactical interaction and hence mutual respect. Yet, in positioning the woman as a non-playable character – and one whose helicopter is damaged by enemy fire so she can onlyprovide reconnaissance while you (the player) destroys the enemy – the game commu-nicates the message that it is the actions of men that are central to the winning of the Waron Terror. The player, who takes the role of the male gunner, is responsible for destroyingthe enemies in the game and thus for progressing the story.In contrast, MoHW is unusual within the military shooter genre as its counter-terroriststoryline centres on the consequences which military service has for family life in thehomeland, emphasising that US Special Forces (and troops more generally) make hugesacrifices for their country that resonate within their families. What is perhaps moststriking is the way in which sacrifice is given a profoundly personal and genderedperspective. Much of the gameplay is linked by cut-scenes involving conversationsbetween ‘Preacher’ (the main playable character) and his wife which explore the incom-patibility of his lifestyle as a serving member of Special Forces with maintaining hismarriage and the relationship that he has with his daughter. This comes to a head when hearrives at a metro station in Madrid to collect his wife and daughter – his marriage alreadyunder significant strain – and a terrorist bomb destroys their train, suggesting that thewhole family was killed in the blast. As Preacher awakens in hospital it becomes clear thathis wife and daughter missed their scheduled train and so are both alive. Prior to the bombblast, Preacher had been considering leaving the military to save his marriage but he ispersuaded by his wife whilst recovering in hospital that his ‘service’ in fighting the war onterror is more important than their relationship – this is a sacrifice that the family is willingfor him to take given the importance of his role as a soldier.The theme of sacrifice is literally brought home in MoHW as the character of ‘Mother’(Preacher’s best friend and brother-in-law) is captured and tortured to death towards the endof the game. The game ends with a two and a half minute long cut-scene centred onMother’s military funeral in which Preacher, his wife, her sister (Mother’s wife) andPreacher’s daughter are at the grave side as Mother’s heroism is commemorated.6 Thus,MoHW takes the theme of sacrifice into a very personal place, demonstrating the conse-quences for those left in the homeland of fighting the War on Terror. The story thus directlyreflects the comments made in a number of the Tier 1 films used to accompany the releaseof the earlier MoH game which emphasised the personal cost of service.We can thus identify clear evidence of all of the inter-related facets of militarism setout in the framework above in both games: these aspects come together in the promotionCritical Studies on Security 265and playing of the games to produce militarism within the living rooms of North America,Europe and Australasia.The controversies and opposition to military videogamesThe final part of this article discusses the ways in which the militaristic popular cultureembodied in these games resulted in two particularly important controversies. The first –centred on the game Medal of Honor (MoH) – stemmed from the representational aspect ofmilitarism in terms of the political geographies accessible to the player; the second – centredonMedal of Honor Warfighter (MoHW) – resulted from the explicit exposure and celebrationof the military-entertainment complex. This article articulates the nature of these politicalcontroversies and associated opposition, captured through public statements of politicians,media reports and the commentary of military and videogame industry spokespeople. Inaddition, it also reflects on the importance of players for opposition, demonstrated throughtheir contributions to social media forums which actively opened up spaces for discussionand sites of opposition to these controversies: it was here that players interacted with, andcommented upon, the political controversy as mediated to them through mainstream mediaand videogaming websites. The research process involved reading all of these webposts infull; here I offer a qualitatively-focused yet representative sample which captures the natureof the positions taken by videogame players.In using social media content, comments and interactions to support the analysis, thisarticle contributes to a growing array of work within critical security studies and IR whichsimilarly uses social media. As Carpenter and Drezner argue, ‘Web 2.0 data can provide arich data source from which to draw’ (2010, 261) and social media research can offer‘targeted research of specific communities’ (2010, 260). As they further state, ‘. . .it isimperative that IR scholarship begin to take the new media’s impact on world eventsseriously as a subject of research in its own right. There is a growing debate in the socialsciences about the role these technologies play in the facilitation of “smart mobs” andother forms of transnational civic activism’ (2010, 260). With its focus on capturingpolitical contestation within social media, this article responds to this call. As Ksiazek,Peer, and Lessard (2014, 3) argue ‘comments, as well as replies from other users toalready posted comments, can be seen as representative of high-level interactive engage-ment between the user and content and between the users themselves, respectively’.The controversy and opposition to Medal of HonorIn the run-up to its release MoH met with considerable opposition within both the UK andthe USA. The game was widely condemned due to its multiplayer mode in which it wasoriginally envisaged that players would be able to fight as both American forces and theTaliban. Opposition involved politicians, representatives of military families and the retailsector – the role of players was relatively limited, being overwhelmingly supportive of thedevelopers and broadly hostile to the political controversy.In the USA, opposition developed over the appropriateness of making a game basedon an ongoing conflict, with criticism from US military personnel, victims’ families andthe retail sector: GameStop, in particular, refused to stock the game at any of its 49 shopson military or airforce bases (Kotaku 2010). In the UK, the then Defence Secretary calledfor a ban, stating that he was ‘disgusted’ by the game: it is ‘shocking that someone wouldthink it acceptable to recreate the acts of the Taliban against British soldiers. . . At thehands of the Taliban, children have lost fathers and wives have lost husbands’ (BBC266 N. Robinson2010). These comments were made in spite of the fact that British troops are notrepresented in either the multiplayer or single player elements of the game (BBC 2010).The game’s publishers, Electronic Arts, initially defended the game on the grounds of itssensitive depiction of the realities of contemporary conflict and on the basis that the gamesimply reflected norms typical of children’s play. ‘Most of us have been doing this since wewere seven – if someone’s the cop, someone’s gotta be the robber, someone’s gotta be thepirate and someone’s gotta be the alien’, Amanda Taggart, senior PR manager for EA, toldAOL News. ‘InMedal of Honour multiplayer, someone’s gotta be the Taliban’ (Their 2010).Yet, EA backtracked in response to the controversy before the game’s release, announcing analteration to the game that renamed the Taliban as Opposing Force (OP-FOR) in the multi-player element of the game. While this was enough to defuse much of the immediateopposition, it did not result in a reversal of the sales ban on GameStop military bases andled to additional criticism of the industry’s immaturity due to its inability to tackle con-troversial subjects (Parkin 2010). Certainly, while the controversy preoccupied members ofthe political establishment and certain sectors of the military, the videogaming communitywas largely unmoved, with some sections actively hostile to the criticism.The general view among players was that the media and politicians had overreacted.MoH was ‘just a game’:You don’t hear people complaining when you play Nazis, Russians or Vietcong because theywere the ‘bad guys’ at some point. If people think that because I play Taliban in a game it’ll makeme wan’t to go blow myself up, that’s like saying i can fly because i drank redbull. The Talibanare a fighting force and an ‘army’ in their own right and the sooner people realise this the better.A small minority of contributors in fact suggested that they would prefer to play as theTaliban, either because they welcomed the possibility of shooting at American troops orbecause they thought the Taliban’s AK-47 weapons would be more effective in themultiplayer mode. Perhaps unsurprisingly, such posts frequently provoked hostile debateabout the merits and effectiveness of American action in Afghanistan.Later posts, capturing the reaction from within the gaming community to EA’sdecision to replace the Taliban with ‘OP-FOR’, were overwhelmingly hostile, accusingEA of abandoning the pursuit of authenticity, failing to uphold free speech and kowtowingto the media and critics:We’re not fighting over names. EA claims this game to be authentic. It’s no longer authentic.Coalition troops in Afghanistan don’t fight ‘OpFor’ they fight Talibans and Insurgents. BIGThanks to EA for being political ass kissers for some people that can’t handle the truth aboutwho they’re fighting in this wannabe war.Fuck you EA! How can you remove the Taliban from online? Grow some fucking balls.Whatever happened to free speech?However, a minority of commentators did support the elite-level view that on balance theremoval of the ability to play as the Taliban was the right decision if respect for thecombat troops was EA’s objective:when you’ve been over there and have not returned with some of your buddies. . .the last thingyou want to do is play a game playing Taliban shooting american troops. Medal of Honor madethis game to be authentic and impress Operators and Military troops alike. Not disrespect them.Critical Studies on Security 267The opposition/controversy over Medal of Honor Warfighter7MoHW was also embroiled in significant controversy in the run up to its release, with thegame being widely condemned for its partnerships with the weapons manufacturers. Inspite of the fact that, as discussed above, the developers had been releasing near weeklyvideos promoting the partnerships from March 2012, it was not until August 2012 that thevideogaming media picked up on the story.The story broke with an article on the gaming website The Gameological Society(2012) which reported the formal links between the game and its weapon and equipmentpartners. It also reported that EA’s website allowed direct click-throughs to partners suchas McMillan and LaRue Tactical allowing the purchase of sniper rifles and submachineguns via a sponsored link. Finally, the article reported EA’s intention to allow for thepurchase of a MoH sponsored tomahawk from ‘SOG Knives and Tools’ for $75 (overalllength 12.56” with a 3.5” ‘extended cutting head’).Initially, EA attempted to justify the links on the basis of authenticity and the fact thatthe financial benefits were being channelled into a charity (‘Project Honor’) set up by EAto provide financial support to families of severely wounded Special Operations person-nel. As Greg Goodrich argued in an interview:. . .we’ve been working with these partners because we wanted to be authentic, and we wanted togive back to the communities . . . Every one of those partners, none of them paid a dime forproduct placement – all the money generated went to Project Honor. (Edge Online 2012)However, the story rapidly spread to other gaming media and within 48 hours EA hadremoved the links between the game’s website and the weapons partners and had cancelledthe licensed tomahawk (Eurogamer.net 2012b). What is particularly striking is that thecontroversy was almost totally limited to debate within the videogaming community,encompassing players, gaming journalists and bloggers. Politicians and other political actorsplayed no role, and it was only after the debate had played out within the gaming communityand EA had taken down the links from the games to the weapons companies websites that themainstream media offered any analysis/comment on it, prompted in particular by the SandyHook Elementary School shooting in December 2012 which left 26 dead in the USA andwhich reopened debates about the links between videogame and real world violence (e.g.New York Times 2012; The Hollywood Reporter 2012).Here is a photo ofme performing a full automag dump last Fridaywith a SureFire suppressedMKHP7A1.If you can’t get your hands on a select fire suppressed submachine gun head over to the SureFire websiteand pick yourself up the incredible 800 lumen UB3T InvictusTM Ultra-High Variable-Output LEDflashlight and light someone up! (Executive Producer of MoHWGreg Goodrich in Eurogamer.net 2012a)268 N. RobinsonIn considering the gaming community’s reactions to these partnerships between the weap-ons manufacturers andMoHW it is possible to identify two distinct positions. On the one hand,the posts which directly engaged with the articles tended to condemn the links, rejecting anysuggestion of charitable benefit and arguing that this was a PR disaster in the making:Making a modern military shooter and including links to real life weapons manufacturers seemsto be saying ‘Now you, too, can do the awesome things you just did in this game!’ That isdownright deplorable. I don’t think most players are going to take up the offer. I don’t think itwill lead to some significant increase in violence. But I absolutely cannot stomach the idea.The general tenor of opinion is well illustrated by the following posts which emphasisedthat whilst the link between weapons manufacturers and military games may be inferred,to actively promote associations with inter-linked websites is a step too far:This is infuriating. I’ve been completely on the side of ‘violent video games don’t causeviolence any more than violent books or movies’. But to directly link people to a website thatallows you to purchase the weapons you use in a game? Sorry, that’s crossing the line.Totally agreed. And I’m even a firearms enthusiast. I HAVE bought firearms I’ve enjoyedfrom videogames. But a link right to the site? Yea. . . that crosses a line for me too.On the other hand, while EA’s actions were seen as overstepping the mark, licensing perse was unproblematic. The following examples from the discussion, ‘Does EA’s partner-ship (and direct linking) to gun manufacturers bother you?’ at Giant Bomb (2012) yielded148 posts of which the following are typical:Gun companies make deals with publishers all the time, simply to license the guns. It’s not abig deal at all.It’s no different than any product placement deal. Racing games using real cars, for example.Analysis of these two controversies thus suggests that whilst representational aspects canbe managed by the industry, the explicit and ‘over celebration’ of militarism, particularlywhen so clearly linked to the military-industrial complex, is a step too far.However, in discussing the controversies and opposition prompted by these games,it is also important to highlight the absence of controversy prompted by either thegendered militarism which is so explicit in the advertising and gameplay or the explicitrelationships between the producers and the military personnel who worked alongsidethem to produce the game. What does the silence over gender in terms of thecontroversies tell us about its importance? On the surface, it may undermine itssignificance. But instead I suggest that the lack of controversy suggests precisely theopposite: that gender has become imbued as a form of un-politics to such an extent thatit remains un-problematised and unchallenged. This is perhaps an unsurprising findingto those scholars of gender who frequently emphasise the static nature of genderedmilitaristic representations within popular culture.In relation to the closeness between the games producers and the military, most of thevideogames industry and players seem rather to reward or celebrate that as a legitimatepart of authentication of videogames which makes them more desirable rather than less.But while the soldiers themselves are seen as ‘good, natural and necessary’ in Jackson’sCritical Studies on Security 269(2012) terms, the fate of the Medal of Honor series suggests that the gaming public remainhostile to the explicit celebration of the military-industrial complex.Conclusion: issues for future researchThis article began with the claim that much popular culture is increasingly militaristic andthat this plays an important part in militarism. It emphasised that videogames, as a nowpre-eminent form of popular culture, have been under-examined from the point of view ofscholars of international security. Building a framework for such analysis, the articleargued that in relation to videogames, militarism can be identified through a combinationof the military-entertainment complex, through spatial and representational aspects cap-tured through the ‘political geography of militarism’, and finally through genderedmilitarism.Utilising that framework, the article developed an analysis of the military videogamesMedal of Honor and Medal of Honor Warfighter, and explored how they resulted incontroversy. MoH became controversial when the game suggested allowing representationthat was potentially not of an American or British soldier but rather of a Taliban fighter; inthe case of MoHW, the open celebration of the closeness between the games’ developersand the military-industrial complex made visible in the promotional videos and websiteallowing click-through purchase of real military equipment, caused considerable uneaseamongst gamers and games journalists.8 Videogames – and the discourse around them –thus provide both an insight into militaristic popular culture and a potential space forquestioning that.Furthermore, the role of videogames in the broader process of militarisation ispotentially critical. Stahl (2010) (amongst others) has captured the way in which mili-tarised entertainment has become almost ubiquitous (particularly in the USA) stretchingfrom army recruitment, militarised media, sports and ‘reality’ TV coverage and popularculture including military videogames. He describes what he terms the ‘virtual citizensoldier’, arguing that Militainment Inc. has served to change the citizen from a ‘criticalsocial subject’ to one who through their participation actively demonstrates their supportfor war (2010, 21–30, 41–48). McInnes (2002) similarly emphasises the importance of‘spectatorship’ as an analogy to show the impact on citizens of the move towards TVmediated war as visual spectacle. Such work suggests that military videogames arepotentially integral to citizen transformations and are integral to the process of militarisa-tion. If true, this is critical to future research.Disaggregating process (integral to militarisation) is of course a thorny methodologi-cal challenge. One way forward may be to actively seek better understanding of how theaudience is affected by military videogames, building on existing work within the fields ofcultural anthropology and popular culture and what may be termed the ‘sociology ofgaming’. DeVane and Squire (2008), for example, look specifically at how socio-culturalfactors (in particular race, age and socio-economic background) affect the mediatedunderstandings that male players have of the games that they play. Galloway (2006) haslooked specifically at military games, similarly arguing that how such games are under-stood by players depends on who the player is: a game in which the player takes on therole of a member of the US military fighting in a war in the Middle East has a potentiallyquite different meaning to an American citizen supportive of military action in Iraq andAfghanistan than to a Palestinian youth who may be hostile to such action (Galloway2006, 78–84). Yet, precisely how they are affected, the messages players internalise, andthe extent to which military games impact on values are surprisingly understudied.270 N. RobinsonA specific focus on players as audience could be utilised within the context of aframework such as that offered by Moore and Farands (2013, 227) who in a discussion ofvisual security argue that analysis of the meaning of ‘texts’ such as photographs (or indeedvideogames) requires a multi-faceted approach which seeks to understand the linksbetween the viewer/player and the photograph/game, the photograph/game and its produ-cer/creator, and finally between the context within which the photograph/game wasproduced and the context within which it is being seen/played by the viewer/player.Such a multi-faceted framework could build on the focus offered here on gender andlink this to work on race and ethnicity to build a more comprehensive discussion based onintersectionality.Overall, this article has identified a clear case of military videogames promotingmilitaristic messages. Yet, it also shows that ‘excessive’ celebration of militarism canresult in backlash and active opposition. To those concerned about creeping militarismand militarisation this may prove some source of comfort – how much comfort, of course,will come through further research.AcknowledgementsHeartfelt thanks to Linda Åhäll, Jonathan Dean, Susan Jackson, Jutta Joachim, Andrea Schneiker,Marcus Schulzke, Helen Thornham, members of the POLIS reading group (Leeds University), twoanonymous reviewers and the editors of CSS for their very helpful advice and comments. Earlierdrafts of this article were given at the ISA Annual Conference (2013 and 2014); Popular Culture andWorld Politics conference (2013) and at departmental seminars at the University of Surrey andUniversity of East Anglia (both 2014) – thanks are offered to participants at all those events.FundingThis work was supported by the Swedish Research Council as part of its programme, ‘The DigitizedSociety - Past, Present, and Future’ [grant number 340-2012-5990].Notes1. The data are compiled on the basis of the author’s calculations using http://www.vgchartz.com.The only game with under 25m sales is Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare (2014) with reportedsales of 19.44m as of 3 November 2015.2. Sales data are compiled from http://www.vgchartz.com. Metacritic ratings are at: http://www.metacritic.com.3. A focus on gender does not preclude analysis of other social relations of power such as race andethnicity. Much of the existing literature on military videogames does precisely identify thatOrientalist depictions are widespread; perhaps surprisingly, gender is understudied within thiswork.4. Estimates for the total views of these films and those associated with MoHW are extremelyconservative. They are hosted on multiple YouTube channels such as general gaming platforms(e.g. IGN and Gamespot), which frequently attract more views than the official channels.5. This content has now been removed from the internet by the publisher EA. Opposition to thelinks with the military partners is discussed later in this article.6. The aspect of sacrifice is also emphasised in promotional material produced through formallinks between the game’s makers and the band Linkin Park. The promotional video to theband’s song ‘Castle of Glass’ (which has over 130m hits on YouTube) tells a story whichintersperses footage from the band, actors portraying a story of the trauma military families gothrough when following the death of a loved one, and gameplay footage. The band’s promovideo was thus based on a mutual relationship with the game, providing a summary of the storycontained within the game (Linkin Park 2012. YouTube: 71,552 comments; 138,730,825 views;845,328 likes as of 17 November 2015).Critical Studies on Security 2717. A further controversy emerged in relation to this game over the role of the Tier 1 operativeswho were criticised for getting too close to the developers and giving too much advice. SevenNavy Seals were exposed and fined by the army for giving too much information to the gamedevelopers (Mail Online 2012).8. In reflecting on the consequences of these different forms of opposition, perhaps surprisinglythe impact of the MOHW case was arguably greater: whereas the opposition to MoH involvedthe ‘political establishment’, it had no discernible impact on sales of the game; yet theopposition to MoHW which was primarily confined to the videogaming community had asignificant impact on sales, ultimately resulting in the cancellation of future MoH games.Notes on contributorNick Robinson is Associate Professor in Politics and International Studies, School of Politics andInternational Studies, University of Leeds, UK. His research focuses on the militarisation of socialmedia and the politics of videogames, with specific focus on military games. His recent publicationsin this area have appeared in Political Studies, Political Quarterly and Millennium: Journal ofInternational Studies. He is presently working on a book for the Popular Culture and World Politicsbook series (Routledge) on Videogames and War. His research is funded by a four-year FrameworkGrant from The Swedish Research Council entitled, ‘Militarization 2.0: Militarization’s SocialMedia Footprint Through a Gendered Lens’.ORCIDNick Robinson http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2283-3022ReferencesÅhäll, L. 2012. “The Writing of Heroines: Motherhood and Female Agency in Political Violence.”Security Dialogue 43 (4): 287–303. doi:10.1177/0967010612450206.Åhäll, L. 2015. “The Hidden Politics of Militarization and Pop Culture as PoliticalCommunication.” In Popular Culture and World Politics: Theories, Methods, Pedagogies,edited by F. Caso and C. Hamilton, 63–72. Bristol: E-International Relations.Bacevich, A. J. 2005. The New American Militarism: How Americans are Seduced by War. Oxford:Oxford University Press.BBC. 2010. “Liam Fox Defends Call for Ban of Medal of Honor Game.” BBC News, August 23.Accessed August 23, 2010. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-11056581Berghahn, V. R. 1981. Militarism: The History of an International Debate 1861–1979. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Bernazzoli, R. M., and C. Flint. 2009. “Power, Place, and Militarism: Toward a ComparativeGeographic Analysis of Militarization.” Geography Compass 3 (1): 393–411. doi:10.1111/geco.2009.3.issue-1.Bernazzoli, R. M., and C. Flint. 2010. “Embodying the Garrison State? Everyday Geographies ofMilitarization in American Society.” Political Geography 29 (3): 157–166. doi:10.1016/j.polgeo.2010.02.014.Boggs, C., and T. Pollard. 2006. “Hollywood and the Spectacle of Terrorism.” New Political Science28 (3): 335–351. doi:10.1080/07393140600856151.Boggs, C., and T. Pollard. 2007. The Hollywood War Machine: US Militarism and Popular Culture.Boulder, CO: Paradigm.Carpenter, C., and D. Drezner. 2010. “International Relations 2.0: The Implications of New Mediafor an Old Profession.” International Studies Perspectives 11 (3): 255–272. doi:10.1111/(ISSN)1528-3585.Chan, D. 2005. “Playing with Race: The Ethics of Racialised Representations in E-Games.”International Review of Information Ethics 4: 24–30. http://www.i-r-i-e.net/inhalt/004/chan.pdf.Chan, D. 2010. “Dead-In-Iraq: The Spatial Politics of Digital Games Art Activism and In-GameProtest.” In Joystick Soldiers: The Politics of Play in Military Video Games, edited by N.Huntemann and M. Payne, 272–286. London: Routledge.272 N. RobinsonCrowe, N. 2011. “‘We Die for the Glory of The Emperor’: Young People and SymbolicExperimentation with the ‘Darkside’ in On and Off-line Role Playing Games.” In TheMilitarization of Childhood: Thinking Beyond the Global South, edited by J. Marshall Beier,153–174. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Davies, M., and S. Philpott. 2012. “Militarization and Popular Culture.” In The Marketing of War inthe Age of Neo-Militarism, edited by K. Gouliamos and C. Kassimeris, 42–59. New York:Routledge.Debrix, F. 2008. Tabloid Terror: War, Culture, and Geopolitics. New York: Routledge.Der Derian, J. 2009. Virtuous War: Mapping the Military–Industrial–Media–EntertainmentNetwork. 2nd ed. London: Routledge.DeVane, B., and K. Squire. 2008. “The Meaning of Race and Violence in Grand Theft Auto: SanAndreas.” Games and Culture 3 (3–4): 264–285. doi:10.1177/1555412008317308.EA. 2012a. “The Authentic Source for Tactical Gear.” Accessed March 25, 2013. http://www.medalofhonor.com/blog/2012/03/authentic-source-tactical-gear. Accessed December 3, 2014.NB this URL is preserved at: http://web.archive.org/web/20130102174456/http://www.medalofhonor.com/blog/2012/03/authentic-source-tactical-gearEA. 2012b. “The Dead Center of Precision!” Accessed March 25, 2013. http://www.medalofhonor.com/blog/2012/04/dead-center-precision. Accessed December 3, 2014. NB this URL is pre-served at: http://web.archive.org/web/20120926044821/http://www.medalofhonor.com/blog/2012/04/dead-center-precisionEdge Online. 2012. “EA Backs Down and Pulls Medal Of Honor: Warfighter Tomahawk.”Accessed March 25, 2013. http://www.edge-online.com/news/ea-backs-down-and-pulls-medal-honor-warfighter-tomahawk/Enloe, C. 1988. Does Khaki Become You? The Militarization of Women’s Lives. London: Pandora.Enloe, C. 2004. The Curious Feminist: Searching for Women in a New Age of Empire. Berkeley,CA: University of California Press.Eurogamer.net. 2012a. “The Medal of Honor Tomahawk: When Following ‘a Dotted Line to RealWorld Events’ Stops Being Offensive and Gets Scary.” Accessed March 25, 2013. http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2012-08-14-the-medal-of-honor-tomahawkEurogamer.net. 2012b. “EA Pulls Medal of Honor Tomahawk Promotion.” Accessed March 25,2013. http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2012-08-16-ea-pulls-medal-of-honor-tomahawkGalloway, A. R. 2006. Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic Culture. Minneapolis: University ofMinnesota Press.GameSpot. 2010. “GDC 2010: Medal of Honor Interview w/ Greg Goodrich.” Accessed October 3,2013. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EVSFENobIfoGametrailers.com. 2012. “GDC 2012: Tier 1 Returns Interview.” Accessed September 4, 2013.http://www.gametrailers.com/videos/6i53fj/medal-of-honor-warfighter-gdc-2012–tier-1-returns-interviewGeyer, M. 1989. “The Militarization of Europe, 1914–45.” In The Militarization of the WesternWorld, edited by J. R. Gillis, 65–102. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Giant Bomb. 2012. “Does EA’s Partnership (and Direct Linking) to Gun Manufacturers BotherYou?” Accessed October 14, 2013. http://www.giantbomb.com/forums/general-discussion-30/does-eas-partnership-and-direct-linking-to-gun-man-557008/?page=1Gillis, J. R. 1989. “Introduction.” In The Militarization of the Western World, edited by J. R. Gillis,1–10. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Goldstein, J. S. 2001. War and Gender: How Gender Shapes the War System and Vice Versa.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Haynes, C. 2006. “Armageddon Army: Playing God, God Mode Mods, and the Rhetorical Task ofLudology.” Games and Culture 1 (1): 89–96. doi:10.1177/1555412005281909.Herz, J. C. 1997. Joystick Nation: How Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our Hearts, andRewired Our Minds. London: Abacus.Höglund, J. 2008. Electronic Empire: Orientalism Revisited in the Military Shooter. Game Studies 8(1). http://gamestudies.org/0801/articles/hoeglund.Hunt, K., and K. Rygiel, eds. 2007. (En)Gendering the War on Terror: War Stories andCamouflaged Politics. Aldershot: Ashgate.Huntemann, N., and M. Payne, eds. 2009. Joystick Soldiers: The Politics of Play in Military VideoGames. London: Routledge.Critical Studies on Security 273Jackson, S. T. 2012. “The National Security Exception, the Global Political Economy andMilitarization.” In The Marketing of War in the Age of Neo-Militarism, edited by K.Gouliamos and C. Kassimeris, 214–235. London: Routledge.Kotaku. 2010. “Video Game Pulled Globally from Military Stores over Taliban Inclusion.”Accessed March 10, 2012. http://kotaku.com/5628741/gamestop-pulls-video-game-from-military-stores-over-taliban-inclusionKsiazek, T. B., L. Peer, and K. Lessard. 2014. “User Engagement with Online News:Conceptualizing Interactivity and Exploring the Relationship Between Online News Videosand User Comments.” New Media and Society online first: 1–19. doi:10.1177/1461444814545073.Lenoir, T. 2000. “All But War is Simulation: The Military-Entertainment Complex.” Configurations8 (3): 289–335. doi:10.1353/con.2000.0022.Lenoir, T., and H. Lowood. 2000. Theaters of War: The Military-Entertainment Complex. AccessedOctober 8, 2008. www.stanford.edu/dept/HPST/TimLenoir/Publications/Lenoir-Lowood_TheatersOfWar.pdfLinkin Park. 2012. “Linkin Park – Castle of Glass (featured in Medal of Honor Warfighter).”Accessed March 27, 2013. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ScNNfyq3d_wMail Online. 2012. “Seven SEALs from Bin Laden Team are Punished for Sharing Military Secretswith Creators of Video Game Medal of Honor.” Accessed March 27, 2013. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2230296/7-Navy-SEALs-team-6-punished-sharing-military-secrets-Medal-Honor-video-game-creators.htmlMantello, P. 2012. “Playing Discreet War in the US: Negotiating Subjecthood and Sovereigntythrough Special Forces Video Games.” Media, War & Conflict 5 (3): 269–283. doi:10.1177/1750635212459451.McInnes, C. 2002. Spectator-Sport War: The West and Contemporary Conflict. Boulder, CO: LynneRienner.Medal of Honor. 2010. “Medal of Honor Tier 1 Interview Series – Part Three: Hammer andScalpel.” Accessed March 27, 2013. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qnoxDv4VhHsMills, C. W. 1958. “The Structure of Power in American Society.” The British Journal of Sociology9 (1): 29–41. doi:10.2307/587620.Moore, C., and C. Farands. 2013. “Visual Analysis.” In Critical Approaches to Security: AnIntroduction to Theories and Methods, edited by L. J. Shepherd, 223–235. London: Routledge.New York Times. 2012. “Real and Virtual Firearms Nurture a Marketing Link.” Accessed March 25,2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/25/business/real-and-virtual-firearms-nurture-marketing-link.html?_r=0Parkin, S. 2010. “Military Stores Ban Medal of Honor Despite Removal of Taliban Name.”Gamasutra, October 6. Accessed March 25, 2013. http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/121536/Military_Stores_Ban_Medal_of_Honor_Despite_Removal_Of_Taliban_Name.phpRobb, D. L. 2004. Operation Hollywood: How the Pentagon Shapes and Censors the Movies. NewYork: Prometheus.Robinson, N. 2012. “Videogames, Persuasion and the War on Terror: Escaping or Embedding theMilitary-Entertainment Complex?” Political Studies 60 (3): 504–522. doi:10.1111/post.2012.60.issue-3.Robinson, N. 2015. “Have you Won the War on Terror? Military Videogames and the State ofAmerican Exceptionalism.” Millennium: Journal of International Studies 43 (2): 450–470.doi:10.1177/0305829814557557.Rowley, C. 2010. “Popular Culture and the Politics of the Visual.” In Gender Matters in GlobalPolitics: A Feminist Introduction to International Relations, edited by L. J. Shepherd, 309–325.London: Routledge.Schulzke, M. 2013. “The Virtual War on Terror: Counterterrorism Narratives in Video Games.” NewPolitical Science 35 (4): 586–603. doi:10.1080/07393148.2013.848703.Shapiro, M. J. 2009. Cinematic Geopolitics. London: Routledge.Shepherd, L. J. 2013. Gender, Violence and Popular Culture: Telling Stories. London: Routledge.Sherry, M. S. 1995. In the Shadow of War: The United States Since the 1930s. New Haven, CT: YaleUniversity Press.Šisler, V. 2008. “Digital Arabs: Representation in Video Games.” European Journal of CulturalStudies 11 (2): 203–220. doi:10.1177/1567549407088333.274 N. RobinsonStahl, R. 2006. “Have you Played the War on Terror?” Critical Studies in Media Communication 23(2): 112–130. doi:10.1080/07393180600714489.Stahl, R. 2010. Militainment, Inc: War, Media, and Popular Culture. London: Routledge.Stavrianakis, A., and J. Selby, eds. 2013. Militarism and International Relations: Political Economy,Security and theory. London: Routledge.Suellentrop, C. 2010. “War Games.” New York Times, September 8. Accessed March 27, 2013.http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/12/magazine/12military-t.html?pagewanted=allThe Gameological Society. 2012. “Partners in Arms: In their Quest for Realism, Military Shootershave Ventured into Murky Moral Territory.” Accessed March 25, 2013. http://gameological.com/2012/08/partners-in-arms/The Hollywood Reporter. 2012. “Electronic Arts Cuts Gun Maker Promotion in Medal of HonorWebsite.” Accessed March 25, 2013. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/electronic-arts-cuts-gun-maker-406442Their, D. 2010. “New Video Game will Let You Play as the Taliban.” AOL News, August 13.Accessed September 1, 2010. http://www.aolnews.com/2010/08/13/new-video-game-will-let-you-play-as-the-taliban/Turse, N. 2008. The Complex: How the Military Invades our Everyday Lives. London: Faber andFaber.Critical Studies on Security 275