ABSTRACT: 
In this paper, we study the importance of a consistent description of real work in patient risk assessment in the primary healthcare domain. Through a case study in the context of primary health care, we address the research problem of finding ways to build consistent real work descriptions of the patient risk assessment system in the primary healthcare domain, in order to foster the design of improved work situations and support devices. This is a qualitative field study based on ethnographic observation and semi-structured interviews carried out among professionals involved in the risk assessment process in a primary healthcare facility. The objects of ergonomic work analysis were work places and work situations with focus on human activity, as well as surrounding aspects. The analysis identified elements in the work domain with high cognitive demand and operations that could increase mental workload, providing elements for the earlier stages of the design of work situations and support devices to improve the risk assessment in primary health care. This paper shows the usefulness of real work descriptions in the design for complex situations like the risk assessment in health care, as well the impact of poor descriptions in generating harmful situations for both the patient and healthcare practitioners in the explored domain. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper presents a case study of the execution of a cognitive work analysis (EWA) in a primary healthcare facility responsible for providing assistance to people from a poor community in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. EWA is one possible method to understand organizational constraints and affordances and reveal the way organizations manage complex knowledge structures and contributing to the design of new support systems. We present a case study using EWA as an approach for the analysis of work situations in complex systems like health care, as means to address the following questions: How can work situations be enhanced and support devices be designed in order to improve the risk assessment process in primary health care? We suggest that EWA might be one approach to capture the richness of human work in this environment. The analysis of how workers actually perform rather than describing how work has been prescribed to be performed, and the study of differences between these aspects provides a range of design opportunities. We present a case study using EWA as an approach for the analysis of work situations in complex systems like health care, as means to address the following questions: How can work situations be enhanced and support devices be designed in order to improve the risk assessment process in primary health care? We believe that the results we present in this paper have the conceptual and practical significance of helping designers to understand the implications of work descriptions in the design for complex situations like risk assessment in health care. Our results also aim to minimize the impact of poor descriptions in generating harmful situations for both the patient and healthcare practitioners in the explored domain. Furthermore, the case study of EWA contributes with transformations of complex, dynamic, and high demanding work situations, like patient risk assessment. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords Complex systems  Ergonomic work analysis  Primary health care  Risk assessment 1 Introduction Healthcare systems are struggling to respond to multiple challenges in a complex and constantly changing world, while high levels of inequity in health status still exist, both globally and within nations. To improve the quality of services, healthcare systems must use multifaceted approaches integrated with local context, involving sus- tained action and engagement across multiple levels (Reid et al. 2005). One of the major processes in health care is the evalu- ation of patients’ risks and the corresponding triage according to their conditions. This process involves the identification of symptoms, listening to the patient’s com- plaints and expectations, and evaluating the patient’s vul- nerabilities. It’s a dynamic and singular process, and patients and professionals are both responsible for the decisions made. These decisions can be critical as they & Alessandro Jatoba´ jatoba@fiocruz.br Hugo Cesar Bellas hbellas@fiocruz.br Renato Bonfatti bonfatti@fiocruz.br Catherine M. Burns c4burns@uwaterloo.ca Mario Cesar R. Vidal mvidal@ergonomia.ufrj.br Paulo Victor R. de Carvalho paulov@ien.gov.br 1 Escola Nacional de Sau´de Pu´blica (ENSP), Fundac¸a˜o Oswaldo Cruz – FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 2 Department of Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada 3 Instituto Alberto Luiz Coimbra de Po´s-Graduac¸a˜o e Pesquisa em Engenharia – COPPE, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 4 Instituto de Engenharia Nuclear (IEN), Comissa˜o Nacional de Energia Nuclear (CNEN), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 123 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 DOI 10.1007/s10111-015-0355-x involve the possibility of harmful situations both for the patient and the healthcare workers. Furthermore, the risk assessment process encompasses organizational practices and procedures that may not be fully disseminated, as well as clinical traditions and prac- tices, presenting singular combinations of knowledge. This hampers the use of an algorithmic approach, limits the usefulness of currently available support tools, and chal- lenges the design of support tools. Thus, we propose that an ergonomic approach can be useful in this case, as modeling can help to understand the knowledge structures and cognitive demands that can occur in these situations. Ergonomic work analysis (EWA) is one possible method to understand organizational constraints and affordances and reveal the way organizations manage complex knowledge structures and contributing to the design of new support systems. In this paper, we present a case study of the execution of a EWA in a primary healthcare facility responsible for providing assistance to people from a poor community in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. In the following subsections, we describe our research topic and the research questions we will address. In Sect. 2, methods used are described, while in Sect. 3 we present our results. In Sect. 4, we present discussion, and in Sect. 5, we present our conclusions. 1.1 Research problem and questions In health care, one of the major barriers in designing suitable medical devices is the prevailing idea that safety and success in clinical procedures depend mostly on the abilities and training of healthcare workers. Not only does this create an attitude that problems can be trained away, it reduces the motivation to closely examine the tools that people use in their work or the understanding of how they use them (Norris et al. 2014). In any sociotechnical systems, work is underspecified and humans adapt their behavior to cope with the system’s inherent complexity, and such a fact makes it difficult for analysts to build descriptions of work performance (Car- valho 2011). Traditional approaches that are common in health care like standardization and division of labor look effective under normal conditions. However, they may create gaps and increase risks for hazardous situations under abnormal conditions (Nemeth et al. 2011). Moreover, the dynamic behavior of complex systems is also influenced by human characteristics like fatigue, mood, and emotions, as well as interaction with other people and with the environment, the influence of the past experiences and culture of the people working within the system (Norman 1980). In some ways, human decision makers strengthen systems due to human flexibility and ability to adapt to changes that face the system (Ahram and Karwowski 2013). Thus, in this paper we address the problem of finding ways to build consistent descriptions of the actual work performed on patient risk assessment system in the primary healthcare domain, in order to foster the design of improved work situations and support devices. We suggest that EWA might be one approach to capture the richness of human work in this environment. The analysis of how workers actually perform rather than describing how work has been prescribed to be performed, and the study of differences between these aspects provides a range of design opportunities. We present a case study using EWA as an approach for the analysis of work situations in complex systems like health care, as means to address the following questions: • How can work situations be enhanced and support devices be designed in order to improve the risk assessment process in primary health care? • What are the contributions from ergonomics to the design of improved work situations and support devices for risk assessment in health care? We believe that the results we present in this paper have the conceptual and practical significance of helping designers to understand the implications of work descrip- tions in the design for complex situations like risk assess- ment in health care. Our results also aim to minimize the impact of poor descriptions in generating harmful situa- tions for both the patient and healthcare practitioners in the explored domain. Furthermore, the case study of ergo- nomic work analysis we described here contributes with transformations of complex, dynamic, and high demanding work situations, like patient risk assessment. 1.2 Research setting This study was carried out in a primary healthcare facility in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. According to the Brazilian healthcare policy, access to healthcare services must be universal, including actions for promotion, protection and recovery, with priority given to preventive activities. Thus, primary health care turns out to be the major strategy in the Brazilian healthcare system, as it is characterized by a set of actions, both individual and collective, in order to cover promotion and protection of health conditions, disease prevention, diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation and main- tenance of health. Currently, primary health care in Brazil is mostly rep- resented by the family healthcare strategy, developed through the performance of care practices by healthcare teams in delimited territories, considering social aspects of the locations in which patients live. In the family 216 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 healthcare strategy, assistance occurs both in primary healthcare facilities and in people’s residences. In Fig. 1, we can see the basic structure of the reception of patients by the family healthcare strategy. Before visiting the patient’s residence, professionals become aware of patient’s current risk state. In the healthcare facility, this is not possible, since patients arrive without appointments. Either way, all patients in the pri- mary healthcare system must undergo risk assessment before getting assistance. The risk assessment process consists in the evaluation of patients’ severity and vulner- ability, resulting in the prioritization of care actions. This process is based on the protocol described in Manchester Risk Rating Scale (Manchester Triage Group 2005), in which colors are assigned to patients according to the severity of their conditions. The original protocol consists of five colors (black, red, yellow, green, and blue, considering black the worst patient conditions and blue the best patient conditions); however, the primary healthcare facility in which our study was carried out uses a modified version of the risk scale in which the color black is not present, and the worst patient conditions are represented by the color red. 2 Methods Primary data are based on a qualitative field study carried out with ten professionals directly involved in the risk assessment process, along with two managers who were indirectly involved with the risk assessment process in a healthcare facility. The objects of analysis are work places and work situations with focus on human activity. The context is the workplace and its surrounding aspects. Data collected by means of ethnographic observation (Myers 1999; Nardi 1997) and semi-structured interviews through conversational action (Vidal and Bonfatti 2003) were recorded through photographs, videos and notes. Through ethnography, the observed group and its culture issues are understood by living in the same environment and making the things that the people make, trying to act the way they act while collecting empirical data. This way it is possible to understand how and, mainly, why the activities are done in one determined way, because the phenomenon is studied inside the social, cultural, and organizational context. This strategy of gathering data allows grasping social scenes with its conflicts, misunder- standings, negotiation processes, and creation of consen- sual arrangements to avoid prescriptive rules (Junior et al. 2010). From the point of view of the activity analysis (Enges- tro¨m 2000), as the subjects are observed in actual work settings, the physical, organizational, and cultural con- straints provide background for inferences and hypotheses about cognitive activities, which are going to be and vali- dated with the participants in further steps of the analysis. This study is in accordance with the ethical principles of the Resolution no. 466/2012 of the Brazilian National Council of Health Care/Brazilian Ministry of Health regarding scientific research involving human beings and has been approved by the ethics committee of the Sergio Arouca National School of Public Health/FIOCRUZ. 2.1 EWA as a formative work analysis approach The human interaction with a physical system always consists of actions, i.e., changes of the spatial arrangements of things, i.e., the body and external objects. Actions have extensions in time, and decompositions of a current activity into a sequence of actions can be done in many waysFig. 1 General structure of patient reception Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 217 123 (Rasmussen 1979). Through the study of workers’ behavior in work situations, EWA increases understanding about how workers actually see their problems, indicates obsta- cles for the accomplishment of activities, and enables these obstacles to be removed through ergonomic action (Wisner 1995a, b). Activity is a system of human performance, individually and societally, whereby subjects work in order to achieve an outcome. Human activity is performed in a multifaceted, mobile, and rich way, presenting variations of content and form (Engestro¨m 1999; Hutchins 1994). Any activity car- ried out by a subject includes goals, means, the process of molding the object, and results. The goals of an activity appear as the foreseen result of the creative effort. More- over, while performing the activity, the subjects also change themselves. Societal laws manifest through human activities that construct new forms and features of reality, turning material into products (Davydov 1999). From the activity theory perspective, cognition is a set of unconscious mental operations automatically unfolding over time or voluntary conscious cognitive actions (Kap- telinin et al. 1995). These two levels of information pro- cessing are interdependent and mutually influenced. Thus, activity is a goal-oriented system. The goal of activity is a conscious representation of a desirable result. As a system, task consists of cognitive and motor actions, cognitive operations, and processes required in order to achieving a goal. The complexity of the task is determined by the number of elements in the system, the specificity of each element, the manner in which they interact, and the modes in which the system can function (Bedny et al. 2014). Like other activity-centered approaches such as the course-of-action analysis framework, the EWA approach can also be useful for the analysis of both computerized and non-computerized work situations, and it’s also focused on the analysis of workers’ actual work situations, aiming for the design of improved new work situations. Inspired by the some critics of early human-centered sys- tems, design approach based on human factors instead of human actions, and in the French traditional ergonomics (Norman and Draper 1986; Ombredane and Faverge 1955; Wisner 1995a, b), the course-of-action approach (Theureau 2003) proposes the study of the human system by the human interaction with the environment through tasks, cultural differences, behavioral acts, performance, and learning. The EWA approach takes a similar path and provides a structured set of phases and tools that simplify the data collection and the construction of models. Both approaches give high emphasis in the transition between the analysis and the design of intervention pro- jects; however, the EWA approach focuses on the defini- tion of recommendations and their validation with workers. Relationships are very important for EWA. The main idea is that ergonomists must be as close as possible to work situations, observing the activity from as close as they can and validating recommendations directly with workers. In order to accomplish that, the EWA approach provides tools to define and describe groups and explicit responsi- bilities for workers and ergonomists during the analysis. The aim is to reduce tensions during the ergonomic inter- vention, as workers become part of the group that builds the solution, and help keeping the flow of information about how work situations are going to be transformed (Carvalho 2006). EWA is also involved with musculoskeletal disorders caused by work posture, wrong movements, inadequate furniture, or other work-related because these issues are important factor to be considered in ergonomic projects; however, psychosocial, cognitive, and individual factors also contribute to the development of work-related injuries (NIOSH 1997; Corlett and Bishop 1976). Therefore, understanding work activities using EWA enables investi- gations about physical disorders and discovering of sociocognitive implications to work, and it is compatible with other frameworks and tools for cognitive analysis and modeling. Both EWA and cognitive work analysis (CWA; Vicente 1999) give emphasis in the identification of intrinsic work constraints and how these constraints affect the behavior of workers. However, EWA also takes into account the influence of physical components of the work environment in workers’ mental and physical distress, and the impacts of changes in the workplace settings—not only through the inclusion of new technology—but also transforming the overall work setting, influencing workers’ moves, postures, processes, tools, and equipment. Difficulties of the work situation, perception of the worker, the strategies workers adopt to satisfy work demands, and potential risks of hazards involved in work performance lead to differences between the prescribed work (task) and the actual work (activity). In order to describe social relation in healthcare environments, we must have a deeper understanding of social relations that involve multiple teams with overlapping or competing interests (Jiancaro et al. 2014). Thus, EWA is centered on activity analysis, opposing the study of workers’ motion on tools or devices, focusing on observing how workers actually perform their activities. Moreover, especially in complex work situations, situ- ated cognition is the basis for activity. In general, organi- zations develop work systems and support technologies imagining a system that is supposed to be constant in terms structure, time, and demands. However, in the real world, to cope with variations, there is the need of continuous adjustments in the operational performance, and sequences 218 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 of tasks may vary enormously and quickly, both individ- ually and among groups of workers. In these cases, the hazards of performance may occur due to the high degree of indetermination of the demands of the task (Ombredane and Faverge 1955) and the high degree of performance adjustment needed to cope with variations (Hollnagel 2012). Thus, as the systems do not enable workers to be aware of important signals, which could be used as basis for their decisions, the work analysis must focus on cognitive issues in a broad sense, rather than only on humans as processing information units, or in physical constraints in work performance. To access workers’ situated cognition and, hence, the intelligence of the workers, we must perform detailed observation of their behavior (Wisner 1995a, b). 2.2 A four-phase approach to ergonomic work analysis In this paper, we propose the use of a four-phase approach to EWA as can be seen in Fig. 2. This representation of EWA as a spiral process indicates that phases might be performed iteratively until the final results are obtained. Iteration is the act of repeating the process in order to achieve the expected goal (Pressman 2014; Sommerville 2010). In ergonomics, the operation comprises observable parts of work (movements, postures, communication), and non- direct observable issues such as the cognitive functions like perception, attention, memory, problem-solving, and deci- sion making. These are the essentials of activities descriptions, i.e., the true working conditions. In the next subsections, we explain the four phases of the proposed approach for EWA. 2.2.1 Framing The expected result of the first phase of EWA is the elic- itation of the initial objectives, i.e., the general idea workers and organization (represented by the managers) have about problems that affect work situations and the solution they initially desire. In subsequent phases, this initial objectives shall be confirmed (or not), turning into the description of actual ergonomic needs for both sharp end workers and managers. For example, workers might be complaining about a specific tool, saying that it is not appropriate for the work that is being performed. However, the tool might not be the actual problem. Problems might be organizational, Fig. 2 Phases of EWA Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 219 123 involving the processes in which the tool is being used, like the way the tool is being used. This investigation will be performed iteratively during subsequent phases and will be essential for the elicitation of the ergonomic needs in the global analysis phase. In the framing phase, we also describe general aspects of the organization, such as its history, location, relation with its surroundings, and context. Deeper relationships are also established to facilitate observations and interviews during fieldwork. In order to enhance the exchange of general and specialized knowledge, mobilizing the professional com- petencies available requires engagement to deepen rela- tionships between workers, managers, and ergonomists (Vidal et al. 2009). During this research, we use three major groups of people: • Support group: professionals that work in the organi- zation and are meant to support fieldwork. They are stakeholders. This group comprises directors and man- agers responsible for the initial demand, as well as giving access to the organization, enabling the ergonomic action; • Focus group: this group comprises the subjects of the analysis. This group must indicate which work situa- tions will be analyzed and why (more representative, critical, more time consuming, with more cognitive demands) and, therefore, which professionals will be observed and interviewed; • Accompaniment group: professionals that work in the organization and will join ergonomists as part of the analysis team. They can be recommended by the support group, but must definitely have strict relations with the focus group, as they will be the ones to reveal essential aspects of how workers perform their tasks, enable observations, put ergonomists in contact with professionals at work, arrange meetings between ergonomists and workers, validate results, etc. Professionals can be members of more than one group, and there’s no limit for the amount of professionals in each group. 2.2.2 Global analysis The objective of the global analysis phase is to describe, by means of context analysis and operation, which work sit- uations actually deserve intervention. In order to accom- plish this phase’s objective, the functional context of the organization must be described, e.g., its population, work organization, work processes, and scope. Among all work situations studied during the framing phase, in order to focus on the situation that actually needs intervention and define the ergonomic needs, we suggest the use of an analytical tool called EAMETA (Ricart et al. 2012). The EAMETA tool is used to evaluate six aspects in work situations as follows: • Space: includes physical features of the workspace; • Environment: comprises workspace elements, circum- stances or conditions and their parameters in means of how they interfere in work performance; • Furniture: includes furniture and objects people use to perform their activities and the way those objects are disposed in the workspace; • Equipment: includes tools professionals use to perform their activities; • Task: comprises rules, regulations, procedures, and objectives that determine the workers’ functions; • Activity: includes the necessary steps workers must perform to accomplish their objectives. A set of workers must be selected for interviews in which they will give their opinions about work situations, scoring each one of the aspects from 1 (very bad/very high demanding) to 5 (very good/very low demanding). The ergonomist responsible for the analysis also observes and evaluates the work situation and provides a score. The final score is calculated by averaging the scores given by workers and by the ergonomist. An aspect which final score is below 3.0 is potentially a candidate for intervention. This phase is meant to describe a pre-diagnosis of work problems and define the focus of the analysis, as the starting point is the initial objective, mainly characterized by worker’s complaints. However, worker’s impressions about causes of distress might not be actual problems, especially when dealing with cognitive issues. Thus, it’s important to keep in mind that results of further phases of EWA might bring the analyst back to this phase, and new applications of the EAMETA tool can be necessary to find out actual problems. 2.2.3 Operation modeling Operation modeling consists of collecting evidence on actual activities, making possible a preliminary diagnosis of work situations. This is obtained by delimiting and measuring observable aspects of work and enables the description of how people work. Focused on the opportunities for intervention detected during the global analysis, this phase aims the under- standing of workers’ behavior, operating strategies, pro- cesses, and interactions. It implies the description of workers’ activity, including their postures, efforts, infor- mation recovery and flow and decision making. It’s also important to delimit the determinants of work that might be organization-related (design of the worksta- tion, formal work organization, time constraints, etc.) or 220 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 operator-related (age, anthropometrical characteristics, experience, etc.; Garrigou et al. 1995). This phase must be carried out by observations at the workplace, along with interviews with workers. Flowcharts are used to represent workers’ activities, and the operation model must be complemented by: • A set of problems; • A set of recommendations; • An outline of possible improvements. The set of problems must contain their descriptions, causes, consequences and evidences found during field- work. In the set of recommendations, each one of them must be related to the problems they intend to solve. After that, the expected improvements must be listed. 2.2.4 Validation Validation is the discussion about the ergonomic diagnosis with the EWA support group. It consists in presenting the results of EWA to the support group and discussing the final operation model and its complementary material (problems list, recommendations and outline of possible improvements). In this phase, results of analysis and rec- ommendations are verified and negotiated, resulting in an intervention project. 3 Results Field work sessions have been organized in four groups, one for each phase of EWA as follows: four sessions for framing, eight sessions for global analysis, ten sessions for operation modeling, and one session for validation. Par- ticipation in a team meeting completes the field work as given in Table 1. The framing phase took one session with the general manager, one session with an assistant manager, and two sessions with risk assessment teams. All eight sessions in the global analysis phases were used to apply the EAMETA tool. Four sessions were used to carry inter- views, and four sessions were for general work observations. Operation modeling comprised work observation sessions focused on the problems described in the ergonomic needs. We can see in the following sections that they were necessary to describe cognitive issues involved in decision making inherent to the risk assess- ment process. Two validation sessions with both the support and accompaniment group were necessary to present the intervention project. In this section, we show the results of the EWA carried out in the primary healthcare facility. 3.1 Framing The general administrator of the primary healthcare facility accompanied the first visit, and the relationships necessary to carry out the field work were defined as follows: • Support group members: • General administrator of the primary healthcare facil- ity, responsible for coordinating all areas, from infras- tructure to medical assistance. During interviews, the person in this position pointed out which workplace should be the focus of the analysis due to complaints from workers about work situations, and designated the professional who would accompany the ergonomic action. • Focus group members: • Five orderlies and five nurses whose workplace is a room in the primary healthcare facility entitled ‘‘the risk assessment room.’’ According to the support group, those two groups of professionals are the ones directly involved in patient triage and risk assessment processes. • Accompaniment group members: • Assistant manager of the primary healthcare facility. We called assistant manager one of the four assistants to the general manager. The one that has been designated for the accompaniment group is responsible for supporting professional continuing education in the primary healthcare facility, and his/hers background includes concepts, processes, workflows and tools that are used in the risk assessment workplace that has been pointed out by the support group. Table 1 Field work effort Sessions Time/session Total time (h) Framing 4 1 h 4 Global analysis 8 2 h 16 Operation modeling 10 1 h 10 Validation 2 2 h 4 Participation in team meeting 1 4 h 4 Total 38 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 221 123 Figure 3 shows the representation of the group relations. This phase started with an interview session with the general manager in which for the definition of the focus and accompaniment groups members. In this interview, the general manager pointed out the risk assessment room as a focus of complaints by workers, therefore a potential high demanding work place. Pictures of the risk assessment room can be seen in Figs. 4 and 5. Figure 4 shows the desk with the computer, and we can see in a small sink in the back. There are also two chairs: one for the patient and the other for one member of the risk assessment team. We can see that the desk has two small drawers, used to store medical equipment, paper, etc. The room has also an examination table and two weighing machines, one for adults and one for kids. A second chair, which cannot be seen in Figs. 4 and 5, is used for the second member of the risk assessment team. The layout of the risk assessment room can be seen in Fig. 6. The accompaniment group has also been designated. According to the general manager, the professional and continuing education assistant manager would be the best person to join the ergonomists due to knowledge about Fig. 3 Group relations in the primary healthcare facility Fig. 4 Desk of the risk assessment room Fig. 5 View of the weighing machines and the stretcher in the risk assessment room Fig. 6 Basic layout of the risk assessment room 222 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 work processes as well as proximity to the professionals that should be analyzed. Thus, a second interview session has been carried out with the assistant manager, who is member of the accom- paniment group. The assistant manager confirmed that performing risk assessment is stressful and wearing due to the amount of aspects of the patient that the professionals must be aware of, as well as importance of the decisions that are made. The assistant manager testimonial can be seen below: • The risk assessment is the major cause of distress in the clinic. Professionals don’t like to perform it, and when they do, they end up their shifts very exhausted. During these first sessions, we have been informed that the relation between scheduled and emergency consulta- tions is an index for tracking and evaluation of success rates in medical procedures. It is an important index as patients arriving spontaneously looking for care must pass through the evaluation of risk and vulnerability process which includes biological and socioeconomic aspects. On data extracted from the information system used on the primary healthcare facility, analyzing 2800 consulta- tions in November 2013, 53 % of the nursing care visits are not scheduled. In the case of medical care visits, this number rises to 76.6 %. Only in dental care visits, that number is below half and still reaches 23.4 %. The foun- dations of primary health care lie on health promotion and disease prevention. Therefore, as most patient receptions are happening spontaneously, i.e., without booked appointments, the primary healthcare assistance service loses its major characteristics. The two remaining sessions of this phase have been carried out with the focus group. Five orderlies and five nurses participated in non-structured interviews about essential aspects of their activities, to describe principles, relations, work organization, and harmful situations. Both nurses and orderlies stated that they have to keep attention in many aspects, not only of the patient, but the work environment, such as patient’s physical conditions, patient records and history, as well as be aware of the amount of patients in the waiting rooms, routing patient to the correct treatment, etc. According to the members of the focus group, interruptions are very common, as other teams must communicate with them all the time, but sometimes patients who are supposed to be in the waiting room also interrupt them, seeking for information or assistance. Based on data collected during the interview sessions in this phase, we defined the initial objective as follows: The ergonomic evaluation of risk assessment work- place, due to distress it causes on workers and its potential for generating harmful work situations. 3.2 Global analysis At the end of this phase, we were able to describe a pre- diagnosis of the risk assessment work in the primary healthcare facility and, thus, to define the ergonomic need, i.e., the actual harmful work situation faced by workers that should be mitigated. 3.2.1 Focusing with the EAMETA tool Work in the risk assessment room is performed by five teams of two professionals (one nurse and one orderly). For the application of EAMETA, four teams have been inter- viewed and observed while performing their activities; of the ten members of the focus group, one nurse and one orderly could not be interviewed neither observed due to lack of availability. Four interview sessions and four observation sessions have been carried out. Results can be seen in Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 where T1 to T4 rep- resent the teams that were interviewed and observed. For the ‘‘space’’ criteria problems related to circulation and workplace area were detected, once the risk assessment room is located in a small space in the corner of the pri- mary healthcare facility. It causes also communication problems since workers must seek information about the patient outside the room. Circulation is also hampered by crowding in the waiting area. For the criteria ‘‘environment,’’ we can see in Table 3 that the risk assessment room doesn’t have serious lighting or ventilation problems. It has good windows and natural lighting and ventilation as well as a silent air conditioner. As we can see in Table 4, the furniture aspects present low average value. During observations, we could see that although the chair workers use is good, the desk has not enough space to dispose documents, notes, and the com- puter. During interviews, workers stated that desk is too small and there’s no drawer and closet for personal belongings, and this could be confirmed during observa- tions. However, most of the interviewed professionals also Table 2 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Space’’ with the EAMETA tool Space T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Ceiling height 4 5 4 4 4 4.13 Circulation 4 1 1 2 1 2.5 Workplace area 4 4 4 4 1 2.5 Windows 5 5 4 4 4 4.25 Visibility 4 5 4 4 4 4.13 Communication 2 1 1 2 1 1.25 Average 3.13 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 223 123 said that’s not a big problem, because their shift in the risk assessment room is only 3 h a week. Therefore, the fur- niture aspect is not the first priority for the ergonomics action in the primary healthcare facility. In Table 5, we show that the equipment is suitable, as workers have good computer and available medical instruments. Regarding tasks and activity performance, data on Table 6 show that no serious physical demands could be detected in work performance. Moreover, as we could see before, workers do not stay in the workplace for long periods of time. However, cognitive demands are very high in the risk assessment as given in Table 7. Along with high memory usage, workers must remember a large amount of infor- mation about patient’s conditions and current clinical conditions such as vital signs, temperature, and blood pressure. Although they have adequate computers, the software they used doesn’t have functionality to store all variables they use, making them use very volatile tools like sheets of papers and post-it stickers. Therefore, this infor- mation is not stored and can’t be reliably transmitted. We could observe that during the diagnosis process, which can take about 10–15 min, workers must keep in mind not only the protocol to be followed in each case, but information like blood pressure values, current weight and height, eventual fever status, as well as patient history and values previously stored in their records—recovered sometimes electronically and sometimes on physical paper records. Table 3 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Environment’’ with the EAMETA tool Environment T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Natural lighting 4 4 4 4 2 3 Artificial lighting 4 5 5 5 4 4.36 Noise 4 4 4 2 4 3.75 Smell 4 5 4 5 4 4.25 Temperature 4 4 4 2 4 3.75 Ventilation 4 5 5 4 4 4.25 Average 3.89 Table 4 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Furniture’’ with the EAMETA tool Furniture T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Chair 1 1 4 4 4 3.25 Desk 1 1 1 1 1 1 Drawer 1 1 1 1 1 1 Closet 1 1 1 1 1 1 Average 1.56 Table 5 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Equipment’’ with the EAMETA tool Equipment T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Computer 4 4 4 4 4 4 Medical instruments 5 5 5 5 5 5 Average 4.5 Table 6 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Physical demands’’ with the EAMETA tool Physical demands T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Laying 5 5 5 5 2 3.5 Physical strength 5 5 5 5 5 5 Visual 5 5 4 4 4 4.25 Listening 5 5 5 5 5 5 Speaking 4 2 4 2 4 4 Average 4.35 Table 7 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Cognitive demands’’ with the EAMETA tool Cognitive demands T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Attention 1 1 1 1 1 1 Focus 1 1 1 1 1 1 Memory 1 1 1 1 1 1 Reasoning 1 1 1 1 1 1 Awareness/interpretation 1 1 1 1 1 1 Decision 1 1 1 1 1 1 Average 1 Table 8 Evaluation of the criteria ‘‘Organizational demands’’ with the EAMETA tool Organizational demands T1 T2 T3 T4 Ergonomist Score Time pressure 1 1 1 1 1 1 Division of tasks 5 5 5 5 5 5 Interruptions/interferences 1 1 2 1 1 1.13 Cooperation 4 4 4 4 1 2.5 Procedures 1 1 1 1 1 1 Average 2.12 224 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 During observations, we could also see that interruptions are common, as other professionals interrupt them to get information and sometimes they must go outside the risk assessment room to get information themselves. Talking with other workers in other teams is an important activity in risk assessment, especially because much information about patients are tacit and can only be obtained by talking to other teams that have previously given those patients assistance. Interviews and observations let us infer that most information seeking occurs to make workers aware of as much aspects as they can about patients’ conditions, which are influenced not only by their current clinical status, but by the conditions of their families, and social conditions like employment, residence situation, safety, etc. Being aware of all these aspects without adequate support is very difficult, making awareness a very high demanding element in performing risk assessment. Attention is also a very high demanding element, as workers must be fully concentrated. We could see that constant interruptions make it difficult to keep their focus on the evaluation of patients’ conditions and to all protocols that must be followed to evaluate patients’ clinical and social conditions. We must also point out the pressure that is imposed by the importance of correct diagnosis, which means life or death of patients as well as other problems as overcrowding of emergency rooms or increase on waiting times. Shift hours, interferences, and interruptions increase time pressure, as given in Table 8. The lack of standard procedures to perform assessments also increases organi- zational demands. The primary healthcare managers made some effort in establishing some procedures and protocols for risk assessment. However, they are not followed by all teams. During interviews, we could see some workers complaining about the lack of training on such protocols. We could also notice that even when the team knows the protocols and procedures, some situations prevent them from applying such procedures, which makes them work- around. Only two evaluations (workplace area, for the space and cooperation, for the organizational demands) show discrepancy between the opinion of workers and result of the observation by the ergonomist. There hasn’t been significant discrepancy among the opinions of work- ers either. In the case of the discrepancy in the workplace area criterion, we could infer that workers are used to the size of the risk assessment room. During field research, we could notice that most rooms in the primary healthcare facility are the same size, so workers might be resigned about it. From our point of view, the room should have more space, enabling workers to perform their tasks more comfortably. The discrepancy in the evaluation of the cooperation criterion might have a similar reason. We believe that the fact that the workers must share important information with lots of other professionals without appropriate support, making them go outside of the room or being interrupted many times, is a harmful situa- tion. However, the results of the EAMETA indicate that they don’t see any harm in this situation. Observations of work situations were very important to capture and describe stressors, specifically cognitive ones which couldn’t be diagnosed only by asking workers what they’re feeling. To understand cognitive functions, we have to appreciate the context in which they are carried out (Crandall et al. 2006). 3.2.2 Pre-diagnosis and elicitation of the ergonomic needs The risk assessment process is a sub-process of the primary care triage. Triage is the first contact between healthcare professionals and patients and is the act of receiving and listening to patients’ complaints. It is considered the fun- damental process in performing primary healthcare actions. As part of triage, the purpose of risk assessment is to deepen the evaluation of demands that patients present to healthcare professionals. Data collected during fieldwork indicated that bad risk assessments were mischaracterizing the primary healthcare system in the clinic where this work was carried out, as most of the assistance provided in the clinic was emer- gency care rather than preventive action. Primary care should prioritize preventive care and the promotion of health. The results of the global analysis also indicate poor standards for risk assessment and difficulties that workers have in applying the existent protocols due to problems like variability, pressure, and work overload. In this case, workarounds unsettle the risk assessment process. We could see during observations that similar patient condi- tions received completely different risk scores. This issue makes workers uncomfortable, as can be seen in the fol- lowing testimonials: • ‘‘When a patient is assisted by the nurse that made his assessment, we do not assign a color to him.’’ • ‘‘Sometimes I forget to assign a color and assist the patient anyway.’’ • ‘‘Sometimes we receive a patient complaining of a symptom and we are not aware that this is not his first visit, but rather a return to the clinic.’’ At the end of this phase, we defined the ergonomic needs as follows: The standardization of the risk assessment process, making criteria more visible, reducing the need of memorize data already available may minimize Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 225 123 variations in activity and the needs of performance adjustments enabling a more reliable application of the risk assessment and facilitating practitioners decision-making. 3.3 Operation modeling In the primary healthcare facility in which this study was carried out, risk assessment is performed by a team of two people (a nurse and orderly) in a once-a-week 3-h shift. The assignment of risk scores is performed according to the model suggested by the Brazilian Ministry of Health, in which colors are assigned to patients according to how severe their conditions are. This model is based on the Manchester Risk Assessment Scale (Manchester Triage Group 2005), which was adapted to the Brazilian health- care strategy, and can be seen in Fig. 7. 3.3.1 Task modeling To describe the procedures and steps, workers follow while performing the risk assessment, two teams have been observed and task flows have been built as shown in Figs. 8 and 9. In Fig. 9, we see that before waiting for his turn, the patient is previously evaluated by the Community Health Care Agent (CHA). Sometimes, after this evaluation, the patient is assisted by the team or sent home. Concerning the activity of assigning risk to patients, variation also occurs. In Fig. 10, we see a scenario in which a patient is presented to Team 1 with a set of symptoms and in the end is assigned the color Red. In Fig. 11, we see the same symptoms being evaluated by Team 2 that, in this case, attributes the color yellow to the patient. These cases illustrate how the process varies with con- text and scenarios, once it is impossible to predict all possible situations. In these scenarios, even though patients present similar symptoms, we could observe different contexts. Moreover, transferring knowledge across con- texts is cost-effective, since such knowledge may refer to training, procedures and regulations, and features of the work environment (Parush et al. 2012). In our observations, we could highlight that patients in the represented cases live in different locations, and in the case presented in Fig. 10 the healthcare facility was not as crowded as in the case presented in Fig. 11. Moreover, the two cases represent different teams, in different moments, thereby different situations. 3.3.2 Problems list In this section, we present the list of problems detected and described during the past phases of EWA. Each problem is entitled and related to collected evidence. In this paper, we list in Table 9 three major problems related to the ergo- nomic needs—the reduction in unwanted variations of the risk assessment process, making criteria visible and their application more uniform, reducing the use of memory, and enhancing the possibility to use other cognitive resources. From this list of problems, we could propose a set of recommendations that aimed to mitigate their impact on work conditions, as we see in the following subsection. 3.3.3 Recommendations Along with recommendations related to transformation of the physical space, new furniture, and others, the devel- opment of a decision support tool with the features listed in Table 10 has been submitted to the support group of the EWA as suggestions to mitigate workers’ cognitive overload. In the following subsection, we explain the possible improvements that could be accomplished with the implementation of an intervention project containing this recommendation. Fig. 7 Risk assessment color scale 226 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 3.3.4 Outline of possible improvements As the result of EWA, complementing the list of problems and recommendations, we presented a set of assumptions about achievable work improvements to the support group, as given in Table 11. The discussion and validation of those results are pre- sented in the next subsection. 3.4 Validation Among all presented problems, only the one entitled ‘‘Lack of standard procedures’’ has not been recognized by clinic managers. They state that the clinic has made many staff meetings to discuss procedures and rules and that many protocols are inherent to clinical practice. However, they agreed that less experienced professionals have more dif- ficulties in following protocols and that the clinic does not have verification procedures to assess how those protocols have been effective. Thus, it was common sense that an information support system could incorporate the risk assessment protocols. This could reduce the gap between the performance of experienced and novice professionals. The support system may also improve cognitive performance, reducing the need to memorize information already available, and Fig. 8 Risk assessment tasks Fig. 9 Variation on risk assessment tasks Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 227 123 managers’ worries about how the protocols have been followed or not. Regarding how the information system could support decision making, the EWA supports group state that the risk assessment is accomplished taking into account many chaotic variables. Thus, we agreed that any support algo- rithm must consider the opinions of experts and variations in the activity itself. Moreover, regarding the retrieval of information about patient’s conditions, members of the support group agreed that there is much tacit and dispersed information, but argued that the most important information is centralized and retrieved by the current information system, although its displays may not be suitable to the operation. We agreed that the future information should provide multiple visualizations of the information in order to increase suitability, although the implementation of these kinds of displays implies some cognitive costs as well (Jun et al. 2013), affecting human performance especially in safety–critical systems (Ding et al. 2015). Moreover, the new system interface must represent the constraints of the work environment in a way that people who use it could clearly perceive them (Burns and Hajdukiewicz 2004; Vicente and Rasmussen 1989; Rasmussen 1986). 4 Discussion There were three core findings from this study. First, that context can have a significant effect on decision making. Second, high information requirements can add signifi- cantly to demands. Finally, we found that the EWA was a useful approach to identify these problems and to generate ideas to help redesign future support tools. Context effects decisions In our case study, we could highlight the importance of the context in the way healthcare workers make decisions. For example, how crowded the facility is influences the perception the healthcare team has about patient’s conditions and, sub- sequently, in the risk score the patient will be assigned. Furthermore, integration of healthcare service systems depends on the quality of coordination processes and effi- cient communication among workers, as well as commu- nication between workers and patients (Nyssen 2011). High information access requirements add demands Results also demonstrate that the retrieving of information about patients is high demanding to workers. There is a large amount of documents to be retrieved on each patient reception, and workers must deal with lots of information on a computer screen and paper, as well as seek for information from other teams, most of the times transmit- ted verbally. The combination of environmental and con- textual settings, information retrieving, and patient examination is a large set of issues that workers must be aware in order to assess patients’ risks. This entails the increase in the probability of inadequate assessments, waste of resources, and harmful situations. EWA was an effective method to identify redesign points To support the design of new support tools, the EWA approach highlights points of tension in work performance, i.e., elements in work situations that cause harm or dis- comfort for workers. This element is important in the extent that it helps delimiting the boundaries of the inter- vention, that is, which parts of the work situation should actually be transformed or supported. Moreover, as the EWA approach can be combined with other work analysis frameworks and processes, it provides important incomes to initial design phases. The results of the EWA, rather than simply providing a list of factors that should be considered in the design, provided descriptions of interactions between the elements of the system as a Fig. 10 Assignment of risk by team 1 Fig. 11 Assignment of risk by team 2 228 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 whole, which enables a human-driven approach to design. Systemic approaches like EWA facilitate understanding the domain and identification of the problems considering diverse points of view. The capability of comprehending problems assumes sensitivity to particularities of the con- text and readiness to acquire knowledge from domain experts (Norros 2014). A concern presented by the support group during vali- dation sessions is that no matter how sophisticated the technological support may be, the final decision must be made by the healthcare professional. This could denote that healthcare professionals distrust technological support to automatize or as substitute of humans in their activities. However, the technological support can be used in way to Table 9 Problems list Title Description Evidence Lack of standard procedures Although the clinic has established a set of protocols for risk assessment, they are hard to follow, especially by unexperienced workers. These protocols are related to the clinical practice or to the use of the risk assessment color scale Although managers state that the clinic has procedures for risk assessment (see Global Analysis in Sect. 3.2) EAMETA indicates that procedures are not followed (see Table 8). Pre- diagnosis also shows testimonials where professionals state that procedures are not followed. Operation models show that sometimes variation in the reception process that affects the way risk assessments are performed. Moreover, we can see in activity flows that similar situations are evaluated differently. It could be not only a demonstration of the lack of standards, but also of variability (see Sect. 3.3; Figs. 8, 9, 10, 11) Large usage of memory Workers must remind the protocol for capture patients’ conditions and, once conditions are captures, must remember the values of the variables related to such conditions. There are no tools to store those variables and workers make use of paper notes, post-its, and other materials to keep such information Testimonials collected during the analysis show that workers forget aspects of protocols sometimes (see Pre-diagnosis in Sect. 3.2). Cognitive demands evaluated with EAMETA also show the large usage of memory (see Table 7) Attention Workers must pay attention to patients’ conditions while being interrupted and coping with interference. As much of information about patient history and social conditions is tacit, workers must interrupt their work themselves to look for that information EAMETA shows many interference and interruptions (see Table 8). Furthermore, it also shows that workers state that they have high needs of cooperation with other teams. Although we couldn’t detect significant communication problems between teams, we could observe that it sometimes affect the level of attention workers have during their activities. Operation models show that situation (see Sect. 3.3; Figs. 8, 9) Table 10 List of recommendations Recommendation Features Development of a decision support tool showing information about patients and option selection in assign risk scores As access to information about patients’ conditions is not centralized, workers make decisions based on the information they collect by their own means An information system could gather the necessary information about patient’s conditions and display it properly to workers, helping them make decisions. The following aspects must be observed: The decision support tool must enable the communication between risk assessment teams It must support the registration of the variables workers evaluate during diagnosis The tool must represent the workflow of risk assessment and its protocols It must be able to retrieve information on patient history It must incorporate the criteria of assignment of risk scores Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 229 123 facilitate work augmenting action possibilities and inserted in the work environment as naturally as possible. Although there has been some effort by software experts in involving users in the development of healthcare infor- mation technology, this has not been enough to ensure proper understanding of the users’ needs and many failure cases remain. Thus, the participation of ergonomics and human factors specialists can be useful to reduce the dis- tance between users’ expression of their needs and the proper formalization of requirements for design purposes (Nie`sa and Pelayo 2010). Furthermore, the way professionals interact with the new system must not be too different than the way they interact with other tools. We suggest that an ecological approach should be adopted in the design of the interface of the decision support tool, as the organization and presen- tation of information are essential in designing displays for safety–critical system. Although during validation sessions professionals had agreed that workers could take advantage of multiple visualizations providing different perspectives on the data, there are also some costs associated with this kind of dis- plays. It involves design costs (i.e., additional computation time to render views), spatial and temporal harms of pre- senting multiple views, and cognitive costs like learning time. 5 Conclusions Healthcare workers’ rules, mental models and use of clinical information are much more complex than meets the eye. Although some repetition of tasks can be noticed, there is enormous variability, as occurrences always have different characteristics. These factors demonstrate the great cognitive effort of healthcare workers while per- forming their activities and how critical the decisions made in such environments are. The application of EWA during field work in a primary healthcare facility in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, let us highlight a set of problems in the risk assessment process, a decision- making process in the family healthcare strategy which imposes high cognitive effort to workers due to its com- plexity and criticality. Moreover, the major recommendation to improve work situations was the development of a decision sup- port tools. We must emphasize that the computerization of work processes without considering workers’ current information requirements produces gaps between work- ers and their devices. When developing support tools, information technology professionals must be aware of the variables and constraints involved in such complex work in order to design and implement tools that reduce cognitive effort instead of increasing it (Jatoba et al. 2012). EWA results pointed out that risk assessment workers have to remember a large set of variables, protocols and tacit information, and such situation must be mitigated. However, more specific cognitive engineering techniques may be applied to deepen the analysis and result in more detailed work descriptions, as decision making in such settings is difficult. Therefore, we suggest that future work could bridge the gap between EWA and the design of support tools both in the human factors and software engineering area, or bringing together elements of both areas to result in information systems that meets the needs of workers in complex systems like health care. Acknowledgments We would like to thank the family healthcare professionals who participated in this study and the staff of the Germano Sinval Faria Health Care Center and School/Oswaldo Cruz Foundation led by Dr. Emilia Correia. This research has been partially funded by the Science Without Borders Program/Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development and by the Group of Ergonomics and New Technologies/Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. References Ahram TZ, Karwowski W (2013) Engineering sustainable complex systems. Manag Prod Eng Rev 4(4):4–14 Bedny GZ, Karwowski W, Bedny IS (2014) Task and its complexity. In: Marek T, Karwowski W, Frankowicz M, Kantola J, Zgaga P (eds) Human factors of a global society: a system of systems perspective. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 203–2010 Table 11 List of achievable improvements Reduce usage of memory Variables and respective values should be stored and retrieved from the system, and workers won’t have to keep them in mind Stabilization of the risk assessment process As the information system should represent the risk assessment workflow, it will be more difficult for workers to perform the risk assessment their own way Reduce tacit information flow Data collected during communication between teams can be registered and incorporated to patient’s history, becoming explicit information Help using the risk assessment protocol The information system will incorporate the criteria that the clinic’s managers have determined as a protocol for the assignment of risk colors to patients. This increases the stabilization of this process and help workers apply such criteria, specially the unexperienced ones 230 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 123 Burns CM, Hajdukiewicz JR (2004) Ecological interface design. CRC Press, Boca Raton Carvalho PVR (2006) Ergonomic field studies in a nuclear power plant control room. Prog Nucl Energy 48:51–69 Carvalho PVR (2011) The use of functional resonance analysis method (FRAM) in a mid-air collision to understand some characteristics of the air traffic management system resilience. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 96:1482–1498 Corlett EN, Bishop RP (1976) Technique for assessing postural discomfort. Ergonomics 19:175–182 Crandall B, Klein G, Hoffman R (2006) Working minds: a practitioner’s guide to cognitive task analysis. A Bradford Book, Florida Davydov VV (1999) The content and unsolved problems of activity theory. In: Engestro¨m Y, Miettinen R, Punama¨ki R-L (eds) Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 39–52 Ding X, Li Z, Dong X, Gao Q, Song F, Wang Q (2015) Effects of information organization and presentation on human perfor- mance in simulated main control room procedure tasks. Hum Factors Ergon Manuf Serv Ind 1:1–11 Engestro¨m Y (1999) Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In: Engestro¨m Y, Miettinen R, Punama¨ki R-L (eds) Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 19–38 Engestro¨m Y (2000) Activity theory as a framework for analyzing and redesigning work. Ergonomics 43(7):960–974 Garrigou A, Daniellou F, Carballeda G, Ruaud S (1995) Activity analysis in participatory design and analysis of participatory design activity. Int J Ind Ergon 15(5):311–327 Hollnagel E (2012) The ETTO principle: efficiency-thoroughness trade-off: why things that go right sometimes go wrong. Ashgate Publishing Ltd, Burlington, USA Hutchins E (1994) Cognition in the wild. MIT Press, Cambridge Jatoba A, Carvalho PR, Cunha AM (2012) A method for work modeling at complex systems: towards applying information systems in family health care units. Work J Prev Assess Rehabil 41(1):3468–3475 Jiancaro T, Jamieson GA, Mihailidis A (2014) Twenty years of cognitive work analysis in health care: a scoping review. J Cogn Eng Decis Mak 8(1):3–22 Jun E, Landry S, Salvendy G (2013) Exploring the cognitive costs and benefits of using multiple-view visualisations. Behav Inf Tech- nol 32(8):824–835 Junior LCS, Borges MR, Carvalho PV (2010) A mobile computer system to support collaborative ethnography: an approach to the elicitation of knowledge of work teams in complex environ- ments. In: Kolfschoten G, Herrmann T, Lukosch S (eds) Lecture notes in computer science, vol 6257. Springer, Berlin, pp 33–48 Kaptelinin V, Kuutti K, Bannon L (1995) Activity theory: basic concepts and applications. In: Blumenthal B, Gornostaev J, Unger C (eds) Human–computer interaction. Springer, Berlin, pp 189–201 Manchester Triage Group (2005) Emergency triage. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, Manchester Myers M (1999) Investigating information systems with ethnographic research. Commun Assoc Inf Syst 2:1–20 Nardi B (1997) The use of ethnographic methods in design and evaluation. In: Helander M, Landauer T, Prabhu P (eds) Handbook of human–computer interaction. Elsevier Science, North-Holland, pp 361–366 Nemeth C, Wears RL, Patel S, Rosen G, Cook R (2011) Resilience is not control: healthcare, crisis management, and ICT. Cogn Technol Work 13(3):189–202 Nie`sa J, Pelayo S (2010) From users involvement to users’ needs understanding: a case study. Int J Med Inform 79(4):e76–e82 NIOSH (1997) Musculoskeletal disorders and workplace factors: a critical review of epidemiologic evidence for work-related musculoskeletal disorders of the neck, upper extremity, and low back, 2nd edn. B. Bernard, Cincinnati Norman DA (1980) Twelve issues for cognitive science. Cogn Sci 4(1):1–32 Norman DA, Draper SW (1986) User centered system design. New perspectives on human–computer interaction. L. Erlbaum Asso- ciates Inc., Hillsdale Norris B, West J, Anderson O, Davey G, Brodie A (2014) Taking ergonomics to the bedside—a multi-disciplinary approach to designing safer healthcare. Appl Ergon 45(3):629–638 Norros L (2014) Developing human factors/ergonomics as a design discipline. Appl Ergon 45(1):61–71 Nyssen AS (2011) From myopic coordination to resilience in socio- technical systems. A case study in a hospital. In: Hollnagel E, Woods DD, Parie´s J, Wreathall J (eds) Resilience engineering in practice: a guidebook, vol 1. Ashgate Publishing Limited, Farnham, pp 219–233 Ombredane A, Faverge J-M (1955) L’analyse du travail. Pr. Universit. de France Parush A, Kramer C, Foster-Hunt T, McMullan A, Momtahan K (2012) Exploring similarities and differences in teamwork across diverse healthcare contexts using communication analysis. Cogn Technol Work 16(1):47–57 Pressman RS (2014) Software engineering: a practitioner’s approach, 8th edn. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, Maidenherd Rasmussen J (1979) On the structure of knowledge—a morphology of mental models in a man–machine system context. Risø-M-2192, Roskilde Rasmussen J (1986) Information processing and human–machine interaction: an approach to cognitive engineering. Elsevier Science Inc, New York Reid PP, Compton D, Grossman JH, Fanjiang G (2005) Building a better delivery system: a new engineering/health care partner- ship. The National Academic Press, Washington Ricart SL, Vidal MC, Bonfatti RJ (2012) Evaluation and control of ergonomics actions in federal public service: the case of FIOCRUZ-RJ. Work J Prev Assess Rehabil 41(1):532–538 Sommerville I (2010) Software engineering, 9th edn. Addison- Wesley, Reading Theureau J (2003) Course-of-action analysis and course-of-action centered design. In: Hollnagel E (ed) Handbook of cognitive task design. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, pp 55–81 Vicente KJ (1999) Cognitive work analysis: toward safe, productive, and healthy computer-based work, 1st edn. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah Vicente K, Rasmussen J (1989) Coping with human errors through system design: implications for ecological interface design. Int J Man Mach Stud 31(5):517–534 Vidal MC, Bonfatti RJ (2003) Conversational action: an ergonomic approach to interaction. In: Grant CB (ed) Rethinking commu- nicative interaction. John Benjamins B.V, Amsterdam Vidal MC, Carvalho PVR, Santos IJL (2009) Collective work and resilience of complex systems. J Loss Prev Process Ind 22:537–548 Wisner A (1995a) Situated cognition and action: implications for ergonomic work analysis and anthropotechnology. Ergonomics 38(8):1542–1557 Wisner A (1995b) Understanding problem building: ergonomic work analysis. Ergonomics 38(3):595–605 Cogn Tech Work (2016) 18:215–231 231 123 