ABSTRACT: 
We conducted a systematic review to identify policy interventions that improve education quality and student learning in developing countries. Relying on a theory of change typology, we highlight three main drivers of change of education quality: (1) supply-side capability interventions that operate through the provision of physical and human resources, and learning materials; (2) policies that through incentives seek to influence behaviour and intertemporal preferences of teachers, households, and students; (3) bottom-up and top-down participatory and community management interventions, which operate through decentralisation reforms, knowledge diffusion, and increased community participation in the management of education systems. Overall, our findings suggest that interventions are more effective at improving student performance and learning when social norms and intertemporal choices are factored in the design of education policies, and when two or more drivers of change are combined. Thus, supply-side interventions alone are less effective than when complemented by community participation or incentives that shift preferences and behaviours. 
 
PREDICTION: 
We conducted a systematic review to identify policy interventions that improve education quality and student learning in developing countries. Relying on a theory of change typology, we highlight three main drivers of change of education quality: (1) supply-side capability interventions that operate through the provision of physical and human resources, and learning materials; (2) policies that through incentives seek to influence behaviour and intertemporal preferences of teachers, households, and students; (3) bottom-up and top-down participatory and community management interventions, which operate through decentralisation reforms, knowledge diffusion, and increased community participation in the management of education systems. Overall, our findings suggest that interventions are more effective at improving student performance and learning when social norms and intertemporal choices are factored in the design of education policies, and when two or more drivers of change are combined. Thus, supply-side interventions alone are less effective than when complemented by community participation or incentives that shift preferences and behaviours. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65What works to improve the quality of student learning in developingcountries?Serena Masino a, Miguel Nin˜o-Zarazu´a b,*aOxford Department of International Development (ODID), University of Oxford, United KingdombUnited Nations University, World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU-WIDER), Helsinki, FinlandA R T I C L E I N F OArticle history:Available online 23 December 2015JEL classiﬁcation:I25I28I38C10O50Keywords:Education qualityStudent learningEducation policyDeveloping countriesSystematic reviewA B S T R A C TWe conducted a systematic review to identify policy interventions that improve education quality andstudent learning in developing countries. Relying on a theory of change typology, we highlight threemain drivers of change of education quality: (1) supply-side capability interventions that operatethrough the provision of physical and human resources, and learning materials; (2) policies that throughincentives seek to inﬂuence behaviour and intertemporal preferences of teachers, households, andstudents; (3) bottom-up and top-down participatory and community management interventions, whichoperate through decentralisation reforms, knowledge diffusion, and increased community participationin the management of education systems. Overall, our ﬁndings suggest that interventions are moreeffective at improving student performance and learning when social norms and intertemporal choicesare factored in the design of education policies, and when two or more drivers of change are combined.Thus, supply-side interventions alone are less effective than when complemented by communityparticipation or incentives that shift preferences and behaviours. 2015 UNU-WIDER. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Contents lists available at ScienceDirectInternational Journal of Educational Developmentjo ur n al ho m ep ag e: ww w.els evier . c om / lo cat e/ i jed u d ev1. IntroductionSince the seminal work of Becker (1962) and Schultz (1961) onthe theory of human capital, education policy has been increas-ingly the object of research, for its intrinsic importance but also forits instrumental value in the improvement of society. Theoreticaleconomic models have emphasised the role of schooling indetermining the returns to education that ultimately fostereconomic growth (Lucas, 1988; Becker et al., 1990; Rebelo,1991; Romer, 1994). Empirical studies show that education andthe policies that facilitate the process of innovation and knowledgecreation have profound effects on the long-run economic growthand development patterns (Barro, 1991; Rebelo, 1991; Benhabiband Spiegel, 1994; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1998). The beneﬁts ofinformation and knowledge diffusion in facilitating economictransactions, productive arrangements, social interactions, andpolitical participation are also widely acknowledged (Sen, 1999).Investing in human capital through education policy has been agrowing priority for developing countries since the post war era,and such efforts are often supported by foreign aid. During the* Corresponding author.E-mail address: miguel@wider.unu.edu (M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2015.11.0120738-0593/ 2015 UNU-WIDER. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access articl4.0/).1970s and 1980s, and with many African nations achievingindependence from colonial powers, much of the education aidfocused on improving access to education via supply-side policies,such as the construction of schools and the provision of equipment(Coombs, 1985; Tilak, 1988). These policies were expected to leadto enhanced productivity, economic growth, and development. Inaddition, improving teaching abilities via training of teachers andreforming learning materials was funded as an effective way ofenhancing education quality (World Bank, 1980). During thatperiod, around 50% of all bilateral co-operation aid went tosecondary education, and nearly a third to tertiary and technicaleducation. These sectors were, in fact, regarded as catalytic forgrowth and development (OECD, 2012). It was not until the late1980s that education aid and public policies began to shift towardsimproving access to primary education, as the latter wasrecognised to have the highest economic returns in developingcountries (Psacharopoulos, 1981, 1985; Psacharopoulos et al.,1986; Petrakis and Stamatakis, 2002; Psacharopoulos and Patrinos,2004; Asiedu and Nandwa, 2007). The shift was followed, in 1990,by the World Declaration on ‘Education for All’, adopted by theUnited Nations Educational Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organisation(UNESCO) and other multilaterals and more recently by the currentformulation of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), whereaccess to education represents a cornerstone for expanding humane under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–6554capabilities and freedoms (UNESCO, 2007). This approach has sincebecome the dominant paradigm of education aid in the developingworld (see Riddell and Nin˜o-Zarazu´a, 2016).More recently, the education aid policy debate has graduallyshifted from access to schooling to improving learning quality. Thetransition is likely to dominate the post-2015 global developmentframework for education development, and can be explained bytwo important factors: ﬁrstly, growing evidence emphasises thatquality of education is what matters for economic development.Hanushek and Kimko (2000) and Barro (2001), for example, ﬁndthat test scores are better predictors of real per capita GDP growththan years of schooling attainment. Hanushek and Woessmann(2008, 2012), Hanushek et al. (2010), Jamison et al. (2007), Lauriniand Andrade (2012), and UNESCO (2011), among others, show thatcognitive skills are more strongly associated with increases inearnings and development outcomes than schooling attainment.The second factor is the recognition that poor quality ofeducation remains endemic in developing countries. UNESCO(2014) reports that 250 million children are functionally illiterateand innumerate despite 50% of them having spent at least fouryears in school. Similarly, in India, more than half of all grade ﬁvestudents’ reading ability stands at grade two level (ASER, 2015).Teacher qualiﬁcations and attendance is equally problematic withless than 75% of primary school teachers in developing countriesbeing trained according to national standards (UNESCO, 2014).Along the same lines, Glewwe et al. (2010) report that teachersfrom rural schools in Kenya were absent 20% of the time; while, inZambia and Pakistan, teachers were absent, respectively, 18 and10% of the time (Das et al., 2004; Reimers, 1993). Other supply-sideconcerns such as overcrowded classrooms, lack of teachingmaterial, and poor infrastructure are also obstacles for goodlearning environments. In sub-Saharan Africa, the rapid increase inschool enrolment rates accompanied by low teacher recruitmentmeans that the pupil-teacher ratios in primary education is nowexceeding 40:1 (UNESCO, 2014). Demand-side factors such asdiscriminatory social norms, group incentive dynamics, andintertemporal choices can also inﬂuence the utilisation ofeducation services.Previous analytical review studies have examined the relation-ship between policy design and cognitive skills and learning atvarious levels of education, while focusing largely on supply-sideinterventions (Glewwe, 2002; Kremer, 2003; Glewwe and Kremer,2006; Kremer and Holla, 2009; Glewwe et al., 2014). Recentsystematic reviews have focused on a number of issues including(i) assessing the effectiveness of policies that improve enrolmentin primary schools (Petrosino et al., 2012); (ii) supply-side anddemand-side factors in school attendance and learning (Krishnar-atne et al., 2013); (iii) school-based interventions lookingexclusively at the evidence from randomised control trials(McEwan, 2014) and (iv) studies with a speciﬁc regional focus(Conn, 2014). This study contributes to the existing debate byconducting a systematic review of the literature on educationpolicies that speciﬁcally target the quality of student learning atbasic education level in developing countries. In line with thisfocus, we decided to consider test scores and depart from theexamination of outcomes such as school enrolment and attain-ment, pupil-teacher ratios, drop-out rates, and repetition rates. Thechoice is motivated by the fact that mere indicators of enrolmentand attainment do not necessarily capture the quality of thedelivered education, and the level of students’ achievement(UNESCO, 2014). Our study collects evidence from experimentaland quasi-experimental studies, and, overall, our ﬁndings suggestthat interventions are more effective at improving studentperformance and learning when social norms and intertemporalchoices are factored in the design of education policies; and whena combination of policy approaches is adopted. We conclude thatsupply-side interventions are less effective alone than whencomplemented by community participation interventions or byincentives that shift preferences and behaviours.The remaining of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2presents a theory of change typology, outlining the drivers thatfacilitate improvements in education quality in developingcountries, while Section 3 presents the systematic reviewmethodology. Section 4 presents the synthesis of evidence, whichis divided into three groups: (i) supply-side capability interven-tions, (ii) incentives for changing preferences and behaviours, and(iii) participatory and community management interventions.Finally, Section 5 concludes by discussing the ﬁndings and drawingsome possible policy implications.2. Policy innovations to improve education quality and studentlearning: a theory of change typologyWe begin the discussion by developing a theory of changetypology based on the systematic review. The theory of changeinvolved, ﬁrst, the identiﬁcation of the targeted outcome, which inour case is student achievement as measured by test scores inreading, writing and mathematics. Secondly, the theory of changeidentiﬁed various transmission channels through which policystrategies impact education quality in developing country con-texts. Typically, a variety of interlinked factors affect the desirableoutcomes overtime. Therefore, it was important to disentangle theshort-term from the medium and long-term objectives that alsoinﬂuence targeting mechanisms and the process of impactevaluation of policies.From the systematic review analysis, we were able to identifythree main drivers of change for advancing education quality andstudent learning in developing countries (see Fig. 1). These consistof (i) interventions aiming to enhance the supply-side capabilitiesof education institutions, (ii) interventions targeting supply-sideand demand-side changes in preferences and behaviours thataffect the utilisation of education services, and (iii) bottom-up andtop-down participation and management interventions. In thefollowing sections we discuss these drivers of change in moredetail.2.1. Supply-side capability interventionsSupply-side interventions aim to raise student achievementsby targeting infrastructure or organisational deﬁciencies through,for example, improving physical infrastructure, providing teachingmaterials, and training and hiring extra teachers. Financialresources provided by governments and/or aid-funded pro-grammes can take the form of directed or generalised ﬁnancialallocations to improve physical conditions of existing schools (asin Paqueo and Lopez-Acevedo, 2003; Bjorkman, 2004; Barrera-Osorio, 2007) or involve the construction of new schools (as inBurde and Linden, 2013). Other studies have also examined theallocation of ﬁnancial resources to provide school materials suchas computers, ﬂip-charts and textbooks, which support thelearning process and improve teaching quality (see for exampleBarrera-Osorio and Linden, 2009; Glewwe et al., 2004; Vermeerschand Kremer, 2005; Glewwe et al., 2009; Evans et al., 2009; Banerjeeet al., 2007; Linden, 2008; He et al., 2008; Muralidharan andSundararaman, 2010).Supply-side education policies have also focused on hiring extrateachers, so as to decrease the prevailing high teacher-pupil ratiosin many developing countries, and also complement permanentteachers with younger, often more motivated, temporary teachers(see e.g. Duﬂo et al., 2015; Asadullah, 2005; Linden, 2008;Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2011). Finally, supply-sidepolicies have also taken the form of management relatedSupply -side capability interventio ns Incenti ves for changing pr eferences and beha viour s Participa tor y and communit y management interven tions Physical infrastruct ure; learn ing materials Extra-teache rs; training sch emes for teachers Pay incent ive s for teachers CCTs, schoo l vouchers , merit -based sch olarshi ps Bottom-up commun ity partici patio n schemes Top-down decentralisat ion reforms Drivers of ch ange InterventionsShort -term des irable outcomesLong -term developme nt goalsImproved educati on systems Reduc tion in opport unity cost of sch ooling; higher demand for educa tion Parents and communit y inv olvement and improv ed manag ement of education High er student achievement performance and improved lea rning Fig. 1. Theory of change ﬂow diagram.S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65 55interventions aiming to improve the functioning and efﬁcacy ofeducation systems as a whole (Garcı´a Palomer and Paredes, 2010;King and Ozler, 2005; Galiani et al., 2008; Lassibille et al., 2010).This type of interventions can be seen as cross-over policy betweenresource-provision and participation-related drivers of change.2.2. Incentives for changing preferences and behavioursMonetary incentives have been used to produce changes in thebehaviour and preferences of agents involved both in the provisionand utilisation of education services, namely teachers, studentsand parents. Incentives for teachers aim to improve the qualityof teaching whereas incentives for students and parents areconcerned more with behaviours and preferences that affect thedemand for, and utilisation of education services. Several studieshave, in fact, shown that, in contexts where the demand foreducational services is constrained by societal and economicfactors, supply physical and human resources alone can oftenresult in a waste of limited resources (Vermeersch and Kremer,2005; Glewwe et al., 2009; Muralidharan and Sundararaman,2010).In this sense, teachers’ commitment to attend the classroomregularly can depend on a number of factors, including the level ofwages and the nature of their contracts (permanent vs. temporary),the distance to the workplace and school facilities, and theexistence of systems to monitor their work shifts and attendance.In some contexts, the provision of monetary incentives can beeffective to discourage absenteeism. In others, teachers mayrespond better to non-monetary incentives, such as monitoringand pay sanctions and other enforcement mechanisms. It has beenreported, however, that such policies sometimes fail to achievelong-term improvements in students learning, by simply encour-aging teachers to boost students’ short-term performance, so as tomeet the target to which the incentives are tied (see discussionbelow on the studies of Rau and Contreras, 2009; Glewwe et al.,2010; Kingdon and Teal, 2007; Duﬂo et al., 2012; Muralidharan andSundararaman, 2011).Similarly, a number of strategies have been deployed targetingthe behaviours of students and their parents. Examples are theColombian school voucher programme PACES, analysed by Angristet al. (2002, 2006), or Chile’s school voucher scheme discussed byContreras (2001), Hsieh and Urquiola (2006), and Anand et al.(2009). These aim to facilitate enrolment and attendance of low-income students in better quality (often private) schools. Schoolvouchers work through two parallel mechanisms: ﬁrst, theyprovide students with the ﬁnancial resources needed to attendschools in more conducive environments. Second, they aim toinﬂuence students’ intertemporal choices and inﬂuence theallocation of time to education over labour supply.Conditional cash transfers (CCTs), and merit-based scholarshipsand grants are also designed to induce behavioural change towardsan increased utilisation of education services (Das et al., 2004;Kremer et al., 2009; Baird et al., 2011). In those cases, the ﬁnancialsupport is conditional upon, or tied to, student and householdbehaviour including school attendance, grade progression, ortest score attainment. In this way, students’ choices are directly38 studies included in the review74 full-tex t articles assessed for eligibil ity220 abstrac ts screened146 studies exclude d due to methodologic al limita tions17800 search hits of related studies throug h Ec onli t, Socia l Science Citation In dex, JSTOR, SCOPUS, Eldis, 3ie da tabase, J-PAL li brary, and Google Scholar17580 non- impact evaluation stu dies ex cludedIdentificationScreeningEligibility36 studies did no t meet the eligibil ity criteria in terms of outc omes, rese arch design and cove rage IncludedFig. 2. Systematic review ﬂow diagram.S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–6556targeted to bring about the desired change in behaviour. Girls areoften given larger income support than boys to compensate forgender bias and normative discrimination (Nin˜o-Zarazu´a, 2011;Martı´nez Franzoni and Voorend, 2012). Low-income and vulnera-ble groups, including ethnic or religious minorities, are alsotargeted by CCTs, as these groups are exposed to higher risk factorsfor school dropouts (Heckman and LaFontaine, 2010; Suh and Suh,2007). As depicted in Fig. 1, by coupling behavioural incentiveswith ﬁnancial resources at the school level, school vouchers, CCTs,and merit-based scholarships effectively cross-over the supply-side of interventions.2.3. Participatory and community management interventionsThe third driver of change runs through bottom-up or top-downparticipatory and community management interventions. On theone hand, bottom-up policies diffuse and disseminate relevantinformation among actors, to raise awareness of community needsfor quality education services and of possible solutions. Often suchinitiatives, in combination with incentives to change preferencesand behaviours, seek to alter discriminatory social norms thatrestrict demand for education services, particularly among girlsand vulnerable groups. Some examples of bottom-up interventionshave been studied in Jimenez and Sawada (1999) and Di Gropelloand Marshall (2005).On the other hand, top-down interventions channel or optimiseresource deployment through management reforms and standardsof practice enforcement. These interventions are often comple-mented by the provision of resources, while the communityparticipatory component serves to rationalise the service ﬂow ofthe education system. Examples of such interventions arediscussed in King and Ozler (2005), Galiani et al. (2008), Garcı´aPalomer and Paredes (2010), and Lassibille et al. (2010). Participa-tory community management interventions can thus be seen as animportant complement to both supply and demand-side drivers ofchange, insofar as they generate conducive environments for socialchange.3. MethodologyWe conducted a systematic review of the literature on thequality of student learning, following the Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins and Green, 2008)and the PRISMA guidelines (Moher et al., 2009). The review isbased on the largest relevant databases available, includingEconlit, Social Science Citation Index, JSTOR, SCOPUS, Eldis, 3iedatabase, J-PAL Library, and Google Scholar.Search criteria included academic articles adopting a rigorousquantitative impact evaluation design, that assessed the effective-ness of policies targeting the improvement of education quality inpre-school, primary, and secondary education, and which werepublished in English. The search was restricted from 1990 onwards.This is due, ﬁrstly, to a limited number of experimental or quasi-experimental studies conducted before 1990. Secondly, 1990 is theyear when the World Declaration on Education for All was adoptedby UNESCO. The Declaration sparked considerable expansion inresearch, as well as in funding and innovation of the education aidarchitecture; this then paved way to the introduction of the MDGsin 2000. In order to diminish the risk of publication bias, weincluded unpublished studies (grey literature), such as workingpapers. Non-academic policy documents such as policy briefs andreports that lack rigorous methodology were excluded from thereview.The search protocol was complemented with a hand search ofreference lists of previous review studies to identify additionalrelevant material. The initial search was repeated at a later stage, inFebruary 2013, to update the review. To make the searchingprocess more efﬁcient, we combined a number of study ‘identiﬁers’that included (i) research design (e.g. RCTs, randomised experi-ment, randomised controlled trial, quasi-experimental method,difference-in-differences, regression discontinuity design, match-ing methods, instrumental variables, structural equation model-ling), (ii) type of intervention (e.g. improved school infrastructure,allocation of extra teachers, school meals, school fees, textbooks,school vouchers, conditional cash transfers), (iii) outcomes (e.g.reading, mathematics, and writing test scores), (iv) education level,which was limited to primary and secondary education, and (v) thecontext of intervention (e.g. rural vs. urban settings, developingcountries, Africa, Asia, Latin America, Middle East). Groupidentiﬁers were combined with the Boolean operator ‘AND’, whilethey were connected with the Boolean operator ‘OR’.We selected 220 studies for screening on the basis of theirabstracts and keywords, out of 17,800 search hits of relatedstudies. Of the 220 studies, 146 were excluded due to methodo-logical limitations, leaving 74 studies that were fully scrutinised onthe basis of their content; of these, 36 did not meet the eligibilitycriteria in terms of outcomes, research design, or coverage. Finally,in total, 38 studies were included for analysis in the systematicreview (see Fig. 2).As the primary objective of this study is to review educationpolicies that improve the quality of learning of basic educationstudents in developing countries, we only included studies thatfocused on student achievement test scores as impact outcomes.As previously mentioned, we excluded other outcomes, such asschool enrolment and attainment, pupil-teacher ratios, drop-outrates and repetition rates. This is due to the fact that test scores insubjects such as mathematics and language are better proxies forlearning performance and achievement, while enrolment orS. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65 57attainment levels do not necessarily give a measure of educationquality. Test scores can be either administered by ofﬁcialinstitutions that oversee students’ grade progression, or duringpre- and post-implementation phases of policies that are analysedby researchers in the context of independent evaluations.It is important to point out that there are a number of issuesregarding the comparability of student test scores across contexts,learning subjects, and grades. For instance, student achievementtest scores for primary school levels do not reﬂect the samecognitive progression of secondary school levels. Comparing thetwo or pooling them together in the same analysis would yieldmisleading conclusions. In addition, internationally comparabletest scores are available for a relative small number ofindustrialised and middle income countries,1 but these are notstrictly comparable with most student achievement test scoresavailable in developing countries. The standardisation of measures,via standard deviations (SD), can nevertheless help us compare theeffectiveness of policies across different types of contexts.Following a programme or intervention, the standard deviationindicates the amount of variation the latter produced in studentlearning, compared to changes in learning observed in a controlgroup. A 0.2 SD change in test scores would amount to a childmoving from the 50th to the 58th percentile of her/his group testscore distribution. In the education literature, an increase of lessthan 0.1 SD is typically considered to be a small effect, while anincrease of more than 0.3 SD is considered a large effect. Anincrease of more than 0.5 SD is regarded as a very large effect(Dhaliwal et al., 2012).Therefore, this study only includes experimental or quasi-experimental studies that use standard deviations of studentachievement test scores to measure policy impact. As explained,this is done to render cross-country comparisons of policy impactmore meaningful; it does not, however, undermine the relevanceof other studies that have adopted qualitative methods ofresearch enquiry. The study also adopts a geographical inclusioncriterion by focusing on studies conducted in countries deﬁned aslow or middle-income by the World Bank’s Atlas classiﬁcationsystem, which is based on gross national income (GNI) percapita.2Out of the 38 selected studies, 23 adopted experimentaldesigns, while the remaining 15 followed quasi-experimentalmethods. The large number of recent studies included in thereview reﬂects the increasing interest in issues related toeducation quality among the research community. With regardto the geographical coverage, the review included studiesconducted in 15 countries located in three major geographicalregions: Central Asia (Afghanistan) and South-Asia (Bangladesh,India); Latin America (Argentina, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador,Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua), and sub-Saharan Africa (Kenya,Madagascar, Malawi, Uganda, Zambia). No studies conducted inMiddle Eastern or North-African countries were identiﬁed, whilesome studies in Central or East Asia did not meet the inclusioncriteria.4. Synthesis of evidenceIn this section, we discuss the synthesis of evidence, followingthe policy classiﬁcation outlined in the theory of change presentedin Section 2. To summarise: the ﬁrst group of policies aims to1 For example, the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA).2 Based on 2011 data on GNI per capita, developing countries were classiﬁed asfollows: low income countries were those with annual GNI per capita of US$1025 orless; lower middle income countries were those with GNI per capita between $1026and $4035; and upper middle income countries where those with GNI per capita inthe rage of $4036–12,475. For more information, see http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classiﬁcations.improve education quality through the strengthening of supply-side capabilities of education systems via, for example, theprovision of computers and extra-teachers. The second group ofpolicies aims to inﬂuence individual preferences and behavioursvia the provision of incentives. This group of policies is furtherdivided into (i) supply-side incentives (e.g. payment incentiveschemes for teachers); (ii) demand-side incentives (e.g. merit-based scholarship programmes), and (iii) supply-side plusdemand-side incentives (e.g. school voucher programmes andCCTs). A third group of policies relies on participatory andcommunity interventions with the objective of improving themanagement of education systems. Examples of these policies arecountry-wide school decentralisation reforms and communityinvolvement programmes. A synthesis of evidence is presented inTable A1 in Appendix A.4.1. Supply-side capability interventionsA number of studies examine policies that provided additionalresources for schools and teachers, in an attempt to improveeducation quality and student learning. Changes in outcomesvaried across contexts, but overall, the analysis suggests that it isnot sufﬁcient to limit policy strategies to the provision of supply-side capabilities. For instance, Asadullah (2005) reports that inBangladesh secondary school achievement test scores were notimproved after reductions in class-size. The author attributed theresult to the lack of complementary learning materials andteaching improvements. This is in line with what the ﬁndings ofthe study by Jones (2016) in this Issue also indicates. Similarly,Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2010) found that, in India,teacher-aid tools, such as exam performance diagnostics, began toproduce positive effects only after they were complemented withpayment incentives tied to student achievement.It appears that demand-side factors often undermine theeffectiveness of supply-side capability interventions. This wasparticularly evident for policies that exclusively provided schoolmaterials. In fact, some of these policies resulted in exclusionerrors, typically of the weakest students. For example, the Mexicancompensatory programme (PARE) analysed in Paqueo and Lopez-Acevedo (2003) aimed to improve access to, and quality of, schoolsin the four poorest Mexican states, by providing ﬁnancialresources. But the adopted top-down targeting mechanism failedto reach the poorest students. Similarly, the textbook distributionintervention analysed in Glewwe et al. (2009) only increased theperformance of the strongest and often better-off students, whilepoorer students were unable to properly understand books writtenin English. Other interventions failed to produce signiﬁcant gainsin student learning because key complementary resources wereneeded before inputs such as ﬂip-charts could result in signiﬁcantlearning improvement (Glewwe et al., 2004).Nevertheless, a group of supply-side capability interventionsdid succeed in raising student achievement test scores. For example,the PACE-A programme analysed in Burde and Linden (2013), whichinvolved the construction of village-based community schools inrural north-western Afghanistan, produced a very sizable effect onboth boys’ and girls’ school test scores. The main channel throughwhich the programme had an impact was the reduced transactioncosts in terms of distance and travelling time pupils had to spendto attend traditional public schools, which are usually locatedfurther away from rural communities. Additional positive evidencefrom supply-side interventions came from Kenya, where schoolmeals and school uniforms improved students’ performance(Vermeersch and Kremer, 2005; Evans et al., 2009). Vermeerschand Kremer (2005) specify, however, that the gains were mainlydue to an induced increased attendance, rather than the result ofimprovements in cognitive abilities through nutritional intake.S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–6558Also, in Kenya, Duﬂo et al. (2015) found that additional non-civil-service contract teachers hired by parent-teacher associationsincreased test scores only for those students that were assignedto the new teachers, which seems to be explained by contractteachers often using more effort than permanent teachers, in orderto get promoted to receive a permanent contract. For the studentsassigned to regular pre-existing teachers, the reduced class sizeresulting from the hiring of extra teachers did not translate in anysizable positive effect on performance. This is consistent with theevidence reported in Asadullah (2005) and Jones (2016) in thisIssue.A number of recent studies have examined whether teachingquality could be enhanced through compensatory or ‘remedial’education schemes, or through new teaching methods such asﬂashcards and computer assisted learning. The outcomes of suchprogrammes are generally positive, with gains in both mathsand language test scores. Something that emerged in more thanone study is that, when interventions substitute teachers’ inputs,their efﬁcacy was lower than when they complemented them(Linden, 2008; He et al., 2009). For example, the study byMuralidharan and Sundararaman (2011) found that, althoughproviding extra schooling materials helped improve studentperformance, supplying additional contract teachers was amore effective policy to improve the quality of learning.Furthermore, the effectiveness of remedial education schemeswas found to be largely driven by the lowest performing pupilswho seemed to have beneﬁted the most from the programmes(Banerjee et al., 2007; He et al., 2008). On the contrary, self-paced computer assisted learning programmes, like the oneanalysed in He et al. (2008), were found to help strongerstudents the most.4.2. Incentive for changing preferences and behavioursWe ﬁnd that, contrary to supply-side capability interventions,incentive policies targeting preferences and behaviours have beenextensively implemented at secondary school levels. This seems toreﬂect programme design features intended to induce shifts inindividual and household behaviour and preferences, particularlyat the time when the opportunity cost of schooling for low incomehouseholds begins to increase. Incentive policies have focused onsupply-side constraints of education systems and/or demand-sideconstraints.4.2.1. Supply-side incentivesPay incentives for teachers have been implemented with theaim of improving teacher attendance and performance. Resultsare mixed: in Chile, pay-incentive tournaments were introducedin secondary schools. The scheme provided monetary incentivesto teachers who improved the performance of secondary schoolstudents over the course of a year. However, the gains in test scoreswere only short-lived and likely to be the outcome of teachers’opportunistic behaviour, whose actions were primarily motived bythe goal of succeeding in the tournament, and not achieving long-term content-based improvements (Rau and Contreras, 2009).Similar evidence has emerged from a teacher pay-incentiveprogramme introduced in Kenyan primary schools. As in theChilean case, it was found that the gains in test scores werethe result of teachers’ short-term opportunistic behaviour tosecure the pay reward (Glewwe et al., 2010).Other similar interventions reported more positive results butonly after they had been combined with monitoring andenforcement devices. In India, for example, Duﬂo et al. (2012)found positive test score effects, which were the result of both pay-incentives and increased monitoring on teachers’ attendance. Alsoin India, Kingdon and Teal (2007) found that pay incentives raisedstudent achievement test scores only in private schools. The resultsappeared to be associated with the nature of contractualarrangements of Indian public schools, where teachers enjoy,unlike in private schools, permanent contracts that diminish thepotential effect of pay incentives. Muralidharan and Sundararaman(2011) also found that both individual and group pay incentivesraised test scores, although individual incentives were moreeffective, with spillovers effects having an impact on test scores innon-incentive subjects. This indicates that complementary poli-cies, such as attendance monitoring and sanction enforcement,together with case-speciﬁc contractual provisions, may inﬂuencethe effectiveness of pay incentives to improve education qualityand learning.4.2.2. Demand-side incentivesDemand-side behavioural incentives have been found toachieve positive impacts on school learning in sub-SaharanAfrican countries, although with some caveats. A Kenyan merit-based scholarship programme, which awarded primary schoolgirls with funds to progress to secondary education, was not onlyeffective in improving student performance but also generatedpositive spillover effects among boys (Kremer et al., 2009). Otherstudies have revealed speciﬁc factors that enhance or limit theeffectiveness of such policies. For example, Nguyen (2008) foundthat a cost effective way to increase test scores in Madagascarwas to provide students and their parents with statistics onreturns to investment in education. Provision of role models was,however, only effective at improving poor students’ performancewhen the role model was herself from a poor background. Daset al. (2004) found, in Zambia, that test score gains were onlyproduced by cash transfers which were not anticipated byhouseholds. The result was associated with the fact thatanticipated grants generated resource substitution and re-distribution effects, which meant that a share of the resourceswere taken away from students who obtained the grant and werere-allocated for other intra-household purposes. Related to thisﬁnding, the study conducted by Baird et al. (2011) amongsecondary school girls in Malawi found that conditional cashtransfers were more effective than unconditional cash transfersin improving student achievement test scores. The resultsstressed the role of conditionalities in inﬂuencing householdinter-temporal preferences and decisions that affected theutilisation of education services.4.2.3. Supply-side plus demand-side incentivesWe also identiﬁed policies that combine supply-side capabilityinterventions with behavioural incentives. Examples of this type ofpolicies are vouchers programmes, which have been extensivelyimplemented in Latin America. These programmes offer, on theone hand, monetary incentives for poor students to attend privateschools that often have better records of teaching performance,and on the other hand, provide schools with the necessaryresources to cover the increased demand for education services.Angrist et al. (2002) and Angrist et al. (2006) report positiveimpacts of the Colombian school voucher programme (PACES)implemented in secondary schools. The renewal of grants isconditional upon satisfactory students’ performance. Evidencesuggests that the programme raised test scores both in the shortterm (Angrist et al., 2002) and in the longer term (Angrist et al.,2006; Barrera-Osorio, 2007). In Chile, a similar voucher pro-gramme was analysed by Contreras (2001), Hsieh and Urquiola(2006) and Anand et al. (2009). The evidence, in this case wasinconclusive: while Contreras (2001) ﬁnds a positive impact, Hsiehand Urquiola (2006) report a decrease in test scores. Following thedecision of some Chilean private schools to charge a fee on top ofthe government voucher, Anand et al. (2009) analysed the testS. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65 59score impact of granting low-income students scholarships toattend those schools. They found that, while students who wereawarded scholarships performed better than the ones in publicschools, no difference existed between the performance ofscholarship-funded students and that of students attending freeprivate voucher schools.The study carried out in Mexico by Behrman et al. (2015)implemented a three component intervention, where pay incen-tives were given to students only, to teachers only, or to both andalso to schools’ administrative staff. The ﬁrst two treatmentsrewarded individual performance whereas the third was designedto elicit collaboration through group performance. The policy wasdesigned to impact multiple levels of the education system. Whileincentives to students only were marginally effective in improvingstudent learning achievements, the intervention suffered fromextensive cheating on the part of students. The teacher-only payincentives were, instead, mostly ineffective. The biggest impactwas, however, that of the combined incentive scheme whichrewarded not only individual performance but also increasedperformance of groups. The authors report cheating-adjustedestimates to account for bias, but what the study highlights is theimportance of carefully assessing the dynamics of such beha-vioural patterns when examining performance-related rewardschemes.4.3. Participatory and community management interventionsParticipatory and community management interventions in-volve bottom-up and top-down policies which, by diffusingknowledge among local communities, parent-teacher associations,and parent committees, raise awareness, and increase participationand involvement in the management of education systems.Examples of bottom-up policy strategies are the EDUCO communityinvolvement scheme in El Salvador, analysed in Jimenez and Sawada(1999), and the PROHECO participation initiative in Honduras,analysed in Di Gropello and Marshall (2005). Both interventionsresulted in improved student achievement test scores.Top-down approaches are more commonly implemented bygovernment education agencies to improve the management andoperational inefﬁciencies of education systems. Examples of thesepolicies are the Nicaraguan and Argentinian decentralisationreforms, analysed in King and Ozler (2005) and Galiani et al.(2008) respectively. Other examples are the multi-level decentral-isation programme in Madagascar analysed, in Lassibille et al.(2010), and the Chilean programme that transferred low-incomestudents to schools reporting best management standards ofpractice (Garcı´a Palomer and Paredes, 2010). These studies reportmixed results: while Garcı´a Palomer and Paredes (2010) foundpositive test score gains for students allocated to better managedschools, Galiani et al. (2008) found that test score gains resultingfrom the Argentinian decentralisation reform failed to reach thepoorest students (Galiani et al., 2008). Autonomy in decisionmaking at school level, following the decentralisation reform inNicaragua, could not explain the increases in test scores either, justthe de facto existence of autonomous management practices (Kingand Ozler, 2005). Similarly, the study by Lassibille et al. (2010), inMadagascar, did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant impact of decentralisationon exam scores.5. ConclusionsThis study has reviewed the available evidence on educationpolicy to identify what works to improve the quality of studentlearning in developing countries. The review has focused onexperimental and quasi-experimental studies of policies thatwere funded by national governments alone and/or with thesupport of donors. We have identiﬁed three drivers of change thatimprove, under certain conditions, student achievement perfor-mance and learning. The ﬁrst driver of change is related tosupply-side elements of education systems, through the provi-sion of additional material and human resources. The seconddriver of change is associated with supply-side and demand-sidefactors that inﬂuence behaviours, and intertemporal choices ofteachers, students, and households. The third driver of change ischannelled through bottom-up and top-down participatory andcommunity management strategies, via decentralisation reforms,and with the involvement of communities in the school systemmanagement.The evidence reviewed suggests that interventions are moresuccessful when two or more drivers of change are combined.Often, the mere provision of physical and human resources isineffective at improving education quality, as unattended demand-related factors can undermine the full utilisation of educationservices. Therefore, intertemporal choices and discriminatorysocial norms need to be factored in when designing educationpolicies. Whenever demand for education is generated viacommunity involvement or behavioural incentive programmes,the review of the available evidence suggests that it is crucial toupgrade simultaneously both infrastructure and administrativecapabilities of education systems, in order to accommodate theincreased demand for education without undermining quality. Thegrowing literature on education policy based on experimental andquasi-experimental methods has helped us to better understandthe underlying mechanisms at play in effective policy implemen-tation. However, more work is still needed to examine the full costsand social beneﬁts of these interventions, and assess the long termimpacts of various types of education policies. This will requireextending the focus of analysis beyond experimental and quasi-experimental research designs, to provide a more informeddiscussion for future education policy strategies in developingcountries.Appendix ASee Table A1.Table A1Synthesis of evidence.Study Setting Funding Study design Study size Intervention Policy outcomeSupply-side capability interventionsPaqueo and Lopez-Acevedo(2003)Mexico (urban and rural);Primary (grade 6)Government RCT 897(indigenous)1024 (rural)1480 (urban)1921 (pooledrural-indigenous)Supply-side educationprogramme (PARE) aiming toreduce inequality and improvequality of primary education in4 poorest Mexican states(a) Rural sector: test scores in Spanishimproved for all, but more so for less poorstudents. When pooling indigenous and ruralsamples, poorest students’ scores increase byonly half that of less poor students overall(b) Urban sector: inconclusive results due toexperimental implementation problemsBarrera-Osorio (2007) Colombia (urban);Secondary (grade 10)Foreign Aid andGovernmentQuasi-experimentalanalysis(propensity scorematching)37,300‘Concession Schools’programme (publiclysubsidised private schools)Maths and reading scoresincreased by 2.4% and 4%respectivelyBarrera-Osorio and Linden(2009)Colombia (urban); Primaryand Secondary (grade 3–9)Government RCT 5201 Integration of computers intolanguage teaching in publicschoolsSmall average treatment effect of about 0.11 SDAbout a third of the students only usedcomputers for IT training rather thanincorporating its use into routine language andmaths classesBjorkman (2004) Uganda (nation-wide);Primary (grade 7)Government Quasiexperimentalanalysis (D-i-D)96 (districts) Government funded per-student capitation grantTest scores in treatment district which hadmore exposure to grant were 0.42 SD higherGlewwe et al. (2004) Kenya (urban and rural);Primary (grade 6–8)Foreign Aid RCT 141,698 Flip-chart provision in primaryschoolsFlip chart provision did not result in anysigniﬁcant increase in test scoresVermeersch and Kremer(2005)Kenya (rural); Pre-Primary Foreign Aid RCT 1326–1350 Subsidised school mealsprovisionTest scores increased by 0.40 SD only in schoolswith better trained teachers. No effect oncognitive abilities, suggesting gains not anutritional effect but increased attendanceincentives explain score gainsGlewwe et al. (2009) Kenya (rural); Primary(grade 3–8)Foreign Aid RCT 7354–12,663 Textbook provision Textbooks did not increase average scores butonly test scores of the strongest students.Weaker students could not read the books asEnglish is most often their third languageEvans et al. (2009) Kenya (rural); Primary(grade 1–4)Foreign Aid RCT 582 School uniforms provision Students’ test scores increase on average by0.25 SDDuﬂo et al. (2015) Kenya (rural); Primary(grade 1)Foreign Aid RCT 6531 Extra contract teacher hired byparent-teacher associations(and reduced class size)Test scores only increased for children assignedto new contract teacher. For the remainingchildren in consequently reduced (by half)classes, no gains take placeBurde and Linden (2013) Afghanistan (rural);Primary (grade 1–8)Foreign Aid RCT,complementedby IVsestimation1374 Effect of village-basedcommunity-schools provisionon test scores and (indirectly)effect of reducing distance toschool on test scoresAttending village-based schools raises testscores by 0.51 SD overall (with stronger impacton girls and on children who would not attendvillage-based schools without treatment).Reducing school distance by 1 mile improvesscores by 0.15 SD (boys) to 0.24 SD (girls).Asadullah (2005) Bangladesh (nation-wide)Secondary (grade 11)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis(regressiondiscontinuity design)2165Effect of class size reduction(following discontinuousrule) on student test scoresSmaller class size does notaffect test scores, possiblydue to secondary schoolstudents being lesssensitive to this. Or becauseclass size only matterswhen coupled withadequate infrastructureand teacher qualityS. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–6560Banerjee et al. (2007) India (urban); Primary(grade 3–4)Foreign Aid RCT (a) 21,936(b) 5523(a) Remedial education in basicliteracy and numeracy skills(b) Computer assisted learningtargeting maths skills(a) Average test scores increased by 0.28 SD,result driven by lowest performing children(b) Maths test scores increased by 0.47 SDLinden (2008) India (urban and rural);Primary (grade 2–3)Foreign Aid RCT 524 (in schoolexperiment)1114 (out ofschoolexperiment)Computer assisted learning, assubstitute (in schoolexperiment) or complement forteacher (out of schoolexperiment)CAL lowered maths scores by 0.57 SD whenimplemented as a substitute for teachers, butimproved them by 0.28 SD when used as acomplement (the result is driven by weakerstudents, whose scores increase by 0.40 SD)He et al. (2008) India (urban and rural);Primary (grade 1–5)Foreign Aid RCT 4882–5327 New teaching methods (PicTalkcomputer machine andﬂashcard games) to improveteaching of foreign language(English)Scores are raised by 0.25–0.35 SD by bothgames and computer-assisted learning. Whenstudents’ own teachers delivered theinterventions, positive spillover raised mathsscores too and weaker students beneﬁted themost. Stronger students beneﬁted more fromthe self-paced computer assisted learningmethodHe et al. (2009) India (urban); Pre-primaryand Primary (grade 1)Foreign Aid RCT 1267–2824 Literacy skills schoolprogramme (three types: inschool, out of school, and pre-school)Pre-school and out of school interventionsgenerated higher gains (0.55 SD and 0.70 SD,respectively) compared to the in-school setting.Highest gains where for ex-ante lowestperforming studentsMuralidharan andSundararaman (2010)India (rural); Primary(grade 1–5)Foreign Aid RCT 48,791 Provision of low cost diagnosticfeedback to teachers onstudents’ performanceA supply-side intervention to provide feedbackdiagnostic was not enough to generate teacherincentives to improve students’ exam scores(companion paper shows that coupled with payincentives diagnostic feedback providesvaluable input)Muralidharan andSundararaman (2011)India (rural); Primary(grade 1–5)Foreign Aid RCT 20,878 (maths)21,049(language)Provision of extra contractteachersTest scores increased by 0.15 SD in maths and0.13 SD in language. Intervention is particularlybeneﬁcial for students in 1st school year and inremote schoolsMuralidharan andSundararaman (2011)aIndia (rural); Primary(grade 1–5)Foreign Aid RCT 12,255–14,797(maths)12,410–14,963(language)Provision of an extra contractteacher and extra schoolingmaterialsProvision of extra resources raised test scoresby 0.10 SD on average, which is 0.13 SD lowersthan the average increase in test scores causedby the pay incentive schemeIncentives for changing preferences and behavioursAngrist et al. (2002) Colombia (urban);Secondary (grade 6–8)Foreign Aid andGovernmentRCT 282 PACES vouchers funding lowincome students’ privatesecondary education (grantrenewal conditional onstudents’ performance)Lottery winners scored on average 0.20 SDhigher on standardised tests. With largerdisaggregated effects for girls than boys.Angrist et al. (2006) Colombia (nation-wide);Secondary (grade 10)Foreign Aid andGovernmentNaturalexperiment(censoredTobit, non-parametricbounds)3541 PACES vouchers funding lowincome students’ privateeducation (grant renewalconditional on performance)Maths and reading scores increased by 0.20 SD.Positive effects go beyond the incentive not tofail tests, gains are also reﬂected in increasedschool choice incentivesContreras (2001) Chile (nation-wide);Secondary (grade 10)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis (twostage leastsquares)56,200 (male)62,900(female)School Voucher System(publicly subsidised privateschools)Average (language-maths) increase of 102 testpoints for male and 86 test points for femalestudentsHsieh and Urquiola (2006) Chile (nation-wide);Primary and Secondary(grade 4 and 8)Government Cross-sectionaland IV analysis84 (schools) Government voucher schemeallowing any student wishingto do so to move from a publicto a private schoolThe reform did not translate in positiveachievement gains: maths test scoresdecreased. The only tangible result has been amiddle class exodus from public schoolsS. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65 61TableA1 (Continued )Study Setting Funding Study design Study size Intervention Policy outcomeAnand et al. (2009) Chile (urban); Primary(grade 4)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis(propensity scorematching)14,036Scholarship provision to lowincome students attendingprivate voucher school whichcharge fees on top of thevoucherLow income studentsattending fee-chargingprivate schools thanks to ascholarship score 0.20 SDhigher than those attendingpublic schools, but score nohigher than low incomestudents attending freeprivate voucher schoolsRau and Contreras (2009) Chile (nation-wide);Primary and Secondary(grade 4, 8, 10)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis(regressiondiscontinuity design and D-i-Dmatching)955–1740Teacher pay incentives to raisetest scores (assessment oftournament competitionvs. ‘gift-exchange’ effect)Competing in a tournamentfor pay incentiveassignment raised testscores. But after winning,teachers do not act uponreception of the bonus in away that maintains thescore gains (e.g. out ofgratitude)Behrman et al. (2015) Mexico (nation-wide,mostly rural); UpperSecondary (grade 10–12)Government RCT 11,300–17,800 ALI: Individual student andteacher pay incentive schemes;and combined incentivescheme to students, teachersand school administrative stafffor both individual and groupperformance improvement.Teacher incentive pay scheme were noteffective on their own, while student payincentive scheme were (0.2–0.3 SD gain). Thebiggest impact was, however, that of thecombined incentive scheme which rewardednot only individual performance but alsoincreased performance of groups (0.3–0.6 SDgain). Estimates are adjusted as cheatingproved to be substantial.Das et al. (2004) Zambia (urban and rural);Primary (grade 5–6)Government Naturalexperimentand IV analysis164 (schools) Anticipated vs. unanticipatedcash transfers for schoolattendanceMaths and language test scores increase morewhen cash transfers are unanticipated byhouseholds. This is because anticipated grantslead to substitution effect of resourcesNguyen (2008) Madagascar (rural);Primary (grade 4)Foreign Aid andGovernmentRCT 11,659(students)Provision of statisticinformation on educationearning returns and/or rolemodelsProviding statistics raises scores by 0.20 SD onaverage, with an impact as high as 0.37 SD forstudents underestimating returns prior to RCT.Rolemodels only increased scores when of low-income background (0.17 SD); with a higherimpact on poorer students (0.27 SD)Kremer et al. (2009) Kenya (rural); Primary(grade 5–6)Foreign Aid RCT 1153–3602(pooledsample)768–2106(Busia)385–1496(Teso)Merit based scholarship awardto fund secondary schoolprogression for girlsGirls’ test score increased by between 0.20 and0.30 SD in Busia district. There is inconclusiveevidence with regards to Teso. The impact alsohad spillover effects on boys’ score increasesand on test scores of girls who were notawarded the scholarship.Glewwe et al. (2010) Kenya (rural); Primary(grade 4–8)Foreign Aid RCT 15,641 Teacher pay incentive schemetied to students’ performancein examsTest scores increased ad-hoc to achieve pay rise(ability to answer MCQs and ﬁlling the gapsquestions). Thus, only test taking skillsimproved but no impact on content learningBaird et al. (2011) Malawi (urban and rural);Secondary (grade 5–8)Foreign Aid RCT 2057 Conditional vs. UnconditionalCash Transfer SchemesTest scores are 0.14 SD higher in English,0.12 SD higher in maths and 0.17 SD higher inoverall cognitive abilities for girls who receivedthe conditional cash transferS. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–6562Kingdon and Teal (2007) India (urban); Secondary(grade 8)Government Cross-sectionaland quasi-experimentalanalysis (IV)360–542 Teacher pay incentive in privatevs. public schoolsA 22% increase in test scores follows an increasein teacher pay from 1 SD below to 1 SD abovethe mean. This is only found in private schools,as a result of increased teacher effort (as publicschool contracts are mostly permanent in India,pay incentives do not generate effort increasesin that context)Duﬂo et al. (2012) India (rural); Informallearning centres (primary)Foreign Aid RCT 1760–1893 Teacher pay incentive andmonitoring scheme to reduceabsenteeismA year after the intervention test scores were0.17 SD higher. Gains are the results of bothincentives and increased monitoringMuralidharan andSundararaman (2011)aIndia (rural); Primary(grade 1–5)Foreign Aid RCT 12,255–14,797(maths)12,410–14,963(language)Individual teacher payincentive scheme and groupteacher pay incentive scheme(school-level)The individual incentive scheme improved testscores by 0.27 SD in maths and 0.17 SD inlanguage. The group scheme increased scoresby 0.22 SD in maths and 0.09 SD in language.Spillovers raised scores in non-incentivesubjects too (from 0.11 to 0.18 SD).Participatory and community management interventionsJimenez and Sawada (1999) El Salvador (rural); Primary(grade 3)Foreign Aid andGovernmentQuasi-experimentalanalysis(structuralequationmodelling andIV)605 EDUCO’s CommunityInvolvement andDecentralisation ProgrammeLanguage test scores increase as a result of thedecentralisation and increased communityinvolvementGarcı´a Palomer and Paredes(2010)Chile (urban); Primary(grade 4)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis(propensity scorematching and structuralequation modelling)225,206 (structural equation)546 (PSM)Low income students’attendance of privatesubsidised SIP schools whichimplement best practice andmanagement standardsMaths test scores increaseby about 32 points in SIPschools as a result of goodmanagement practicesDi Gropello and Marshall(2005)Honduras (rural); Primary(grade 3)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis(structuralequationmodel)975 Community schoolparticipation programme(PROHECO)10% point average increase in the percentage ofcorrect answers for Spanish, maths and scienceexamsKing and Ozler (2005) Nicaragua (nation-wide);Primary and Secondary(grade 4 and 10)Government Cross-sectionaland IV Analysis945 (primary)911(secondary)Decentralisation of school-management reformWhile ofﬁcial autonomy as a status does notimprove learning, when de facto autonomouspractices are considered, an increase in mathstest scores is recordedGaliani et al. (2008) Argentina (nation-wide);Secondary (grade 10)Government Quasi-experimentalanalysis (D-i-D)3273 Decentralisation of secondaryschool systemTest score increased by 3.5% for maths and 5.4%in language, but the gains did not reach thepoorest studentsLassibille et al. (2010) Madagascar (urban andrural); Primary (grade 3–5)Government RCT 22,000 Improvement of schoolmanagement practices atvarious levels ofdecentralisationManagement practices were improved onlywhen the intervention was implemented at alldecentralisation levels (that is, when schoollevel implementation complemented districtand sub-district implementation), but theimpact on test scores was insigniﬁcantSource: Authors.a The study is recorded twice in order to separate the resource provision from the behavioural incentive component of the intervention.S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65 63S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–6564ReferencesAnand, P., Mizala, A., Repetto, A., 2009. Using school scholarships to estimate theeffects of private education on the academic achievement of low-incomestudents in Chile. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28, 370–381.Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Bloom, E., King, E., Kremer, M., 2002. Vouchers for privateschooling in Colombia: evidence from a randomized natural experiment.Am. Econ. Rev. 92 (5), 1535–1558.Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Kremer, M., 2006. Long-term educational consequencesof secondary school vouchers: evidence from administrative records inColombia. Am. Econ. Rev. 96 (3), 847–862.Asadullah, M., 2005. The effect of class size on student achievement: evidencefrom Bangladesh. Appl. Econ. Lett. 12 (4), 217–221.ASER, 2015. Annual Status of Education Report (Rural) 2014. ASER Centre, NewDelhi.Asiedu, E., Nandwa, B., 2007. On the impact of foreign aid in education ongrowth: how relevant is the heterogeneity of aid ﬂows and theheterogeneity of aid recipients? Rev. World Econ. 143 (4), 631–649.Baird, S., McIntosh, C., Ozler, B., 2011. Cash or condition? Evidence from a cashtransfer experiment. Quart. J. Econ. 126 (4), 1709–1753.Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duﬂo, E., Linden, L., 2007. Remedying education: evidencefrom two randomized experiments in India. Quart. J. Econ. 122 (3),1235–1264.Barrera-Osorio, F., 2007. The impact of private provision of public education:empirical evidence from Bogota´’s concession schoolsIn: WB Policy ResearchWorking Papers No. 4121. .Barrera-Osorio, F., Linden, L., 2009. The use and misuse of computers ineducation: evidence from a randomized experiment in ColombiaIn: WBPolicy Research Working Papers No. 4836. .Barro, R., 1991. Economic growth in a cross section of countries. Quart. J. Econ.CVI, 363–394.Barro, R., Sala-i-Martin, X., 1998. Economic Growth. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Barro, R.J., 2001. Human capital and growth. Am. Econ. Rev. 91 (2), 12–17.Becker, G., Murphy, K., Tamura, R., 1990. Economic growth, human capital andpopulation growth. J. Polit. Econ. 98 (5), S12–S137.Becker, G.S., 1962. Investment in human capital: a theoretical analysis. J. Polit.Econ. 70 (5), 9–49.Behrman, J.R., Parker, S.W., Todd, P.E., Wolpin, K.I., 2015. Aligning learningincentives of students and teachers: results from a social experiment inMexican high schools. J. Polit. Econ. 123 (2), 325–364.Benhabib, J., Spiegel, M.M., 1994. The role of human capital in economicdevelopment: evidence from aggregate cross-country data. J. Monetary Econ.XXVIII, 143–173.Bjorkman, M., 2004. Public funding in the educational sector and its effect ontest scores: evidence from UgandaIn: IIES Stockholm University WorkingPaper.Burde, D., Linden, L., 2013. The effect of village-based schools: evidence from arandomized controlled trial in Afghanistan. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 5 (3),27–40.Conn, K., 2014. Identifying Effective Education Interventions in Sub-SaharanAfrica: A Meta-analysis of Rigorous Impact Evaluations. Columbia University.Contreras, D., 2001. Evaluating a voucher system in Chile. Individual, family andschool characteristicsIn: Universidad de Chile and Yale University WorkingPaper Series.Coombs, P.H., 1985. The World Crisis in Education: The View from the Eighties.Oxford University Press.Das, J., Dercon, S., Habyarimana, J., Krishnan, P., 2004. When can school inputsimprove test scores? In: CSAE Working Paper Series No. 25. .Dhaliwal, I., Duﬂo, E., Glennerster, R., Tulloch, C., 2012. Comparative cost-effectiveness analysis to inform policy in developing countries: a generalframework with applications for educationIn: Policy Action Lab WorkingPaper.Di Gropello, E., Marshall, J., 2005. Teacher effort and schooling outcomes in ruralHonduras. In: Vargas, E. (Ed.), Incentives to Improve Teaching. The WorldBank, Washington, DC.Duﬂo, E., Hanna, R., Ryan, S., 2012. Incentives work: getting teachers to come toschool. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (4), 1241–1278.Duﬂo, E., Dupas, P., Kremer, M., 2015. School governance, teacher incentives, andpupil-teacher ratios: experimental evidence from Kenyan primary schools.J. Publ. Econ. 123, 92–110.Evans, D., Kremer, M., Ngatia, M., 2009. The impact of distributing schooluniforms on children’s education in KenyaIn: Poverty Action Lab WorkingPaper No. 169. .Galiani, S., Gertler, P., Schargrodsky, E., 2008. School decentralization: helpingthe good get better, but leaving the poor behind. J. Publ. Econ. 92 (10–11),2106–2120.Garcı´a Palomer, C., Paredes, R., 2010. Reducing the educational gap: good resultsin vulnerable groups. J. Dev. Stud. 46 (3), 535–555.Glewwe, P., 2002. Schools and skills in developing countries: education policiesand socioeconomic outcomes. J. Econ. Lit. 40 (2), 436–482.Glewwe, P., Hanushek, E.A., Humpage, S., Ravina, R., 2014. School resources andeducational outcomes in developing countries: a review of the literaturefrom 1990 to 2010. In: Education Policy in Developing CountriesTheUniversity of Chicago Press, Chicago.Glewwe, P., Ilias, N., Kremer, M., 2010. Teacher incentives. Am. Econ. J. Appl.Econ. 2 (3), 205–227.Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., 2006. Schools, teachers, and education outcomes indeveloping countries. In: Handbook of the Economics of EducationElsevier(Chapter 16).Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., 2009. Many children left behind? Textbooksand test scores in Kenya. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 1 (1), 112–135.Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., Zitzewitz, E., 2004. Retrospective vs.prospective analyses of school inputs: the case of ﬂip charts in Kenya. J. Dev.Econ. 74 (1), 251–268.Hanushek, E., Woessmann, L., 2012. Do better schools lead to more growth?Cognitive skills, economic outcomes, and causation. J. Econ. Growth 17 (4),267–321.Hanushek, E.A., Kimko, D.D., 2000. Schooling, labor-force quality, and the growthof nations. Am. Econ. Rev. 90 (5), 1184–1208.Hanushek, E.A., Machin, S.J., Woessmann, L., 2010. Handbook of the Economicsof Education. Elsevier Science.Hanushek, E.A., Woessmann, L., 2008. The role of cognitive skills in economicdevelopment. J. Econ. Lit. 46 (3), 607–668.He, F., Linden, L., MacLeod, M., 2008. How to teach English in India: testing therelative productivity of instruction methods within the Pratham Englishlanguage education programIn: 3ie and PicTalk Working Paper.He, F., Linden, L., MacLeod, M., 2009. A better way to teach children to read?Evidence from a randomised controlled trial. In: Poverty Action Lab WorkingPaper No. 154. .Heckman, J.J., LaFontaine, P.A., 2010. The American high school graduation rate:trends and levels. Rev. Econ. Stat. 92 (2), 244–262.Higgins, J.P.T., Green, S., 2008. Guide to the contents of a Cochrane protocol andreview. In: Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of InterventionsJohnWiley & Sons, Ltd..Hsieh, C., Urquiola, M., 2006. The effects of generalized school choice onachievement and stratiﬁcation: evidence from Chile’s voucher program.J. Publ. Econ. 90 (8–9), 1477–1503.Jamison, E.A., Jamison, D.T., Hanushek, E.A., 2007. The effects of educationquality on income growth and mortality decline. Econ. Educ. Rev. 26 (6),771–788.Jimenez, E., Sawada, Y., 1999. Do community-managed schools work? Anevaluation of El Salvador’s EDUCO program. World Bank Econ. Rev. 13 (3),415–441.Jones, S., 2016. How does classroom composition affect learning outcomes inUgandan primary schools? Int. J. Educ. Dev. 48, 66–78.King, E.M., Ozler, B., 2005. What’s Decentralization Got To Do with Learning?School Autonomy and Student Performance. Kyoto University, Interfaces forAdvanced Economic Analysis. DP 54, pp. 51–60.Kingdon, G., Teal, F., 2007. Does performance related pay for teachers improvestudent performance? Some evidence from India. Econ. Educ. Rev. 473–486.Kremer, M., 2003. Randomized evaluations of educational programs indeveloping countries: some lessons. Am. Econ. Rev. 93 (2), 102–106.Kremer, M., Holla, A., 2009. Improving education in the developing world: whathave we learned from randomized evaluations? Annu. Rev. Econ. 1, 513–542.Kremer, M., Miguel, E., Thornton, R., 2009. Incentives to learn. Rev. Econ. Stat. 91(3), 437–456.Krishnaratne, S., White, H., Carpenter, E., 2013. Quality education for allchildren? What works in education in developing countries. In: 3ie WorkingPaperInternational Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), New Delhi.Lassibille, G., Tan, J., Jesse, C., Van Nguyen, T., 2010. Managing for results inprimary education in Madagascar: evaluating the impact of selectedworkﬂow interventions. World Bank Econ. Rev. 24 (2), 303–329.Laurini, M.P., Andrade, de Carvalho E., 2012. New evidence on the role ofcognitive skill in economic development. Econ. Lett. 117 (1), 123–126.Linden, L., 2008. Complement or substitute? The effect of technology on studentachievement in India. In: InfoDev Working Paper Series No. 17. .Lucas, R.E., 1988. On the mechanics of economic development. J. Monetary Econ.22 (1), 3–42.Martı´nez Franzoni, J., Voorend, K., 2012. Blacks, Whites, or Grays? ConditionalTransfers and Gender Equality in Latin America. Social Politics: InternationalStudies in Gender, State & Society.McEwan, P.J., 2014. Improving learning in primary schools of developingcountries: a meta-analysis of randomized experiments. Rev. Educ. Res..Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D.G., 2009. Preferred reporting itemsfor systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Br. Med. J.339, 1–13.Muralidharan, K., Sundararaman, V., 2010. The impact of diagnostic feedback toteachers on student learning: experimental evidence from India. Econ. J. 120(546), 187–203.Muralidharan, K., Sundararaman, V., 2011. Teacher performance pay:experimental evidence from India. J. Polit. Econ. 119 (1), 39–77.Nguyen, T., 2008. Information, role models and perceived returns to education:experimental evidence from MadagascarIn: Poverty Action Lab WorkingPaper.Nin˜o-Zarazu´a, M., 2011. Mexico’s Progresa-Oportunidades and the emergence ofsocial assistance in Latin America. In: BWPI Working Paper No. 142. BrooksWorld Poverty Institute, Manchester.Paqueo, V., Lopez-Acevedo, G., 2003. Supply-side school improvement and thelearning achievement of the poorest children in indigenous and ruralschools: the case of PAREIn: WB Policy Research Working Paper SeriesNo. 3172. .S. Masino, M. Nin˜o-Zarazu´a / International Journal of Educational Development 48 (2016) 53–65 65Petrakis, P.E., Stamatakis, D., 2002. Growth and educational levels:a comparative analysis. Econ. Educ. Rev. 21 (5), 513–521.Petrosino, A., Morgan, C., Fronius, T., Tanner-Smith, E., Boruch, R., 2012. Interventionsin developing nations for improving primary and secondary school enrollmentof children: a systematic review. Campbell Syst. Rev. (October) .Psacharopoulos, G., 1981. Returns to education: an updated internationalcomparison. Comp. Educ. 17 (3), 321–341.Psacharopoulos, G., 1985. Returns to education: a further international updateand implications. J. Hum. Resour. 20 (4), 583–604.Psacharopoulos, G., Patrinos, H.A., 2004. Returns to investment in education:a further update. Educ. Econ. 12 (2), 111–134.Psacharopoulos, G., Tan, J.P., Jiminez, E., 1986. Financing Education inDeveloping Countries: An Exploration of Policy Options. The World Bank,Washington, DC.Rau, T., Contreras, D., 2009. Tournaments, gift exchanges, and the effect ofmonetary incentives for teachers: the case of ChileIn: Universidad de ChileWorking Paper Series.Rebelo, S., 1991. Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth. J. Polit. Econ. 99(3), 500.Reimers, F., 1993. Time and opportunity to learn in Pakistan’s schools: somelessons on the links between research and policy. Comp. Educ. 29 (2), 201–212.Riddell, A., Nin˜o-Zarazu´a, M., 2016. The Effectiveness of Foreign Aid toEducation. What Can Be Learned? Int. J. Educ. Dev. 48, 23–36.Romer, P.M., 1994. The origins of endogenous growth. J. Econ. Perspect. 8 (1), 3.Schultz, T.W., 1961. Investment in human capital. Am. Econ. Rev. 51 (1), 1–17.Sen, A., 1999. Development as Freedom. Oxford University Press, Oxford.Suh, S., Suh, J., 2007. Risk factors and levels of risk for high school dropouts.Prof. School Couns. 10 (3), 297–306.Tilak, J.G., 1988. ’Foreign aid for education. Int. Rev. Educ. 34 (3), 313–335.UNESCO, 2007. EFA Global Monitoring Report 2008 Education for All by2015 Will We Make it? United Nations Education, Science and CulturalOrganization, Paris.UNESCO, 2011. Education Counts: Towards the Millennium Development Goals.http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001902/190214e.pdf (accessed18.11.13).UNESCO, 2014. ‘Teaching and Learning: Achieving quality for all’. Education forAll Global Monitoring Report. UNESCO, Paris.Vermeersch, C., Kremer, M., 2005. School meals, educational achievement andschool competition: evidence from a randomized evaluationIn: WB PolicyResearch Working Paper Series, ISSN 1813-9450.World Bank, 1980. World Development Report. Oxford University Press,New York.