ABSTRACT: 
This paper is an examination of the ethical principles of effective altruism as they are articulated by Peter Singer in his book The Most Good You Can Do. It discusses the nature and the plausibility of the principles that he thinks both guide and ought to guide effective altruists. It argues in § II pace Singer that it is unclear that in charitable giving one ought always to aim to produce the most surplus benefit possible and in § III that there is a more attractive set of principles than the ones Singer outlines that ought to guide effective altruists in their philanthropic practices and in their lives more generally. These principles fit better with his practical ambitions and with plausible attitudes about the limits of beneficence. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper discusses the nature and the plausibility of the ethical principles that Singer thinks both guide and ought to guide the behaviour of effective altruists. It argues in  II pace Singer that it is unclear that in charitable giving one ought always to aim to produce the most surplus benefit possible and in  III that there is a more attractive set of principles than the ones Singer outlines that ought to guide effective altruists in their philanthropic practices and in their lives more generally. These principles fit better with his practical ambitions and with plausible attitudes about the limits of beneficence. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttp://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjge20Download by: [76.64.44.167] Date: 08 August 2016, At: 04:19Journal of Global EthicsISSN: 1744-9626 (Print) 1744-9634 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjge20The ethical principles of effective altruismAnthony SkeltonTo cite this article: Anthony Skelton (2016) The ethical principles of effective altruism, Journalof Global Ethics, 12:2, 137-146, DOI: 10.1080/17449626.2016.1193552To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17449626.2016.1193552Published online: 07 Aug 2016.Submit your article to this journal View related articles View Crossmark dataThe ethical principles of effective altruism*Anthony SkeltonDepartment of Philosophy, Western University, London, Ontario, CanadaInvited contribution received 4 May 2016In The Methods of Ethics, Sidgwick remarks thatone who values conduct in proportion to its feliciﬁc consequences, will naturally set a higherestimate on effective beneﬁcence in public affairs than on the purest manifestation of virtue inthe details of private life… A sincere Utilitarian, therefore, is likely to be an eager politician, buton what principles his political action ought to be determined, it scarcely lies within the scopeof this treatise to investigate. (1981 [1907], 495)Sidgwick began the search for such principles in his The Elements of Politics (1919) andin his Practical Ethics (1898). He expressed plausible attitudes on how to do practical ethicsin light of disagreement about ethical fundamentals (Skelton 2006). However, on other ofthe issues he discussed he put forward views that we now ﬁnd quaint (or worse) (Schultz2004) or, as in his discussion of the ethics of luxury, he barely scratched the surface, leavingmuch work undone. None of his immediate philosophical successors took up the chal-lenge. Indeed, no one took it up in any serious way in philosophy until Peter Singerbegan writing in the 1970s. It is perhaps fair to say that he has done more to determinethe principles on which the utilitarian’s social and political action, broadly speaking,ought to be based than any other philosopher since Sidgwick.This is nowhere more obvious than in his work on the moral challenge of globalpoverty. Singer’s main focus in this domain has been the question of what the absolutelywealthy, those with a surfeit of what is necessary to meet their needs for food, shelter andbasic medical care, owe the absolutely poor, those with too few resources to meet thesesame needs. Singer’s main contribution has been the articulation and defence of the phi-losophical conclusion that the absolutely wealthy ought to do more – nay, much more –for the absolutely impoverished (1972).More recently, however, Singer has turned his attention away from strictly philosophicalissues to more practical matters relating to the achievement of the aim that his argumentobliges the absolutely wealthy to adopt (2009). In this capacity he has become a keen pro-ponent of effective altruism, a new movement in the philanthropic community. This paperis an examination of the ethical principles of effective altruism as they are articulated inSinger’s The Most Good You Can Do. This paper discusses the nature and the plausibilityof the principles that he thinks both guide and ought to guide effective altruists. It© 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group*All unattributed page references are to Singer (2015).CONTACT Anthony Skelton askelto4@uwo.caJOURNAL OF GLOBAL ETHICS, 2016VOL. 12, NO. 2, 137–146http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17449626.2016.1193552Downloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 argues in § II pace Singer that it is unclear that in charitable giving one ought always to aimto produce the most surplus beneﬁt possible and in § III that there is a more attractive setof principles than the ones Singer outlines that ought to guide effective altruists in theirphilanthropic practices and in their lives more generally. These principles ﬁt better withhis practical ambitions and with plausible attitudes about the limits of beneﬁcence.ISinger ﬁrst discussed the issue of what the absolutely wealthy owe the absolutely poor in‘Famine, Afﬂuence, and Morality.’ He offers the following simple, but powerful argument:P1. Death and suffering due to lack of food, shelter and basic medical care are very bad.P2. If it is in one’s power to prevent something very bad from happening without therebysacriﬁcing anything of comparable moral signiﬁcance, then one ought, morally, to do it.P3. It is in one’s power to prevent death and suffering due to (among other things) lack offood, shelter, and basic medical care without thereby sacriﬁcing anything of comparablemoral signiﬁcance by contributing to organizations working to alleviate absolute poverty.C1. Therefore, one ought, morally, to contribute to organizations working to alleviate absolutepoverty until doing so involves sacriﬁcing something of comparable moral signiﬁcance.The second premiss of this argument is its most contentious. The main worry concernsits demands (see, e.g. McGinn 1999; Timmerman 2015). On some readings, it requires theabsolutely wealthy to make quite signiﬁcant sacriﬁces. Premiss two of the argument is not,however, its only contentious one. Although it has been the target of less scrutiny, premissthree is subject to the worry that, even if one is convinced of some reasonably stringentversion of premiss two, it is far from clear that one possesses the power to prevent verybad things from happening by means of philanthropic or other forms of giving. It isoften not clear to what extent such giving achieves the goal of preventing suffering anddeath caused by, among other things, absolute poverty. It is often difﬁcult to gauge theeffectiveness of one’s philanthropic contributions. Even where it is possible to tell, it ishard still to assess the degree to which contributions are efﬁcacious. Moreover, Singer’sargument tells us that the absolutely wealthy ought to do more but not how best to do it.Effective altruism is designed to speak to all of these issues. On Singer’s reading, effec-tive altruists endorse a package of views. First, they believe, in line with his argument, thatthe absolutely wealthy ought to do a lot more to prevent suffering and death (especiallythat caused by absolute poverty). At various points, Singer suggests that the above argu-ment is driving the various choices of the effective altruists he showcases (3, 13, 17, 19, 27,34, 56, 67). His effective altruists have a speciﬁc way of understanding the argument(especially its second premiss), and one aim of The Most Good You Can Do is to providean account of it.Second, effective altruists hold that, if one has decided to engage in philanthropy, thenone ought to use ‘reason and evidence’ to determine which organizations or interventionto support (xi; also 4). The evidence on which effective altruists typically rely is taken fromexisting academic research (preferably using randomized controlled trials) regarding theeffectiveness of a charity or (more likely) one of its interventions (e.g. deworming, vacci-nating and distributing insecticide-treated bed nets). Effective altruists rely in thisregard on meta-charities, for example, GiveWell, that perform the task of evaluating andrecommending charities and their interventions (149–164).138 A. SKELTONDownloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 Third, effective altruists hold that one ought to select, from those available, the phi-lanthropic organization or intervention that is likely to produce the most surplus beneﬁtpossible in the situation (see, e.g. 65, 78, 79, 102, 123) in terms of reducing suffering andpromoting happiness or in terms of preserving or saving lives (7, 9; see also MacAskill2015). This is why effective altruists typically focus on charities or interventions operat-ing in the developing world, where the expectation is that contributions will producethe greatest possible reduction of suffering and/or death (113), though some focuson the suffering of non-human animals (137–147) or the reduction of existential risk(165–178). Proponents of effective altruism, then, appear to address the nature andimplications of Singer’s argument and the difﬁculties of realizing its conclusion inpractice.Singer contrasts effective altruists with so-called warm glow donors (5, 90), who givelittle thought to the efﬁcacy of philanthropic giving. But this is only one way to deviatefrom Singer’s effective altruism. It is possible to endorse only some aspects of it. Onemight, for example, argue that while we have no obligation to contribute to charitableorganizations, when we decide to do so we ought to aim to produce the most surplusgood we can. One could, then, endorse this aspect of effective altruism, but rejectSinger’s argument that we ought to do more for those in need. (I assume here that it isuncontroversial that we ought to rely on reasoning and evidence in directingphilanthropy.)One might, on the other hand, accept that the absolutely wealthy ought to do a lotmore for the absolutely poor without accepting the claim that the only thing relevantto distributing philanthropy is quantity of surplus good produced. One might think thishas some role to play in deciding what to do but that other considerations matter to ﬁgur-ing out how to contribute to charity. This will be my focus in the next section.IISinger takes it almost for granted that in thinking about which charity or intervention tosupport one ought to rely only on the quantity of suffering averted or the number of livessaved. It is, of course, relatively easy to agree that in the prominent cases that Singer notes,we ought, if we choose to give, do what is best quantitatively speaking. One ought to giveto charities that work to encourage people to adopt vegetarianism – for example, VeganOutreach – rather than to animal shelters (137ff.). One ought to donate to a charity thatperforms surgeries to restore the sight of people with trachoma in developing countriesrather than to museums that seek only to improve their visitor’s aesthetic experiences(118ff.). One ought to donate to charities working to alleviate absolute poverty in thedeveloping world rather than to those helping the poor in the developed world (107ff.).One might think that the reason it is hard to disagree about what we ought to do inthese cases is that in each case the plausible choice yields signiﬁcantly more surplusbeneﬁt.Singer is aware that not all agree that quantitative considerations are decisive. He notes,in passing, that John Taurek rejects the claim that we ought to do the best we can in trade-off situations, cases in which you can save from the same loss one or other, but not both, oftwo different but non-overlapping groups (196n6). Taurek would seem to deny that weought always to select the charity that saves the most lives or that minimizes the greatestJOURNAL OF GLOBAL ETHICS 139Downloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 suffering.1 He argues that in trade-off cases the number of individuals is not ethically rel-evant. In cases where you know and like the members of a smaller group or some singleindividual you are permitted to spare them rather than some larger group of strangers thesame loss. In cases where all are strangers to you, you ought to ﬂip a coin to determinewhich way to decide, for this expresses ‘equal concern and respect for each person’(Taurek 1977, 303).Taurek might, however, agree with Singer about the cases mentioned above. Taurekthinks that in cases where the loss to one is very small and the gain to another is quitebig one ought to prevent the greater loss. He might agree with Singer that we ought togive to the charity that funds surgeries to restore the sight of those with trachoma andto the charity that alleviates poverty in the developing world. He might think thisbecause he thinks that even those who lose out in these cases ‘should prefer’ that theone threatened with the greater loss should be ‘spared his loss’ at their expense(Taurek 1977, 302).There is, then, some agreement between Taurek and Singer. Taurek would disagree,however, with Singer that if you are choosing between giving some signiﬁcant sum ofmoney to a charity that will save the lives of hundreds of children in the developingworld by vaccinating them versus giving to a charity that will fund only an operation toseparate conjoined twins who will otherwise die, you ought to give to the former (110).I agree with Singer that Taurek’s view is implausible in this case. But this is not theplace to establish this. The important point is that one does not need to be Taurek toraise doubts about Singer’s claim that we ought always to do the best in every case ofgiving. One can appeal to Taurek-like ideas to do the same work.Taurek appeals to knowing and liking someone in his account. It might be that knowingand liking is relevant to how we ought to donate. Singer himself has a relationship withOxfam, to which he gives, even though it is not among the charities ranked highly interms of effectiveness. One might argue that at least in cases where one is choosingbetween very effective charities one is permitted to let one’s relationship either with acharity or with its recipients play a role in which charity to donate to. It might, then, bepermissible to donate to a slightly less effective charity because one knows and likesthat charity than to a more effective one that one does not know and like. It does notseem wrong to forgo a small beneﬁt for this reason. This might occur in cases where acharity works on a cause to which one is particularly attached.Effective altruist William MacAskill says it would be unfair to let the fact that you havesome relationship with a charity or with some potential recipients of charity to affect thepattern of your donations. He saysIf I were to give to the Fistula Foundation rather than to the charities I thought were moreeffective, I would be privileging the needs of some people over others merely because I hap-pened to know them. That would be unfair to those I could have helped more. If I’d visitedsome other shelter in Ethiopia, or in any other country, I would have had a different set of per-sonal connections. It was arbitrary that I’d seen this problem close up rather than any of theother problems in the world. (MacAskill 2015, 41–42)But it is far from clear that this is unfair. MacAskill says that such a decision is based onarbitrary considerations. But in some sense all close personal relationships are arbitrary. Wemight have loved someone else or pursued different friendships. It does not follow that itis impermissible to give them slightly more weight than strangers in one’s reasoning about140 A. SKELTONDownloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 what to do, especially when the relationship involves a shared history. We might think inaddition that even if there is some unfairness here, that it is negligible and so outweighed.In choosing between highly effective charities, it at least seems permissible to give to aslightly less effective one to which you have some kind of connection, and some effectivealtruists that Singer discusses actually do this (36).There may be other ways in which fairness more clearly matters. Taurek, as noted,appeals to fairness in his account. But we do not need to hold his view of fairness tothink that it matters in philanthropy. There are other ways that fairness might ﬁgureinto one’s reasoning about philanthropy that conﬂicts with the view that Singer (and pre-sumably MacAskill) advocates. First, it might, for example, be unfair to give to a charity thatwill perform operations to correct a thousand obstetric ﬁstulas rather than to a charity thatwill prevent a smaller number of people from dying from starvation even though giving tothe former produces slightly more surplus beneﬁt. It might be unfair to contribute to acharity that would provide robust educational opportunities to some very large numberof children living in the developing world who are not in need of food and medicinerather than to a charity that gives food and medicine to a smaller number of verypoorly off children who are malnourished and who are living in a different part of thedeveloping world, even though giving to the former would produce on balance slightlymore surplus beneﬁt. One might argue here that it would be unfair to choose thebetter off in these cases, and that it would not be wrong on this ground to donate tothe latter charities. It might be unfair not to give priority to the least well off, on theassumption that the charities in question are highly but not equally effective. Indeed, itmight be patently unfair to rule out helping the least well off in these kinds of cases atleast some of the time out of the concern for fairness. It might be fairer to give them incases of this sort at least some chance of being saved, though perhaps not the chancethat Taurek advocates. These are views that ought to appeal to some of Singer’s effectivealtruists, since even on his reckoning some hold that equality matters for its own sake (8–9). Equality or fairness seems to matter here to what we ought to do.These are some considerations that are meant to count against the claim that onlyquantitative considerations matter in considering how to distribute one’s charity. Theseconsiderations are not meant to impugn appeal to quantitative concerns entirely. Theidea is that these are not the only considerations. It might be better to hold, then, theview that, other things being equal, we ought to promote in giving the greatest quantityof good. This is more difﬁcult to deny and certainly captures many of Singer’s highproﬁle examples.IIIAccording to Singer, effective altruism involves not only subscription to the claim that if wedecide to contribute to charity, we ought to do the most good we can, but to the claimthat we ought to promote surplus aggregate good more generally in our lives. A sizableportion of The Most Good You Can Do is devoted to showcasing the various differentstyles of life that Singer thinks people can pursue while functioning as this kind of effectivealtruist (23–72). One might choose to live on very little of one’s existing income giving asizable proportion of one’s surplus away to charity, or one might take a job in which onecan earn a large salary, for example, by working on Wall Street, in order to live well andJOURNAL OF GLOBAL ETHICS 141Downloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 contribute a lot to charity, or one might work in an organization in which one can have agreater than ordinary impact on the fate of the most needy or one can, together withdonating to charity, give parts of one’s body away (e.g. one’s kidney). These are distinctways to live as an effective altruist, though all share the aim of contributing to preventingdeath and suffering.According to Singer, effective altruism of this kind is based on a set of abstract prin-ciples that he ﬁnds in Sidgwick, on whichThe good of any one individual is of no more importance, from the point of view (if I may sayso) of the Universe, than the good of any other; unless, that is, there are special grounds forbelieving that more good is likely to be realized in the one case than in the other.And it is evident to me that as a rational being I am bound to aim at good generally, – so far asit is attainable by my efforts, – not merely at a particular part of it. (1981 [1907], 382)Singer thinks these are the rational principles explicating why effective altruists adoptthe various strategies and lifestyles they do (80, 81–82, 87). These imply for Singer that inreasoning about what to do we are required to produce the impartial best (80, 102). Hedoes not claim that to be an effective altruist you must be a utilitarian (53, 79). Effectivealtruists might, then, arrive at their conclusions by means of other principles. He saysonly that these are the principles that ‘would’ guide effective altruists (80). But heclearly favours them over others. (For a defence of these principles, see de Lazari-Radekand Singer [2014]. As Singer does here, they construe them as all things consideredprinciples.)However, it is unclear, ﬁrst, that these are the principles that explain best the behav-iour of effective altruists and, second, that these principles are normatively the mostdesirable. Singer thinks that effective altruists are motivated by the idea that weshould maximize value in our lives more generally (65, 94, 102). That is, they embracea speciﬁcally utilitarian version of his argument’s second premiss, implying that theabsolutely wealthy donate until the loss to them of doing so is as great as the beneﬁtto the absolutely poor.One difﬁculty with advocating these principles as normatively most desirable is thatdoing so ﬁts uncomfortably with Singer’s previous work on the issue of the demands ofhis argument’s premiss two in which he appears to back away from the more stringentversions of the premiss. The utilitarian version, as he acknowledges, is one amongothers. In his discussions of the practical implications of his argument in both PracticalEthics (1993) and The Life You Can Save he advocates for more modest readings of theargument’s second premiss and so for more modest practical implications. In PracticalEthics he argues that the absolutely wealthy ought to give 10% of their income to theabsolutely poor. In The Life You Can Save he argues for a sliding scale so that the moreyou make the more you are required to give. He imposes this on the top 10% ofearners. For one earning less than US$105,000 the suggestion is that one contribute 1%of one’s pre-tax income to charity.The reason that he does this is quite plausible: advocating more modest norms forgiving makes it on balance more likely that more people will contribute to philanthropicorganizations or interventions aimed at the prevention of death and suffering due toextreme poverty, among other ills. The idea that effective altruism requires subscriptionto the Sidgwickian principles (as Singer construes them) may strike many as running142 A. SKELTONDownloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 counter to this ambition and will strike many as an unattractive ideal for the purposes ofpractice and of attracting individuals to the cause. If you have to buy into Sidgwick, manymight reason, that is enough to dampen enthusiasm, for doing so could commit you toserious (uncompensated) sacriﬁces.In reply, Singer might suggest that he has changed his mind about the effects of advo-cating this (more utilitarian) ideal over other, more modest ones. It might be that this isbetter than rivals in terms of motivating people to prevent loss of life and suffering. Ifhe is right, it has moved some individuals to do some highly effective things in theservice of combating suffering and death caused by crushing poverty, among other things.The difﬁculty is that to establish this we would need evidence of the sort that effectivealtruists seek about the various interventions or charities that they support. This is not,however, in our possession.Of course, Singer might argue that the examples of effective altruists that he discusseswill lead us to think the principles more attractive because, as he describes them, theirpractical manifestations are attractive. He is keen to show that ‘typical effective altruistsleave themselves time and resources to relax and do what they want’ (8). The idea is,then, that we can accept the principles and avoid the demandingness worry. If this isso, we should relax and learn to love the Sidgwickian principles. The difﬁculty with thisis that while it may be true that this is what effective altruists do, it is not clear that thisis consistent with the Sidgwickian principles. Singer has not, at any rate, shown thatthese principles justify these permissions. He might have shown that the altruistspromote surplus good but he is far from showing that what they do is produce themost surplus good they can.There is, anyway, a better set of norms to both explain why certain effective altru-ists modify their behaviour in the ways that they do and to recommend as norma-tively desirable. These seem to provide a more productive image for the purpose ofattracting individuals to the effective altruist fold and serve as a more attractive nor-mative ideal.It is pretty clear from at least some of the descriptions that many of the effective altru-ists gave more weight to their own interests than the interests of others. True, they did notseem to adopt the more conventional balance between one’s own and others’ interests,but they did nonetheless give some greater weight to their own interests.Consider as evidence the following activities by effective altruists. One was ‘writing histhesis, studying a language, practicing his guitar, and writing children’s books, a novel foradults, short stories, and a translation of Plato’s Cratylus that preserves the puns mosttranslators consider to be untranslatable’ (34). Another wrote novels and followedvarious political projects to which she felt a special connection (35–36). Yet another‘plays soccer with friends, enjoys listening to music, and goes cycling most weekends’(45). Others placed limits on what they were willing to do to promote the aims and ambi-tions of effective altruism and so they had children and gave greater weight to the inter-ests of their friends and family and kept their spare organs.Let me be clear: this is not meant as a criticism of these individuals. The point is that likemost of us, effective altruists accord more weight to their own interests than to the inter-ests of strangers in their deliberations about what to do. This does not mean that theapproach is in some way defective. The issue is whether the most plausible account oftheir behaviour involves reference to Sidgwick’s or cognate principles.JOURNAL OF GLOBAL ETHICS 143Downloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 It does not. Indeed, the behaviour of the effective altruists suggests that they accept inaddition to the principle of beneﬁcence a principle of prudence, a principle to which Sidg-wick himself has an afﬁnity. He accepts that there are principles other than the ones thatSinger mentions. Sidgwick thinks that the fact that you and I are distinct individuals giveseach of us a reason to be more concerned with the ‘quality’ of our own existence than withthe ‘quality of the existence of other individuals’ (1981 [1907], 498). What separates effec-tive altruists from most of us is that they have a particularly strong view of beneﬁcencethat sets limits on the pursuit of one’s prudential aims. But all the same they think thatbeneﬁcence is at least to some extent limited by prudence, and in particular by what con-tributes to life satisfaction and/or to a meaningful life (viii, 94; 97–104).What effective altruists appear to have in common is a particular reading of the secondpremiss of Singer’s argument. They are committed to preventing suffering and loss of life,and they have a distinct view of what is comparable in terms of moral importance to it.They believe that we ought to give or contribute until doing so compromises whatmakes life satisfying or meaningful. This seems indicated by the fact that all of the effectivealtruists that Singer discusses found their lives satisfying or meaningful in some respect(97–104).These are, it seems, the main principles underlying effective altruism. The mixture andbalance of principles is normatively attractive. This is a more plausible ideal on which torest effective altruism, giving weight to self- and other-regarding reasons. It involvesaccepting pro tanto rather than all things considered versions of Sidgwick’s principles.These principles are combined with a set of other virtues that effective altruists rightlyexhibit. First, a heightened receptivity to evidence and facts in thinking about how bestto achieve philanthropic ends. Second, effective altruists have, perhaps unwittingly, hiton a sensible way of to some extent reconciling prudence and beneﬁcence; theyappear to have stumbled on what psychologists have been reporting, that above acertain threshold increases in income and wealth produce fewer and less long-lastingincreases in life satisfaction. Effective altruists have discovered that for happiness, forlife satisfaction, one needs much less materially than our cultural norms suggest.Singer could reply that the tendency to give oneself greater weight might just be instru-mental to happiness. A person could be more effective if they are happy or living mean-ingfully. But this is not clear since Singer allows that the effective altruists have valuesother than happiness (and suffering) (7; though cf. 50, 146). These could be doing thework and there is nothing against saying that they do and ought to.Finally, ﬁnding a place for prudence or self-regarding reasons makes it easier for Singerto reply to an argument that he considers fromWilliams (1981). Williams contends that thetrouble with utilitarianism and with Sidgwick’s principles in particular is their request thatwe detach from our personal point of view, ‘frommore personal considerations that other-wise dominate the way in which we live’, and evaluate all our loyalties, loves and disposi-tions to determine how feliciﬁc they are (85). He argues that this is impossible. Singerargues otherwise.But it is not clear that Singer’s argument is entirely successful. He concedes that thedetachment is not ‘total’ (85). There is good reason for this: it is not clear what it wouldmean to evaluate one’s dispositions and loyalties from some completely detached pointof view. If you accept the above view about what does and ought to undergird the effec-tive altruist programme, you have a reply to Williams: the personal point of view of144 A. SKELTONDownloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 prudence is the thing from which one views what matters to them. But effective altruistsdo not leave things here. They limit what they do in pursuit of what they care about bymeans of a principle of beneﬁcence or the version of premiss two of Singer’s argumentthat they accept. To do this there is no need to detach completely from one’s dispositions,loyalties and other ground projects and to then ﬁgure out what to do. One just has to limitthe extent to which one pursues one’s own ends by means of other, compelling other-regarding principles.IVThis paper discussed the nature and the plausibility of the ethical principles that Singerthinks both guide and ought to guide the behaviour of effective altruists. It argued in §II that it is unclear that in charitable giving one ought always to aim to produce themost surplus beneﬁt possible and in § III that there is a more attractive set of principlesthan the ones Singer outlines that ought to guide effective altruists in their philanthropicpractices and in their lives more generally. These principles ﬁt more comfortably withsome of Singer’s practical ambitions and with plausible attitudes about the limits ofbeneﬁcence.2Notes1. It is unclear that Taurek would deny this in the case of non-human animals. It is in fact unclearwhat his view entails in these cases. Perhaps here the numbers count, in which case he mayagree with Singer.2. Thanks to audiences at The University of Western Ontario, Stockholm University and OaklandUniversity and to Lisa Forsberg, Isra Black, Anne Skelton and (especially) Henrik Ahlenius forhelpful feedback on previous versions of this paper.Disclosure statementNo potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.Notes on contributorAnthony Skelton is Associate Professor in the Department of Philosophy at the University of WesternOntario and Associate Director of the Rotman Institute of Philosophy. He researches in the areas ofnormative ethics and the history of ethics. He has published articles in, among other journals, Utilitas,Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Journal of the History of Philosophy and Ethics. He is the co-editor ofBioethics in Canada (OUP, 2013). He is currently working on a book entitled Henry Sidgwick and theConﬂicts of Ethics. This is his ﬁrst publication in the Journal of Global Ethics.Referencesde Lazari-Radek, Katarzyna, and Peter Singer. 2014. The Point of View of the Universe: Sidgwick andContemporary Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.MacAskill, William. 2015. Doing Good Better: How Effective Altruism Can Help You Make a Difference.New York: Gotham Books.McGinn, Colin. 1999. “Our Duties to Animals and the Poor.” In Singer and His Critics, edited by DaleJamieson, 150–161. Oxford: Blackwell.JOURNAL OF GLOBAL ETHICS 145Downloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 Schultz, Bart. 2004. Henry Sidgwick: Eye of the Universe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Sidgwick, Henry. 1898. Practical Ethics. London: Swan Sonnenschein.Sidgwick, Henry. 1919. The Elements of Politics. 3rd ed. London: Macmillan.Sidgwick, Henry. 1981 [1907]. The Methods of Ethics. 7th ed. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishers.Singer, Peter. 1972. “Famine, Afﬂuence, and Morality.” Philosophy and Public Affairs 1 (3): 229–243.Singer, Peter. 1993. Practical Ethics. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Singer, Peter. 2009. The Life You Can Save: Acting Now to End World Poverty. Toronto: Random House.Singer, Peter. 2015. The Most Good You Can Do: How Effective Altruism Is Changing Ideas About LivingEthically. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Skelton, Anthony. 2006. “Henry Sidgwick’s Practical Ethics: A Defense.” Utilitas 18 (3): 199–217.Taurek, John M. 1977. “Should the Numbers Count?” Philosophy and Public Affairs 6 (4): 293–316.Timmerman, Travis. 2015. “Sometimes There Is Nothing Wrong with Letting a Child Drown.” Analysis75 (2): 204–212.Williams, Bernard. 1981. “The Point of View of the Universe: Sidgwick and the Ambitions of Ethics.”Cambridge Review 103 (7 May): 183–191.146 A. SKELTONDownloaded by [76.64.44.167] at 04:19 08 August 2016 