ABSTRACT: 
In this prologue, we will briefly revisit some of the main research findings that have emerged from our collaborative work on Fiji rugby, as well as reflecting on some of the recommendations derived from our empirical investigation. We discuss issues in relation to national identity and migrations, post-rugby career-related retirement issues and alternative emerging cultural practices that challenge the dominant discourse around Fiji rugby. We then turn our attention to the content of this special issue and briefly introduce the articles included, with the main recommendation that there is a growing need to explore absent and emerging voices and cultural practices in regard to sport-related migration in, from and to the Pacific Islands. 
 
PREDICTION: 
In this prologue, we will briefly revisit some of the main research findings that have emerged from our collaborative work on Fiji rugby, as well as reflecting on some of the suggestions derived from our empirical investigation. We discuss issues in relation to national identity and migrations, post-rugby career-related retirement issues and alternative emerging cultural practices that challenge the dominant discourse around Fiji rugby. We then turn our attention to the content of this special issue and briefly introduce the articles included, with the main recommendation that there is a growing need to explore absent and emerging voices and cultural practices in regard to sport-related migration in, from and to the Pacific Islands. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 This article was downloaded by: [202.151.30.6]On: 24 January 2015, At: 17:12Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKClick for updatesAsia Pacific Journal of Sport and SocialSciencePublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rass20Playing on the global periphery: Socialscientific explorations of rugby in thePacific IslandsGyozo Molnara & Yoko Kanemasuba Institute of Sport & Exercise Science, University of Worcester,England, UKb School of Social Sciences, Faculty of Arts, Law and Education,University of the South Pacific, FijiPublished online: 17 Nov 2014.To cite this article: Gyozo Molnar & Yoko Kanemasu (2014) Playing on the global periphery: Socialscientific explorations of rugby in the Pacific Islands, Asia Pacific Journal of Sport and SocialScience, 3:3, 175-185, DOI: 10.1080/21640599.2014.962349To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21640599.2014.962349PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLETaylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as tothe accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinionsand views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Contentshould not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sourcesof information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever orhowsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arisingout of the use of the Content.This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsDownloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 EDITORIAL INTRODUCTIONPlaying on the global periphery: Social scientific explorations of rugbyin the Pacific IslandsGyozo Molnara* and Yoko KanemasubaInstitute of Sport & Exercise Science, University of Worcester, England, UK; bSchool of SocialSciences, Faculty of Arts, Law and Education, University of the South Pacific, FijiIn this prologue, we will briefly revisit some of the main research findings that haveemerged from our collaborative work on Fiji rugby, as well as reflecting on some of therecommendations derived from our empirical investigation. We discuss issues inrelation to national identity and migrations, post-rugby career-related retirement issuesand alternative emerging cultural practices that challenge the dominant discoursearound Fiji rugby. We then turn our attention to the content of this special issue andbriefly introduce the articles included, with the main recommendation that there is agrowing need to explore absent and emerging voices and cultural practices in regard tosport-related migration in, from and to the Pacific Islands.Keywords: Fiji; rugby union; retirement; migrations; identity; emergentIntroductionThat research always entails a modicum (or more) of serendipity is a proven fact. Whetherwe consider the discovery of penicillin, radioactivity or the echoes of the origin of theuniverse, serendipity, along with open-mindedness on the part of the researcher, hasalways been present (McCracken, 1988). We, the editors of this special issue, also haveserendipity to thank for helping initiate our collaborative work, which has been ongoingsince 2010. Four years of joint effort led to organization of the Fiji Rugby CentenaryConference in 2013 – the basis of this special issue and of our exploration of a range ofkey issues in Fiji rugby, including migrations, cultural identity, cultural frictions in andaround rugby and career termination/retirement. We have examined these issues in depththrough the collection of primary, interview-based evidence as well as secondary massmedia (mostly online) data, to which we applied rigorous qualitative socio-culturalanalysis guided by a cultural studies approach.As we progressed with our investigation into the cultural complexities of Fiji rugby, werecognized that despite its being a significant donor country in global rugby, Fiji, and byextension Fiji rugby, has lacked not only the level of academic attention given to Westernsocieties and their issues , but also the forms of scientific support which most elite andhigh-level sports and athletes enjoy (and perhaps take for granted) in metropolitancountries. We have argued elsewhere (Kanemasu & Molnar, 2013a) that even elite-leveldomestic players have to assume (largely) amateur status and play in rudimentaryconditions due to a severe lack of financial and structural support in Fiji. Domestic rugbyplayers at the highest level often have to go without dietary, physiological, psychologicaland medical support and insurance. In other words, Fiji, along with many other developingq 2014 Taylor & Francis*Corresponding author. Email: g.molnar@worc.ac.ukAsia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science, 2014Vol. 3, No. 3, 175–185, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21640599.2014.962349Downloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 small island nations, is not only on the geographic and economic periphery, but is also onthe margins of sport science. For instance, so far there has been no globally publicizedacademic research looking into the psychology and physiology of Pacific Island rugbyplayers; nor has research ever investigated their dietary habits and needs in relation toperformance. In other words, Pacific rugby is still an academic terra nova; thus, one of thekey aims of our line of research (see Kanemasu & Molnar, 2013a, 2013b, 2013c, 2014a)and of this special issue is to generate more research interest in Pacific Island rugby.We would hope that our socio-cultural investigations, along with the others included in thisspecial issue, will be followed by psychological (see Mumm & O’Connor, this issue) andbio-scientific explorations which, as well providing a much needed academic foundation,will in turn provide support for both developing and elite Pacific Island players.Consequently, and to encourage future investigations, in this prologue we will brieflyrevisit some of the main research areas and findings that emerged from our collaborativework, along with reflection on some of the recommendations derived from our empiricalinvestigation. Then we will turn our attention to the content of this special issue and brieflyintroduce the contributing articles in sequential order.Negotiating collective identity in a multicultural worldThe professionalization of rugby union triggered a number of changes in the content, formand structure of the game (Ryan, 2008; Harris, 2010). One of these changes is related to themovement of an ever-growing number of players across different countries and continents,driven by the expanding and diverging commercial opportunities available. While migrationof professionals (Castles, de Hass, & Miller, 2013) in general, and professional athletes(Maguire & Falcous, 2011) in particular, has been extensively investigated, we identified agap in the existing literature relating to Fiji which had only been partially addressed by a fewconference presentations and Robert Dewey’s (2008) exploratory historical research.In addition, the significance of Pacific Island players in global rugby has been on the rise(Horton, 2012, 2014), providing further impetus for investigations centring on theirmigratory experiences and cultural challenges in an ever-globalizing world. We have arguedthat ‘from a migratory perspective, Fiji has assumed a similar role in rugby to Brazil’s role infootball’ (Kanemasu &Molnar, 2013a, p. 864). In this special issue it will become clear thatother Pacific Island nations and peoples have also had similar experiences and have beenfacing the challenges concomitant with migrations. To explore some of these challenges, wehave focused our research on the personal issues which migrant Fijian players experience inthe host culture, and in which ways and to what extent they are influenced by migrations.We have argued that, similar to other migratory fields, rugby migrations take place in thecontext of unequal global–local power relations and serve to perpetuate core–peripheryinequity by depriving Fiji rugby of its critical human and associated economic andpolitical capital (Kanemasu&Molnar, 2013a). In otherwords, Fijian rugbymigrations can beexplained, by and large, through aworld-systems approach (Wallerstein, 2004), as an instanceof ‘muscle trade’ and ‘brawn drain’ (Bale, 1991) driven by supply and demand in globalcapitalist networks at the expense of peripheral athletic labour. At first glance, it may appearthat there is clear exploitation at play within these networks of migration, but our in-depthanalysis of interview data with migrant Fijian athletes revealed a more complex situation.Despite the fact that in this finance-driven, exploitative athletic talent trade,oppositional voices are not always recognized and/or documented, we have identifiedtheir presence and captured them through our interviews. The emerging voices of ourparticipants revealed the significance of rugby migrations as a context for collective176 G. Molnar and Y. KanemasuDownloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 identification and a site of symbolic resistance. Rugby as a symbolic marker of nationalidentity provides emigrant players with a vehicle for cultivating a sense of collectivebelonging and pride in the commercial global rugby arena. We observed that this symbolicdimension of rugby migration has a notable oppositional nature whereby emigrant playershave claimed rugby migration as a medium through which they could challenge thedominant western discourse that defines Fiji and the other Pacific Islands as the ultimateperiphery: small, poorly resourced and isolated. We found examples of Fijians who, evenas they submit themselves to the constraints of the global muscle trade, claim sport as aspace to present an alternative, affirmative self-definition. Thus rugby migrations, despitedivergent opinions (Bale, 2000), constitute a site of both structural subordination andsymbolic resistance.The power imbalance between Fiji and metropolitan countries becomes even morepronounced during international competitions. The lack of financial, institutional andinfrastructural resources in Fiji and the political and economic pressures frommetropolitan clubs and unions often deter elite players from making autonomousdecisions regarding their official national allegiance. To compound the matter still further,once they have played for the national team of another country, the IRB eligibilityregulations disqualify them from representing their country of origin. Their cosmopolitanfreedom to transcend national borders is restricted by institutional requirements to make aformal and profoundly consequential commitment to one nation, which is often not theircountry of birth. Here, the symbolic resistance of rugby migrants comes into conflict withthe politico-economic dynamics of international rugby. While migrant players mayappropriate rugby migration as a symbolic arena of resistance, it is also an area of materialstruggle in which the metropolitan–corporate dynamic exerts power over athletes, oftencoercing them into relinquishing formal allegiance to their home, with significantimplications for the perpetuation of politico-economic disparity between these nations.In this context we have outlined two competing discourses on rugby migration andcollective identification. On the one hand, athletes’ symbolic resistance transcendsnational borders and formal allegiance. Even those who decide to represent another nationin international competitions continue to exert this power, as they perceive themselves andare perceived by many Fijians to be symbolically representing Fiji. On the other, thepolitico-economic dynamics of international rugby render formal national allegiance ahighly consequential act, and athletes’ commitment comes under the critical scrutiny ofother Fijians. Those who fail to commit to their home country no longer represent analternative, empowering vision of their people, but rather their continuing disempower-ment. Even those who do commit are scrutinized as to the genuineness of their allegiance:what they symbolically represent to the nation becomes highly ambiguous and contested.Therefore, global rugby competitions as a context for collective identification crystallizeand embody the tension between the two discourses and agendas – the politico-economicdynamics of the global athletic system and the agency of rugby migrants to cultivate roomfor manoeuvre and for self-expression. As Niko Besnier reminds us in this issue, ‘sport caninclude and exclude, as well as create and maintain structures of inequality withimplications far beyond the confines of sport’. Our research has reaffirmed the multiplicityof the meanings and effects that rugby has had in Fiji.The three Rs of FijiIn further exploring both the oppressive and the empowering aspects of the sport, we haveexamined the dominant discourse that has developed around Fiji rugby since its colonialAsia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science 177Downloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 origins as well as its continuing implication in the dynamics of ethnic and gender politicsin Fiji. This dominant discourse defines rugby as a privileged cultural practice deeplygrounded in the unique heritage of the vanua (land), especially the indigenous chieflysystem, martial/masculine traditions and Christianity. The emergent literature on Fijirugby has contoured this discourse by highlighting the sport’s connections with i Taukei(indigenous Fijian) institutions and traditions (see Dewey, this issue). We provided acloser and critical examination of these linkages and argued that the cultural anchoring ofrugby, as well as the unquestioned prestige that it has come to command, is profoundlyimplicated in the historical making of the colonial (and, later, postcolonial) hegemonicorder in Fiji. Fiji’s localized form of rugby emerged out of the dynamics of the colonialrule that rested on, among other things, a hegemonic alliance with the chieflyestablishment and the church. Rugby thus developed as a hegemonic i Taukei culturalpractice, a cultural expression and a medium of a hegemonic socio-political orderembedded in particular social relations and hierarchies of ethnicity, religion and gender.That is, rugby has both underpinned and reproduced the prevailing social relations incolonial and post-colonial Fiji.However, and most importantly, we have argued for the pertinence of examiningrugby’s contested nature and the challenges presented by emerging and alternativediscourses. While acknowledging the hegemony of traditional cultural definitions ofFiji rugby, we have recognized that an exclusive focus on the dominant is problematic,first because of its essentialist effect of fixing Fijian rugby players in a timeless‘tradition’ and denoting that an immutable, primordial quality persistently prevails byappropriating rugby as its modern medium, and second because of its tendency toreproduce the asymmetrical relations of power inherent in the hegemonic order. That is,preoccupation with the pre-colonial cultural origins and meanings of rugby conceals themultiplicity of meanings and realities of the game in contemporary Fiji, and thereproduction of the gendered and ethnicized nature of the game has the effect of mutingthe voices of women and Indo-Fijians (among others) in Fiji rugby (Kanemasu & Molnar,2013c, 2014b).This has led us to deconstruct the dominant rugby discourse by shedding light onalternative and competing cultural meanings. We have recognized that, to many playerstoday, rugby is not only a modern expression of indigenous cultural heritage but also, andsometimes primarily, one of the few open avenues for alternative cultural self-expression.For Indo-Fijian and woman players, rugby is a site of emergent, counter-hegemonicdiscourses that contest the binary opposition and hierarchy between the indigenous/masculine and the non-indigenous/feminine inherent in the dominant discourse(Kanemasu & Molnar, 2014b). The experiences and voices of Indo-Fijian and womenrugby players which were represented and heard at the Centennial Rugby Conference in2013 illustrate both the formidable power of and the limits to hegemony. These playersremain marginalized through their positioning as minority categories, defined by andagainst ‘mainstream’/‘malestream’ rugby, which manifests itself in uneven distribution ofinstitutional support and resources and various, sometimes severe, forms of negative socialsanction. However, at the same time, their unrelenting pursuit of self-assertion through thegame constitutes a significant act of counter-hegemony, an expression of oppositionalvoices emanating from the social groups that have been at least until recently excludedfrom the hegemonic rugby discourse as well as from the wider hegemonic social order inpost-colonial Fiji. While some may describe this as ‘transgressive’ rather than directlyoppositional, we have argued that this act nevertheless powerfully questions the totality ofthe seemingly undisputed dominant discourse.178 G. Molnar and Y. KanemasuDownloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 Post-career prospects in FijiDeveloping the theme of marginalization and domination, we have explored the realitiesof Fijian ex-rugby players’ lives. Drawing on the lived experiences of former players, wehave depicted Fijian rugby players’ pursuit of the ‘rugby dream’ and their ‘post-rugbydream’ realities. To appreciate the motivation for their devotion to and sacrifices for thegoal of attaining a professional contract, we have examined the immense socio-culturalprestige and economic rewards associated with a professional rugby career. We have alsonoted that the athletes’ decisions to pursue this goal are based on rational assessments oftheir own life chances and the structural conditions in Fiji. With limited livelihood optionsavailable to them, aspiring rugby players make conscious and focused efforts to secureoverseas contracts, receiving little to no formal support or guidance from rugby (or anyother) bodies. Thus, many forsake formal education, vocational training and employmentto devote themselves to rugby while they are sustained by their immediate/extendedfamilies. At the end of this process, many are left without livelihood skills, formalqualification or knowledge relating to finance management, health and safety or careerdevelopment.That is, life after rugby – with or without securing a fat international contract – offerslimited employment options for ex-players in Fiji. While farming appears to be a popularchoice, unemployment is not uncommon among both former international/professionaland domestic/non-professional athletes. Indeed, former athletes often face gravedifficulties, with even some ex-international stars struggling to find employment orworking in unskilled, low-paid jobs. In addition, retired players face emotional difficulties.Former domestic players in particular face the risk of societal humiliation and loss of face.The prestige associated with the ‘rugby dream’ is a double-edged sword in that it givessuccessful players continuing respect from their communities long after their career isover, but creates a deep sense of embarrassment and shame for those who fail to make it.Economic and emotional difficulties in some cases escalate into serious physical,emotional and mental health problems, compounded by substance abuse.As the resource-strapped state welfare system is grossly inadequate and virtually nosocial security services are available to ex-players in Fiji, retired players’ (immediate andextended) families and communities play a vital role as one of the few, and critical,sources of support. The significance of such informal support based on social andeconomic cooperation is enormous. In the absence of formal social protection, it hasshouldered the economic and emotional costs of player development and life after rugby.However, we recognize that this informal support mechanism is beginning to erode,especially in urban areas, and there is evidence that some athletes are already facing severedifficulties as a result.Fijian rugby players’ life after rugby exemplifies the consequences of a neoliberalapproach to sport. Professional rugby operates according to the principles of free markets,deregulation, privatization and individualism, among other things, and in the case of Fiji(and arguably other rugby-playing Pacific Island countries) transfers the risks and deficitsof the ‘muscle trade’ to individual athletes, their families and larger communities.By making little or no investment in player development and no social protectionprovision, rugby bodies – both national and international – engage in unequal exchangewith the local communities who absorb these costs and thereby subsidize the operation ofcommercial rugby. We made particular note of metropolitan clubs and unions, whichsystematically procure Fijian talent in pursuit of professional and commercial interests, yetmake little investment in or contribution toward local player development other than theAsia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science 179Downloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 compensation paid to the Fiji Rugby Union (FRU) for migrant athletes. Fijian rugbyplayers represent low-investment–high-return athletic capital, since much of thenecessary financial and human investment, as well as social insurance, is provided bylocal communities. The struggles of ex-players and their families are the end product ofthe inequity inherent in both commercial sport and the core–periphery relations.Consequently, we recommend the establishment of formal, centrally driven supportstructures to complement and relieve the informal ones. The rationale for this istwofold. First, in light of the predicted erosion of the traditional cultural support system,the continued success of Fiji rugby requires that athletes are provided with adequatecentralized professional and livelihood support. Second, the costs of player development/retirement in Fiji are currently incurred by individual athletes, families and communities;however, it should not be the community who ‘picks up the tab’ of player development/retirement: the FRU and especially metropolitan professional clubs, who benefit the mostfrom Fiji’s talent development, should share these expenses. The establishment of formalsupport structures would be a first step towards greater equity in the global rugby system.Our investigations so far have been intended to add to the existing literature a moreholistic perspective on Fiji rugby as a social phenomenon that shapes, and is shaped by,the dynamics of wider global–local social relations. Like other cultural practices andexperiences, sport constitutes a ‘sort of constant battlefield’ (Hall, 1981, p. 233) or anarena of ‘cultural battle’ (Gramsci, 1971, p. 348), ‘pitting the powerful against the lesspowerful in a competition to define the dominant’ (Molnar & Kelly, 2013, p. 87). Our chiefaim, therefore, has been to illuminate the interaction and contestation between amultiplicity of (dominant as well as emergent) discourses, practices, interests and socialgroups in this cultural arena of Fiji rugby, for a greater understanding of the game that isindeed much more than a ‘gift’ from colonial masters.Special issue content: Toward a ‘second wave’ of Pacific rugby researchWhen the FRU was founded in 1913, its membership consisted only of four Europeanclubs based in Suva (the capital of Fiji). One hundred years on, there are more than 600clubs in 36 regional and affiliated sub-unions and 60,000 senior and 20,000 junior playersacross the country (Kanemasu & Molnar, 2013a). Today, rugby is deeply entwined withthe socio-cultural, economic and political tapestry of Fiji. The FRU’s centenary thusprovided an apt opportunity to discuss the historical and contemporary complexities of Fijirugby at a conference aimed at conjoining academics and practitioners in a supportiveforum and providing reflections on the past, present and future of Fiji rugby. This specialissue features some of the key papers presented at that conference.The first article, by Robert Dewey, sets the scene for the special issue and forrugby-related research into the Pacific Island nations. Based on archival and field research,Dewey provides a brief assessment of the types and strands of academic engagement withrugby as a socio-cultural phenomenon. So far historical and socio-cultural investigationshave dominated the continuously expanding ‘first wave’ literature on Pacific rugby. Manystudies have adopted qualitative, ethnographic approaches to unfold the local culturalcomplexities and to position Pacific Island peoples and communities in relation to globalpolitical undercurrents. Specific attention has been paid to rugby’s relation to politics,migration, national identity, religion and masculinity in the post-colonial context. In thearticle, key sources covering the above topics are briefly discussed and their relations tothe larger scope of Pacific rugby studies are indicated. Dewey importantly acknowledgesthat despite the growing research interest in this field, there are areas that have remained180 G. Molnar and Y. KanemasuDownloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 almost completely uncharted, and makes useful recommendations for a range of essentialfuture research topics. These include research on the smaller Oceania unions leading togreater comparative analysis of rugby cultures, more extensive attention paid to themultifaceted aspects of rugby migrations and diasporic engagement and further studies toanalyse the religion–rugby interplay in domestic cultures and to explore multilayeredgendered aspects of rugby’s socio-cultural roles, including both masculinities andfemininities. In our opinion, the greatest merit of Dewey’s essay is the insight it providesinto key research strands and sources on which future explorations are to rest. It isimplicitly suggested that by building on the ‘first wave’ of academic investigations, the‘second wave’ of research should further aid our understanding of the socio-culturalsignificance and idiosyncrasies of Pacific rugby to help us estimate the increasing local andregional significance of the game and to debunk some of the cultural stereotypes currentlyin existence.Perhaps one example of the emerging ‘second wave’ of research around Pacific rugbyis the sport psychology study in this issue, conducted by Gregory Mumm and DonnaO’Connor, exploring the motivational profile of professional male Fijian rugby players.This study differs from the majority of the ‘first wave’ research in that it focuses on thecollection and analysis of quantitative, structured evidence which are gathered throughmeasured tools (Sports Motivation Scale and Cultural Awareness Questionnaire) used inpost-positivist research. This is a clear distinction between previous qualitative approachesadopting constructivist standpoints, and perhaps a harbinger of the emergingrationalization of Pacific rugby as a consequence of metropolitan influences and rugbyprofessionalization. Through a sample of elite Fijian players, Mumm and O’Connorindicate that their participants display high levels of intrinsic motivation, and that theirmotivation levels are sometimes affected by the ways in which they are perceived andtreated in metropolitan host environments. The challenges of the host country and morestructured rugby practices, coupled with existing rugby-specific stereotypes such as lack ofdiscipline and natural flair associated with Fiji players, could dampen motivation and,thus, performance. To reduce the undesired effects of performance slump and amotivationtriggered by relocation to a new host environment, participants highlighted, it is essentialfor metropolitan coaches to understand more about the cultural particulars of Fiji and otherPacific Island rugby players. Mumm and O’Connor specifically argue that strategies forcoaching migrant Pacific Island rugby players should be ‘in place to help athletes managethe external pressures associated with increased incomes, immediate or extended familyand social welfare programmes’. By developing a more in-depth cultural awareness andsensitivity towards migrant athletes, metropolitan coaches could have a better chance ofalleviating social and family pressures and, in turn, optimize individual as well as teamperformance (see Purdy, Molnar, Griffith, & Castle, 2014).The ever-present cultural pressures faced by Pacific Island rugby players are furtherinvestigated by Peter Horton, who argues that Pacific Islanders have become one of themost visible and prodigious forces in contemporary global rugby. With the growingprofessionalization of the sport and related employment opportunities, Pacific Islandplayers have emigrated to core rugby countries in a quest for the so-called ‘rugby dream’.While the pursuit of a lucrative international contract has become a widespread andculturally supported career choice for a high number of young island men, this careerpathway is not without peril. In this essay, Horton provides in-depth consideration of thesignificant social, cultural, economic and personal issues faced by Pacific Island malerugby players in their host culture. Employing Appadurai’s concept of ethnoscapes, it isobserved that migrations motivated by the pursuit of a professional rugby contract haveAsia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science 181Downloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 put enormous pressures on traditionally existing social ties and players themselves.In this sense, (first and second-generation) Pacific Island migrants have been undermultiple and ever increasing culturally induced stresses, deriving from a range of sources:challenges of the host environment and/or securing a rugby position away from family;single-mindedness regarding their rugby career; cultural pressures to succeed andreach the ‘rugby dream’ and to provide financial stability for the (extended) family.A multiplicity of pressures accompanies Pacific Island youth along their rugby career andthese can be severely damaging both socially and psychologically. In some extreme cases,the culmination of various types of social obligations has led to young island men endingtheir own life due to their perceived failure in rugby and, hence, in society. Hortonprovides two recent key examples, Mosese Fotuaika and Alex Elisala, to illustrate thepertinence of such pressures. Both of these athletes with a range of traditional culturalresponsibilities of being close to their respective ‘rugby dream’ ‘cracked’ under the manydemands that had been put on them and committed suicide. In his essay, Horton revealssome of the dark aspects of Pacific Island rugby migrations and argues that despite a fewpositive strategies implemented by metropolitan clubs, young men from the Pacific Islandsor with Pacific Island heritage still ply their rugby trade under immense social pressures.The next article, by Brent McDonald and Lena Rodriguez, further examines thespecific social demands and stereotypes which Polynesian men experience in Australia inrelation to immigration and sport. They argue that there is a strong functionalist attitude tosport in Australia that attributes predominantly positive, egalitarian features to all sport,and to rugby in particular; however, the reality of sporting spaces is extensively dependenton gender, race and ethnicity discourses and one’s success is strongly influenced by one’sability to successfully negotiate between specific cultural, post-colonial discourses.In the context of migration, one of the most visible and desired employment options forPacific Islanders in Australia is in the professional rugby codes. In this ethnically chargedcultural milieu, migrant Polynesian men are considered successful, natural athletes witha rugby career pathway in focus. Rugby is their ‘meal ticket’. Thus, via the socialmanifestation of Polycultural capital – the ‘maintenance of Pacific values, cultural pride,Pacific language fluency and acceptance from Pacific peoples and others’ (Mila-Schaaf &Robinson, 2010, p. 14) – Polynesian men appear to buy into the dominant discourseregarding their hyper-physicality and thus their predestined road to rugby stardom.McDonald and Rodriguez point out that the number of sport star wannabes, driven by self-fulfilling prophecies, among Polynesian young men significantly surpasses the actualnumber of professional contracts available. Thus, there is a serious and ever growing issueof players who do not make the professional ranks and leave the sport pathway withoutother viable options available – a finding that is supported by our own previous work(Kanemasu & Molnar, 2014a ). Moreover, the general perception of Polynesian men as‘hyper-masculine’ and ‘natural born athletes’ has created dominant cultural discourseswhich have influenced both Polynesians and the wider Australian society as well. Due tosuch general racialized perceptions, Polynesian men have been led to believe that sportingsuccess offsets the neglect of their education and health. To combat such racializedstereotypes, much greater structural engagement is required to develop essential dialoguesbetween immigrants and the general public, which consequently would help Polynesianmen realize their potential outside of contact sports.While the Islanders have long established migratory pipelines with New Zealand andAustralia, which have been active in channelling immigrants in ever increasing numbers,emerging rugby-specific migratory trends can also be observed. Dominik Schiederintroduces the case of Fiji Islander rugby union players in Japan, one of the emerging host182 G. Molnar and Y. KanemasuDownloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 countries for Pacific Island male rugby players. Based on ethnographic field work,Schieder provides a detailed socio-historical account of Japanese corporate rugby and theemerging presence of Fijian players in it. The pioneers of the Fiji–Japan migratory routeappeared in the early 1990s, to be followed by others recruited in and outside of Fijithrough both formal and informal channels. Fijian and other migrant players are contractedby corporate rugby teams to ply their physical and tactical skills for the benefit of thecorporations. As corporate rugby slowly shifted from amateurism to professionalism, therole of migrant players increased greatly and became instrumental in both Japanesecorporate and rugby development. Schieder identified two key reasons for recruiting Fijianplayers: rugby and social skills and lower employment costs. These Fiji Islanders arrivein Japanese corporate rugby via four different but interconnected routes that channelfour types of migrants. These types we, the editors, categorize as amateur, scholarship,nomadic and transnational. Amateurs are born and recruited in Fiji, where they have anemerging rugby career. They are predominantly recruited by both formal (agents) andinformal (Japanese holidaymakers with corporate links) channels. They are predominantlyemployed by lower-level clubs and retain amateur status. Scholarship athletes are youngtalented Fijian rugby players in the early stages of their domestic sporting career. They areoffered places in Japanese high schools and universities where, during their studies, theyare expected to contribute to the rugby team’s performance. Upon finishing school theseathletes are often approached by corporate teams with contract offers. The third category isnomadic Fijian rugby players, who were born and raised in Fiji but have successfullyglobally plied their rugby skills before moving to Japan. These players are formallyrecruited and offered better contract terms than migrants of other categories due to theirextensive global playing experience. The final category is the transnational Fijians,who emigrated in childhood or were born outside Fiji, and came to be involved in rugbypost-migration. Some of these players become part of a Fijian diaspora in the host countrywhere they attended school and learned to play rugby. Transnational athletes, meanwhile,arrive in Japan through various talent pipelines and from different transit countries and,thus, can be found across the levels of corporate rugby.The above categories in particular, and Schieder’s article in general, provide relevant,detailed insight into the ever changing migration networks and contingencies with specificrespect to Japanese corporate rugby and provide directions for further research.Niko Besnier composed the coda for this special issue, in which he ponders uponthe complexity of Pacific Island-related migrations and argues that sport-drivenperegrinations of athletes from this geographic region are inherently connected tohistorical, political, social and global dynamics. Besnier observes that the cliche´ of natural‘Polynesian flair’ present in, among other spheres, the global journalistic imagination, isan extension of colonial and post-colonial western perceptions of non-white bodies andthus is frequently used to make overarching assumptions regarding the general populationof the region. This creates a highly problematic and myopic perception of the peoples ofthe Pacific, as this discourse exclusively focuses on young, trained male bodies and masksthe corporeal features and realities of the people who do not belong to this exclusive circle.As Besnier (this issue) puts it, ‘many other bodies in the same societies do not display thesame characteristics or do not display them to the same extent, a fact that calls intoquestion the basis upon which this flair can be characterized as “Fijian”, “Samoan”or “Tongan”’.Buying into such narratives grotesquely and inaccurately simplifies the socio-culturaltapestry of the Pacific Islands and the great variety of peoples and bodies sharing thatgeo-social space. Besnier’s account of Fiji draws our attention to the heterogeneity of theAsia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science 183Downloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 population of this (and any other) small island nation, which consists of two dominantethnic groups (i Taukei or indigenous Fijians and Indo-Fijians, making up approximatelyjust over 90 per cent of the total population) and a wealth of ethnic minorities, includingpeoples of other Pacific Island or Chinese ancestry and local ‘European’ descendants oftraders and other settlers from Britain, to name but a few. Consequently, research that issignificant and of value needs to embrace local history, coupled with a cognizance ofindigenous political subtleties engulfed by globalization processes, especially post-colonialperspectives. In this way, we can critically distance ourselves from globally manufacturedand perpetuated stereotypes and begin to understand alternative, emerging discourses(Kanemasu & Molnar, 2013c). As Besnier (this issue) succinctly puts it, ‘To understandFijian [and Pacific Island] rugby, we must understand who does not play it; to understandrugby players’ mobilities, we must understand other mobilities; and to understand whatdrives these mobilities, we must pay attention to what discourages them.’ Along withBesnier and others featured in this special issue, we suggest exploring absent and emergingvoices and cultural practices in regard to sport-related migration in, from and to the PacificIslands. Our special issue is intended to serve as a contribution towards this end – building abody of literature that engages with Pacific Island rugby with all its complexities,contradictions and multiplicities and thereby offers Pacific Island rugby researchers,players, officials and stakeholders critical insights into the game that matters so much to somany.ReferencesBale, J. (1991). The brawn drain: Foreign student-athletes in American universities. Urbana:University of Illinois Press.Bale, J. (2000). Sports as power: Running as resistance? In J. P. Sharp, P. Routledge, C. Philo, &R. Paddison (Eds.), Entanglements of Power (pp. 148–163). New York, NY: Routledge.Castles, S., de Hass, H., & Miller, J. M. (2013). The age of migration: International populationmovements in the modern world (5th ed.). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.Dewey, R. (2008). Pacific Islands rugby: Navigating the global professional era. In G. Ryan (Ed.),The changing face of rugby: The union game and professionalism since 1995 (pp. 82–108).Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars.Harris, J. (2010). Rugby union and globalization: An odd-shaped world. Basingstoke: PalgraveMacmillan.Horton, P. (2012). Pacific Islanders in global rugby: The changing currents of sports migration.International Journal of the History of Sport, 29, 2388–2404.Horton, P. (Ed.) (2014). Pasifikas in Global Rugby. Special Edition of the International Journal ofthe History of Sport, 31.Kanemasu, Y., & Molnar, G. (2013a). Collective identity and contested allegiance: A case ofmigrant professional Fijian rugby players. Sport in Society, 16, 863–882.Kanemasu, Y., &Molnar, G. (2013b). Pride of the people: Fijian rugby labour migration and culturalidentity. International Review for the Sociology of Sport, 48, 720–735.Kanemasu, Y., & Molnar, G. (2013c). Problematising the dominant: The emergence of alternativecultural voices in Fiji rugby. Asia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science, 2, 14–30.Kanemasu, Y., & Molnar, G. (2014a). Life after rugby: Issues of being an ‘ex’ in Fiji rugby. TheInternational Journal of the History of Sport, 31, 1389–1405.Kanemasu, Y., & Molnar, G. (2014b). The cultural complexity of challenging post-colonialhegemonic masculinity: Women’s struggles in Fiji rugby. Paper presented at the World Congressof Sociology of Sport, Beijing, China.Maguire, J. & Falcous, M. (Eds.). (2011). Sport and migration: Borders, boundaries and crossings.London: Routledge.McCracken, G. (1988). The long interview. London: Sage.Mila-Schaaf, K., & Robinson, E. (2010). ‘“Polycultural” capital and educational achievement amongNZ-born Pacific peoples’. Mai Review, 1, 1–18.184 G. Molnar and Y. KanemasuDownloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 Molnar, G., & Kelly, J. (2013). Sport, exercise and social theory: An Introduction. London:Routledge.Purdy, L., Molnar, G., Griffith, L., & Castle, P. (2014). Ilona: ‘Tweeting’ through culturaladjustments. In K. Armour (Ed.), Pedagogical cases in sport, exercise and physical activity(pp. 222–234). London: Pearson.Ryan, G. (Ed.). (2008). The changing face of rugby. The union game and professionalism since 1995.Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.Asia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science 185Downloaded by [202.151.30.6] at 17:12 24 January 2015 