ABSTRACT: 
Some philosophers believe that the passage of time is a real phenomenon. And some of them find a reason to believe this when they attend to features of their conscious experience. In fact this “argument from experience” is supposed to be one of the main arguments for passage. What exactly does this argument look like? Is it any good? There are in fact many different arguments from experience. I am not sure I understand them all. In this paper I want to talk about the three most interesting arguments that I do understand. I am going to argue that all three of them fail. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Some philosophers believe that the passage of time is a real phenomenon. And some of them find a reason to believe this when they attend to features of their conscious experience. In fact this “argument from experience” is supposed to be one of the main arguments for passage. What exactly does this argument look like? Is it any good? There are in fact many different arguments from experience. I am not sure I understand them all. In this paper I want to talk about the three most interesting arguments that I do understand. I am going to argue that all three of them fail. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Experience and the Passage of Time∗Bradford Skow1 IntroductionSome philosophers believe that the passage of time is a real phenomenon. Andsome of them find a reason to believe this when they attend to features of theirconscious experience. In fact this “argument from experience” is supposed to beone of the main arguments for passage. What exactly does this argument look like?Is it any good?There are in fact many different arguments from experience. I am not sureI understand them all. In this paper I want to talk about the three most interestingarguments that I do understand.1 I am going to argue that all three of them fail.∗Forthcoming in Philosophical Perspectives.1I will not say anything about A. N. Prior’s “Thank Goodness That’s Over”argument (Prior 1959) because it is not an argument from experience (even thoughit is often said to be). Here is Prior’s argument: I can be glad that my ordeal is overwithout being glad that my ordeal is earlier than this thought or that my ordealis earlier than 12 noon. But the latter two propositions are the propositions thatsome opponents of passage (the ones Prior knew) identified with the propositionthat my ordeal is over. Prior concluded that the object of my propositional attitudeis a proposition that only proponents of passage believe in.Phenomenal experience does not play an important role in this argument. True,there is some distinctive phenomenal “feel” that (sometimes? usually? always?)occurs when I am glad about something. But what matters for Prior’s argument isthe propositional attitude component of gladness, not the phenomenological com-ponent. The argument is about the objects of that propositional attitude. (Callender(2008) mentions some other arguments advertised as connecting experience andpassage that, like Prior’s, do not in fact do so.)12 The Passage ThesisWe should begin at the beginning: what are the theories of time under dispute here?In one corner we have the B-theory. The B-theory says: there are times; thetimes are structured by the relation x is r seconds earlier than y; this relation givestime the same order and metric structure as the real numbers. And that is all.In the other corner we have the moving spotlight theory. The moving spotlighttheory says that the B-theory leaves something out. In addition to the characteristicsthe B-theory says time has, there is also this: exactly one time has the intrinsicproperty presentness. (Maybe things located at that time and events that occur atthat time also have presentness.) Presentness is the “spotlight” that shines on justone time. Moreover, which time has presentness changes. Some time has it, butlater times will have it, and earlier times have had it. The spotlight moves alongthe series of times at a steady pace. It is this continual change in which time haspresentness that in the moving spotlight theory constitutes the passage of time, or“objective becoming.” When B-theorists deny that the passage of time is a realphenomenon they mean to deny that anything like this goes on; there is no suchproperty as presentness that is instantiated first by earlier and then by later times.(There are, of course, other things “the passage of time” might mean and whenit has one of those other meanings a B-theorist might accept the sentence “Thepassage of time is a real phenomenon.”)There are four comments I should make about these theories.First, I have just presented one version of the B-theory. There are other ver-sions. Some versions disagree with my version about the structure of time. Theysay that time has a metric structure but no intrinsic ordering. In those versions thereis no intrinsic difference between the future and the past directions in time. Otherversions of the B-theory say what my version says about the structure of time butthen say something different about which relation “gives” time that structure. (Inthe version I presented a name for a unit of measurement (“second”) appears in thepredicate that expresses the relation that gives time its structure. Some might findthis objectionable.) Still other, more radical versions say that time has an order butnot a metric structure, or that time has a first, or a last, moment. And there are still2other versions as well. The differences between these versions will not matter here.Second, the moving spotlight theory is not the only theory that endorses pas-sage. There are other “A-theories” of time, including presentism and the “growingblock” theory. I focus on the moving spotlight theory in this paper because I thinkit is the best A-theory of time (though I will not defend this claim here). I am notsure how good the arguments I will discuss would look (or even how they wouldbe formulated) if my target were instead, say, presentism. But for reasons of spaceI cannot give a separate discussion of the argument from experience for each A-theory.Third, as I have formulated them the B-theory and the moving spotlight the-ory are both versions of substantivalism: they say that there are such things as times.Some philosophers reject this view. They say that while there are events and tem-poral relations between events (they agree that World War II occurred after WorldWar I) there are no times at which those events are temporally located. This debate,again, will not matter in what follows.Fourth, my statement of the moving spotlight theory is likely to mislead ifit is not accompanied by some comments on the language in which the theory isformulated. That language contains tense operators, including the operators “It willbe the case that...” and “It was the case that...” When the moving spotlight theoristsays “A time later than T will have presentness” he is abbreviating a sentence thatcontains one of these operators — namely, “It will be the case that a time laterthan T has presentness.” These tense operators are “primitive.” Truth-conditionsfor sentences containing them cannot be given using quantification over times. Sothe moving spotlight theorist says that the following is false:(1) “It will be the case that T has presentness” is true at T* iff at a time later thanT*, T has presentness.Why does the theory need primitive tense operators? Two connected reasons. First,the moving spotlight theorist insists that “It will be the case that T has present-ness” is true simpliciter. But (1) says that its truth is relativized to times. Second,the truth-conditions in (1) treat presentness as a relation between times. But, the3moving spotlight theorist says, it is not; it is an intrinsic property.23 The Argument from the Content of ExperienceSome B-theorists have thought they could defuse all arguments from experiencewithout having to figure out just how those arguments work. They argue: supposingthat the moving spotlight theory is true, my experience would be just the same ifthe B-theory were true, and vice versa. So experience cannot favor the movingspotlight theory over the B-theory.3This is a bad argument. Even if it is true that each of the theories is consistentwith my experience being as it is, it does not follow that the fact that my experienceis that way fails to favor one of the theories over the other. This is an instance ofa general epistemological truth: a body of evidence can support some hypothesiswithout entailing that hypothesis. A body of evidence, for example, may be con-sistent with each of two hypotheses but may be better explained by one hypothesisthan it is by the other. In that case the evidence favors the hypothesis that betterexplains it. As we will see, some ways of putting together an argument from ex-perience say that the moving spotlight theory better explains some feature of ourexperience. Let us get on to what those arguments look like.Here is a line of thought that leads to one of them. B-theorists admit that2This is a compressed version of the argument that the moving spotlight theoryneeds primitive tense operators. The argument may not be sound; there may beversions of the moving spotlight theory that do without primitive tense operators.But for the purposes of this paper we do not need to worry about whether this isso. (See Zimmerman (2005) for a discussion of how best to formulate the movingspotlight theory of time. Several different versions of the theory are described in(Skow forthcoming).)Moving spotlight theorists need not say that every tensed sentence abbreviatesa sentence containing primitive tense operators. They might sometimes mean bytensed sentences just what B-theorists mean. So it might be that when a movingspotlight theorist says “Greta won the race” what he says is true iff there is a timeT earlier than the time of utterance such that Greta wins the race at T.3Price (1996, 14-15) gives this argument and Prosser (forthcoming-a) endorsesit. Maudlin (2007) denies the premise. But the argument is bad even if the premiseis granted.4there seems to be an objective passage of time. They just say that this is an illusion.Moving spotlight theorists, on the other hand, say that things are as they seem. Timereally does pass.A moving spotlight theorist might stop here and argue: his theory is superiorbecause it is only in his theory that things are as they seem.4 But this is not a goodargument. A B-theorist might have an excellent story to tell about why things arenot as they seem. If he does then it should not count against his theory that it sayswe are subject to an illusion.So a better way to run the argument is to look at what each theory says aboutwhy time seems to pass. The argument will be that the moving spotlight theory’sexplanation is better than the B-theorists’ explanations, and so (other things beingequal) we should believe the moving spotlight theory.To understand this argument we must know what “time seems to pass” meansas it occurs in the argument. Now there are lots of things that “time seems to pass”can mean. Here is one thing someone might say about it:When I say that time seems to pass I have in mind the following kindof thing. This weekend is my tenth college reunion. So I have beenthinking about my college years all day. I haven’t thought about thatstuff since the last reunion, five years ago. It all seems so much furtherin the past now! That is the kind of thing I am talking about when I saythat time seems to pass.This cannot explain what “time seems to pass” means in the argument I am dis-cussing. That is because in the argument I am discussing the B-theorist follows uphis admission that time seems to pass with “but this is just an illusion.” But anyB-theorist who meant what the (fictional) speaker means by “time seems to pass”would not say this. For (if the B-theory is true) there is nothing that the speakeris wrong about. His college years seem farther in the past; and they are farther inthe past. The temporal distance between his act of thinking and the time he was incollege is greater.4This seems to be the argument in (Hare 2010).5So if there is an argument here for the moving spotlight theory then “timeseems to pass” as it occurs in the argument must mean something else. What else?Comparing the moving spotlight theory and the B-theory to realism and elimina-tivism about color suggests an interpretation.5 Realists and eliminativists aboutcolor agree that ripe tomatoes seem red. This seeming is, of course, a “visual”seeming: realists and eliminativists agree that ripe tomatoes look red. They agreethat ripe tomatoes are visually represented as red. Or, to say the same thing in amore complicated way, they agree that the experience I have when I look at a redtomato has the propositional content that the tomato is red.6 Realists about color goon to say that ripe tomatoes are, in fact, red. They are as they look; our experiencerepresents them correctly. Eliminativists deny this. They say that while tomatoeslook red this is just an illusion.One straightforward interpretation of “time seems to pass” is that it, like“tomatoes look red,” is a claim about the content of some experience or experi-ences. On this interpretation B-theorists and moving spotlight theorists agree thatthe content of (some of) our experiences includes the proposition that there is objec-tive becoming. Their disagreement is about whether the world is as our experiencerepresents it to be. What makes this interpretation plausible is that B-theorists liketo follow their concession that time seems to pass with “but this is just an illusion.”An illusion is a kind of mis-representation. So if the passage of time is an illusionthere must be a (mis)representation around that represents its occurrence.A more precise statement of the argument from the content of experience,then, is this:7 experience favors the moving spotlight theory over the B-theory be-5Several philosophers make this comparison; it goes back at least to (Grünbaum1967).6Some philosophers deny that “the tomato looks red to me,” “the tomato is visu-ally represented as red to me,” and “I am having a visual experience with the contentthat the tomato is red” are all equivalent. But — with one exception, which I willcome to shortly — there is no harm in this context in treating them as equivalent.(See (Byrne 2009a) for discussion.)7There is another argument that I might have called “the argument from thecontent of experience.” That argument goes: the moving spotlight theory better ex-plains why and how our experiences represent things as changing than the B-theorydoes. (Among others, Le Poidevin (2007) and Dainton (2011) discuss something6cause the moving spotlight theory has a better explanation of the fact that (some)experiences have the content that time passes.8To begin evaluating this argument let us look at the assumption it starts with:the assumption that our experiences (some of them at least) have the content thattime passes. Now the objective passage of time consists in change in which time haspresentness.9 So if some of our experiences have the content that time passes, thensome of our experiences have the content that some time has, or some things thatexist in time have, presentness.10 And if some experience has the content that some-thing has presentness, then, it seems safe to assume, some visual experience does.So the assumption the argument starts with entails that some things are visuallyrepresented as having presentness. Some things look like they have presentness.Which things? Presumably all the things I see. This apple, that chair, the black-board — each does not just look to have a certain shape and a certain color. Eachone also looks like it has presentness.Is this true? I am not sure. It would help if I had some conception of whatsomething has to look like in order for it to look like it has presentness. A ripetomato and a firetruck look very different in many respects, but there is also alike this argument.)I will not say anything about this argument in the body of this paper. Here aresome brief comments on it. The argument might appeal to the idea, common amongA-theorists, that there is no “real change” in the B-theory (this idea goes back atleast to McTaggart (1908)). If this premise were true the argument might havesomething going for it; but the premise is false (I have nothing to add to what otherB-theorists have said about why it is false). If the argument does not appeal to thispremise then I do not think the argument is even initially appealing.8Remarks that suggest this argument may be found in many places. Some placeswhere it is relatively explicit are: (Smart 1980, 10), (Hestevold 1990, 541), (Taylor1992, 81), (Smith 1994, 357), and (Paul 2010, 334-39). But there may be alternativeinterpretations of each of these texts.9According to the moving spotlight theory, at least. But that is the only theoryof passage I am considering in this paper.10I write “has presentness” rather than “is present” to emphasize that the expe-rience (allegedly) represents the intrinsic property that moving spotlight theoristsbelieve in and B-theorists do not. Later in the paper I will revert back to the morenatural “is present.”7salient respect in which they look similar. And there is a respect in which bothlook different from oranges and chocolate bars. It is (at least in part) by attendingto these similarities and differences that I get a grip on what something has to looklike in order for it to look red. But the analogous procedure for getting a grip onwhat something has to look like in order for it to look like it has presentness doesnot work. For either everything or nothing I see looks like it has presentness.11I will have to press on without this kind of conceptual help. Now “the tomatolooks like it has presentness” strikes me as false. Actually, my response is muchstronger: it strikes me as crazy, as absurd. But I do not want to place much weighton this judgment. For it may strike me as false only because I use the word “looks.”Compare: does the tomato look like it exists? I find this question baffling. Never-theless, I do think that my visual experience has the content that the tomato exists.(Or at least I find this harder to deny.) Maybe, similarly, my visual experience rep-resents that the tomato has presentness even though it sounds wrong to say that thetomato looks like it has presentness.So far I have reached no conclusion about whether things look like they havepresentness. Here is one argument someone might give in favor of this claim. Weagree that my visual experience represents that there is a tomato. But “is” here is thepresent tense form of the verb “to be.” And representing that something is (presenttense) F is sufficient for representing that it has presentness.I do not think that this is a very good argument in this context. A moving spot-light theorist might accept this sufficient condition for representing that somethinghas presentness. But no B-theorist will. And what we want right now is a reason tothink that things are represented as present that even B-theorists can recognize.This is as far as I have got in my thinking about the claim that everything I seeis visually represented as having presentness. I have not found a decisive reason toaccept this claim, but I also have not found a decisive reason to reject it. In order to11I suppose someone could say that in normal conditions everything I see lookslike it has presentness, but there are very rare and very strange circumstances inwhich I can see something that does not look like it has presentness. But I do notknow of anyone who has said this or said what those circumstances are, so thispossibility is no help in the present context.8make some progress I am going to grant that it is true. The argument from contentis in trouble even if this claim is granted.I should say one more thing about the status of this claim. I arrived at it fromthe assumption that some experience represents that something has presentness.But moving spotlight theorists do not need to agree that some visual experience hasthis content. Of course, the moving spotlight theorist is hardly better off sayingthat it is only auditory experiences that represent time passing. How odd it wouldbe to say that things sound like they have presentness but nothing looks like it haspresentness. But they could maintain that no experience that comes to us from thefive senses represents that something has presentness. Only experiences that comefrom introspection have this content. So, the thought is, it does not look like timepasses, or sound like time passes. Apples do not look present and trains do notsound present. Instead we have experiences as of the passage of time only whenwe look “inward.” It is our own internal states, the states that are the objects ofintrospection, that appear present. Some moving spotlight theorists might thinkthat this is a more plausible claim than the claim that things look present.Introspection is a difficult topic. Some philosophers deny that we have aquasi-perceptual faculty of introspection, an “inner eye” with which we may gazeon our own internal states. (Byrne (forthcoming), building on some remarks byEvans (1982, 226), defends this view.) If our inner states do not appear to us anywhich way at all then they do not appear present and the move to introspection hasnot helped. But suppose Byrne is wrong and we do have introspectable experiences.Then I am also willing to grant for the sake of argument that when I introspect anexperience it is represented as present. However, in what follows I will stick to thecase of visual experience. I do not think anything turns on making this choice.So let us assume that time does seem to pass. Which theory of time betterexplains why this is so? It can look like the B-theory is at an initial disadvantagehere. The idea is that if time does pass then it is relatively easy to explain why itseems to pass. The moving spotlight theorist just needs to say that this is an instanceof veridical perception. So, the thought goes, the moving spotlight theory alreadyhas a relatively good explanation of the fact that time seems to pass. To defendthe B-theory B-theorists must produce a better explanation. And what they have to9explain is why our experiences represent a property (or represent things having aproperty) that nothing can have. And that has got to be relatively hard to do. Whatwill the B-theorist say is the cause of this illusion?B-theorists have proposed explanations, some more detailed than others. (See,for example, (Smart 1980), (Paul 2010), and (Prosser forthcoming-b).) But (con-tinuing to grant that there is something to be explained here) I do not think we needto know the details of the B-theorists’ explanations to know that the argument fromthe content of experience is no good. That is because the moving spotlight theory’sexplanation, as it currently stands, is terrible.Moving spotlight theorists want to explain why thinks look like they have pre-sentness by appealing to the fact that those things in fact have presentness. So theythink that presentness is a visible property, a property we can veridically perceivesomething to have by looking at it. They think that presentness is, in this respect,like redness and squareness but unlike (say) electrical charge. Square things looksquare in part because they are square, but nothing looks negatively charged.For their explanation of the fact that time seems to pass to be any good mov-ing spotlight theorists need to offer us some story explaining how (if their view iscorrect) presentness manages to be visible rather than invisible. Otherwise theirexplanation of the fact that time seems to pass has a big hole in the middle. But Ihave never seen a moving spotlight theorist, or any A-theorist, tell such a story.I have doubts about whether such a story can be told.12 My doubts emergesfrom thinking about an argument for a different conclusion. D. H. Mellor arguedthat “we do not observe the tense of events,” and some (including Hestevold (1990,541)) have read Mellor’s argument as an argument that nothing looks present.13The argument does not establish this conclusion; that is why I did not give it above.But it leads us to where we now want to go. Here is the argument: I look througha telescope and see a star. Unbeknownst to me the star is no more. It died in asupernova years ago. But the star was so far away when it died that the light from12Prosser (2007, 88) gives an argument for this claim that in some respects re-sembles the one to follow. (See also (Prosser forthcoming-a).)13Mellor’s argument is on page 26 of Real Time (1981). I have modified theexample in the argument.10the supernova has not yet reached the earth. Later I go to the planetarium for alecture on that star. The planetarium is so good that when I look at the ceilingthings looks exactly as they did when I looked through the telescope. Hestevoldconcludes: “since past events [or past things] appear through the telescope to anobserver in the same way that present events [or things] appear to the observer,”nothing looks like it has presentness.The problem with this argument is obvious: from the fact that the star andthe ceiling look the same it does not follow that neither looks present. Maybe theyboth look present. It does not matter that the star is no longer around and does nothave presentness. If this is not obvious enough on its face consider the analogy withredness. Suppose I turn my telescope onto another star, one that still exists. Thatstar looks red. In fact its color is indistinguishable from that of the tomato on mydesk.14 Unbeknownst to me the star is no longer red. Its color has changed as it hasaged. But the star is so far away that the light indicating its current color has notyet reached the earth. It would be wrong to conclude: since non-red things appearthrough the telescope to an observer in the same way as red things, nothing looksred.The second star looks red to me, even though it is not red, in part becauseit was red when the light reaching me departed the star. The moving spotlighttheorist might say something similar about the first star: the first star looks like ithas presentness, even though it does not, in part because it had presentness whenthe light reaching me departed the star.But the analogy between redness and presentness here falls apart when youthink about it more. The picture in figure 1 captures what is going on when the starlooks red even though it no longer is. (In this and all other figures, the stick figuredepicts me.) The star is 500 light years away. Back in 1511 the star was red and redlight left the star. That light hits my eyes in 2011. The star looks red to me.What picture captures what is going on when the star looks present eventhough it no longer is? Maybe the picture in figure 2? In that picture the yellowhalo indicates which time (and which things) have presentness.14I do not spend much time looking at the stars. Perhaps no star could look thesame in color as any tomato. If you think so then substitute a different example.11Figure 1: The Brown Star Looks Red15112011Figure 2: The Star Looks Present?15112011This picture cannot be the right picture. For in it the light leaves the star in1511, but the star does not have presentness. The story we are told, though, is that12the star had presentness when the light left it.We are running up against the feature of the moving spotlight theory thatmakes the theory so hard to grasp. In that theory things and times have, or lack,presentness simpliciter. They do not have, or lack, presentness at some times andnot at others. So while the light leaves the star in 1511, the star does not havepresentness in 1511. It also does not lack presentness in 1511. It lacks presentnesssimpliciter.Of course, the moving spotlight theorist will say, it was the case that the starhas presentness. But it is false that “it was the case that P” is true iff there is someearlier time at which P.15 So the moving spotlight theorist may reply that we needto consider the picture in figure 3 along with the picture in figure 2. In the picturein figure 3 the star does have presentness. The picture in figure 2 depicts what is thecase; the picture in figure 3 depicts what was the case.Figure 3: It was the case that...1511201115Instances of this schema are true for many sentences P; but not for all of them.This will come up again below.13But this only makes things worse. In one picture the star has presentnessand in the other it does not. But the exact state of the photons leaving the staris the same in both pictures. Photons of the same frequencies depart in the samedirections. And the exact state of the photons arriving at my retina is the same inboth pictures. It is hard to see how presentness can be a visible property if this istrue.Think about why redness is visible. Redness is a visible property becausethings that have redness interact with light differently from things that lack it. (Thisis not to say that no non-red thing ever looks red, just that this requires specialcircumstances.) That kind of story about why presentness is visible has been ruledout. We have just seen that having presentness makes no difference to the waysomething interacts with light.Of course, in my argument that presentness makes no difference I assumedthat when the spotlight moves from one time to another nothing else changes. Fig-ures 2 and 3 differ only over the location of the halo. (More carefully, I have as-sumed that if S is a sentence that does not contain “presentness” (or any other namefor or description of that property) and does not contain any primitive tense oper-ators then “It was the case that S” is true iff S is true.) Might a moving spotlighttheorist abandon this assumption? He would have to say something like this: thehaloed photons differ in some physical way (maybe they have different frequencies)from the unhaloed photons. It is false that the photons in 1511 are in the same phys-ical state in both pictures. If the moving spotlight theorist says this then presentnessdoes seem to be making a difference to the light leaving objects that have it.But it is hard to take this suggestion seriously. It seems flat-out inconsistentwith what we know about physics. In no physical theory that one might consult tofigure out how light leaves that star does presentness play a role in determining thephotons’ state.So if presentness is visible it cannot be visible for the same kinds of reasonsthat redness is visible.This does not prove that presentness is not visible. For there may be otherways a property can be visible. Suppose I have a twin brother. And suppose thatyou do not know this and have never seen him. But you know me and see me all the14time. One day my brother walks by your window and you see him for the first time.You certainly believe that I am walking by. And your visual experience certainlyhas the content that someone with qualitative features F is walking by (where Fare the qualitative features I have). But maybe more is true: maybe your extendedacquaintance with me also makes it the case that your visual experience has thecontent that Skow is walking by. Perhaps the property of being Skow is representedin your experience. If so then this property is visible even though my brother and Ireflect light in just the same ways.16Maybe a story like this could be told about how presentness gets to be visible.I do not know how it would go. I would certainly like to see it. But in the absence ofsuch a story the moving spotlight theorist does not have a better explanation for thefact that time seems to pass than the B-theorist. The argument from content doesnot succeed.4 The Argument from the Phenomenal Character of ExperienceI cheated a little bit when I reported Hestevold’s conclusion about the star. He didnot write “nothing looks like it has presentness.” What he actually wrote is “beingpresent is not a phenomenal property.” Now “phenomenal property” has severaluses in philosophy.17 I am not sure which way Hestevold is using it. It may bethat by “phenomenal property” he just means a property that may be representedby experience. Then although he used different words his conclusion is the con-clusion I reported: nothing looks present. But he might mean something else by“phenomenal property.” That something else suggests a different argument fromexperience.Experiences do not just have representational content. They also have “phe-nomenal character.” There is “something it is like” to have them. On one way of us-ing “phenomenal property” talk about the phenomenal properties of an experienceis talk about that experience’s phenomenal character. When someone asks whetherpresentness is a phenomenal property, then, he may be asking whether experiences16Siegel (2011) thinks that visual experience can have contents like this.17Byrne (2009b) explores the confusions around its use.15that have presentness “feel” different from experiences that do not.Is there an argument in favor of the moving spotlight theory lurking aroundhere? If there is it might go like this. The moving spotlight theorist starts by sayingthat, in his view, experiences that have presentness do indeed feel different from ex-periences that do not. He then says that this allows his theory to explain things thatthe B-theory cannot explain, or cannot explain well. This explanatory advantage,he continues, counts in favor of his theory. This, in outline, is the argument fromthe phenomenal character of experience (for short: the argument from phenomenol-ogy).Like the argument from the content of experience, the argument from phe-nomenology attempts to show that the moving spotlight theory is explanatorily su-perior to the B-theory, and that for that reason we should believe it. The argumentfrom phenomenology might seem good even in light of what I have said about theargument from content. Maybe the lesson of my discussion of the argument fromcontent is that when arguing in favor of passage the best way to interpret “It seemslike time passes” is not as a claim about the content of experience but instead as aclaim about its phenomenal character.I want to make another comment about the relationship between the argu-ment from content and the argument from phenomenology. Many philosophersaccept intentionalism: the thesis that the phenomenal character of an experienceis determined by, or at least supervenes on, its representational content. If inten-tionalism is true then any moving spotlight theorist who says that experiences withpresentness have a distinctive phenomenal character must also say that they havea distinctive representational content. Does this mean that if intentionalism is truethen the arguments from content and from phenomenology are the same argument?Not necessarily. A moving spotlight theorist might say that although experi-ences that have presentness differ in content from experiences that lack it, they donot differ over whether they represent anything as having presentness. Their contentdiffers in some other way. (What other way? I have no idea. I am not suggestingthat this is a plausible claim.) A moving spotlight theorist who says this rejects apremise of the argument from content. But he might still think that the argumentfrom phenomenology was good. So that argument would still deserve independent16consideration.18Let us take a closer look at the argument. I have only presented an outlineof the argument from phenomenology. I have not said what it is that the movingspotlight theorist aims to explain. That is because I do not know any way of fillingin this detail that makes the argument plausible.So what phenomenon is being explained? One candidate is: the fact thatmy current experiences feel like this. Now this is not a particularly informativecharacterization of the phenomenal character of my current experiences. But it willdo for now.My current experiences occur on Tuesday. So my current experiences are myTuesday experiences. Those experiences have a certain phenomenal feel. The ques-tion is: why do those experiences feel that way? The moving spotlight theorist says:because they have presentness. The B-theorist will have some other explanation (itwill not matter what it looks like).Now as I phrased the question it looks like the moving spotlight theorist aims18Many B-theorists talk about the phenomenal character of experience when theytalk about the fact that time seems to pass. This suggests the argument from phe-nomenology. Then in the next breath they say that although it seems like time passesthis is just an illusion. This suggests the argument from content. Maybe they talklike this because they think the arguments are the same. Anyway, for this reasonit is hard to give examples of philosophers who definitely have the argument fromphenomenology rather than the argument from content in mind. One philosopherwho does at least sometimes seem to aim just at the argument from phenomenologyis Prosser in his paper “Could We Experience the Passage of Time?” He writes thatthe objective passage of time is not “directly perceived through the outer senses inthe same way as colors.” That looks like a rejection of a premise in the argumentfrom content. Then he goes on to say that “time seeming to pass is a feature ofconscious experience with a distinctive phenomenology” (2007, 76-77). That lookslike an endorsement of the premise in the argument from phenomenology. (I thinkthat in the first part of this quotation Prosser means to make the stronger claim thatvisual and auditory experience do not represent objective passage, not the weakerclaim that either they do not represent this or they do but what they represent isfalse. I should say that this interpretation does not perfectly fit everything Prossersays: some of the arguments in Prosser’s paper, like the one I referred to in footnote12, are aimed at the argument from content.)17to explain every aspect of the way my Tuesday experiences feel. But he need notbe that ambitious. It would do if he had a good explanation for just some aspect ofthe way those experiences feel.Okay, so, is the moving spotlight theory’s explanation a better explanation ofthe feel of my Tuesday experiences? I am not going to answer this question directly.Instead I am going to discuss a related question: is the moving spotlight theory’sexplanation any good? If it is not then we can safely assume it is not better than theB-theorist’s.If the moving spotlight theory’s explanation is to be any good then the movingspotlight theorist has to say that experiences that lack presentness, but are otherwiseas similar as possible to my Tuesday experiences, have a different phenomenal char-acter. Is that right? To answer it will help to reflect on an example. So suppose thatI spent today (Tuesday) in a red room (everything in it is red); and I did so on Mon-day as well. On both days I have experiences as of red things, the same things onboth days. Only the Tuesday experiences have presentness,19 but the experiencesare otherwise the same. Then the moving spotlight theory says that things are as infigure 4.Do the Monday experiences feel different from the Tuesday experiences? Ido not think so. I think that the Monday experiences have the same phenomenalcharacter as the Tuesday experiences.Suppose that I have a black-belt in autophenomenology. I can completelyand accurately describe the phenomenal character of my experiences. These de-scriptions are so complete that no one description correctly describes experiencesthat are phenomenally different. And my ability to appreciate the phenomenal char-acter of my experiences is so good that I always produce an accurate description ofthe phenomenal character of the experience I am describing. Now suppose thaton Monday I produce such a description, and I do so again on Tuesday. I writethese descriptions down on paper. I think it is obvious that the descriptions will beword-for-word the same.If I am right that the Monday and Tuesday experiences have the same phe-19I am speaking loosely. Only the experiences during one instant on Tuesdayhave presentness.18Figure 4: The red rooms according to the moving spotlight theoryTuesdayMondaynomenal character then the fact that the Tuesday experiences have presentness can-not explain why they feel like this. So the moving spotlight theory does not explainwhy the Tuesday experiences have the phenomenal character they have.I know how moving spotlight theorists will reply to all this. They will denythat the Monday and Tuesday experiences have the same phenomenal character.What it is like to have the Tuesday experiences differs from what it is like to havethe Monday experiences. To have a name for this difference let us say that on theirview only the Tuesday experiences feel “lustrous.” Moving spotlight theorists willthen say that the Tuesday experiences feel lustrous and the Monday experiences donot because only the Tuesday experiences have presentness.20 And, the reply con-cludes, B-theorists cannot explain why only the Tuesday experiences feel lustrous.20By “E feels lustrous” some moving spotlight theorists might mean “E has somephenomenal character.” These moving spotlight theorists think that if the B-theoryis true then no experience has any phenomenal character. (Maybe they should noteven be called “experiences.”) This is Peter Forrest’s view (Forrest 2004), exceptthat Forrest defends the growing block theory, not the moving spotlight theory.19There is more to this reply. Why am I inclined to think that the Mondayand Tuesday experiences have the same phenomenal character? A moving spot-light theorist might say that I confuse this false claim with a true one. That is theclaim that the phenomenal character the Tuesday experiences have is the same asthe phenomenal character the Monday experiences had. That is, only the Tuesdayexperiences feel lustrous, but it was the case that only the Monday experiences feellustrous. The phenomenal character of my experiences has changed. (This is a kindof change that only appears in the moving spotlight theory. For on the B-theoryit cannot happen that my Monday experiences have a certain feel at one time (onMonday) and then a different feel at a later time (on Tuesday).)What about the descriptions of the phenomenal character of my experiencesthat I wrote down? Since I have a black-belt in autophenomenology I know all aboutlustrousness. So I either wrote “lustrous” on both days or “lustrous” on neither day.(“Lustrous” is not the complete description; but it is the only part we are interestedin now.) The moving spotlight theorist will probably say that I wrote “lustrous” onboth days, even though only the Tuesday experiences feel lustrous. What then aboutthe fact that I always produce accurate descriptions? He will say that understoodone way this claim cannot possibly be true. For since the phenomenal characterof a given experience changes, the accuracy of any description of it changes. Nodescription of the phenomenal character of that experience can always be accurate.But there is another way to understand the claim so that it is true. Read it as theclaim that I always produce descriptions that are accurate “when I produce them.”That is, the description I write on Tuesday is accurate and the description I write onMonday was accurate. (But the description I write on Monday is inaccurate and thedescription I write on Tuesday was inaccurate.) That is as reliable as I can be aboutthese things in the moving spotlight theory.All I can say about this reply is that I continue to think that my Mondayand Tuesday experiences have the same phenomenal character. (I wish I had moreto say.) Nothing in the moving spotlight theorist’s reply persuades me that I amconfused when I think this. As a result, I do not think that there are any facts aboutthe phenomenal character of my experiences that the moving spotlight theory isbetter placed to explain than the B-theorist.20So I do not think that the argument from phenomenology is at all convinc-ing. But I do think there is something interesting behind the argument. I just thinkthat the argument from phenomenology is the wrong way to articulate that some-thing. I think that when moving spotlight theorists are tempted to say that presentexperiences have a special feel it is because an entirely different argument fromexperience is pulling on them. That argument is the final argument I will discuss.5 The Argument from the Presented Experience, IIf the moving spotlight theorist admits that presentness makes no difference to howthings look, and makes no difference to how experiences feel, what possible con-nection could there be between experience and passage? Without either of thesetwo claims, how is an argument from experience supposed to even get started?Let’s go back to the beginning. Suppose (modifying my earlier example) thatyesterday (Monday) I meditated (with my eyes open) in my green room and thattoday (Tuesday) I am meditating in my red room. The B-theory says that I seegreen on Monday and I see red on Tuesday, and that is all (all that is relevant in thiscontext anyway). So the picture of reality that goes with the B-theory is the one infigure 5.The moving spotlight theory says that this picture is incomplete. For onething, it has left out which time has presentness. So the picture should look like thepicture in figure 6. Again, the yellow halo indicates which things have presentness.(And again, the moving spotlight theory says that the picture is still incomplete. Itwas the case that Monday has presentness, but this fact is not evident in the picture.But that will not matter for now.)Something about our experience is supposed to favor the second picture overthe first. What about our experience? And how does that feature of our experiencefavor the second picture?The third argument I want to discuss contains answers to these questions.21The argument comes in two stages. Stage 1 of the argument aims to establish that21As I said, I think that many arguments for the moving spotlight theory thatappeal to experience are attempts to articulate this argument. But the only explicitpresentation of something like this argument that I know of is in (Balashov 2005).21Figure 5: My meditations according to the B-theoryTuesdayMondayFigure 6: My meditations according to the moving spotlight theoryTuesdayMonday22some time has presentness. The following speech is an attempt to articulate stage 1(I present it in the first person):Stage 1. The B-theory does not make very good sense of my experi-ence. Yes, I see red on Tuesday and I see green on Monday. Accordingto the B-theory that is all. Nothing distinguishes the red experiencesfrom the green experiences (other than the colors they are experiencesof). This is hard to believe. Although I see green on Monday it is onlythe red experiences (the experiences of red things) that are available tome or presented to me. So the red experiences are distinguished. Butthe fact that only the red experiences are presented to me is missingfrom the B-theory.The moving spotlight theory makes better sense of my experience.It makes better sense of my experience for two connected reasons.First, it does not say that nothing (other than color) distinguishes thered from the green experiences. Instead, it says that the spotlight ofintrinsic privilege shines on the red experiences but not the green ones.And second, the experiences that theory says are intrinsically privilegedare the only ones that are available to me or presented to me.That is stage 1. Stage 2 aims to establish that which time has presentness changes.An attempt to articulate stage 2 goes like this:Stage 2. Which experiences are presented to me has been changing.Not only are the red experiences available to me, but (as I remember)the green experiences were available to me. Now suppose that stageone of the argument has been successful. The experiences available tome are the ones that have presentness. Then it follows that while Tues-day and things that happen on Tuesday have presentness, Monday andthings that happened on Monday must have had presentness. But thenwhich time has presentness has changed. Time has passed. And thischange in which time has presentness cannot be understood to mean:on Monday, Monday has presentness while on Tuesday, Tuesday haspresentness. For then the facts about presentness do not distinguish my23Monday experiences from my Tuesday experiences. One day’s experi-ences are distinguished only if one and only one time has presentnesssimpliciter.That is the argument from the presented experience. It is certainly an argumentfrom experience. And it is certainly distinct from the other two arguments I havediscussed. Nowhere does the argument say that things look present, or that thepassage of time is represented by some experience. And nowhere does the argumentsay that presentness makes a difference to how experiences feel. It does not saythat experiences with presentness have some special phenomenal character. Theargument does have this much in common with the argument fron phenomenology:it says that experiences with presentness are special. But instead of saying that theyfeel different this argument says that experiences with presentness are the only onesthat are available to me.It will help to have a more explicit statement of the premises of the argument.I want to focus just on stage 1. The moving spotlight theorist and the B-theoristagree that I have both green and red experiences (at different times). The movingspotlight theorist insists(P1) Only the red experiences are available to me.But, the moving spotlight theorist says, according to the B-theory “nothing distin-guishes the red experiences from the green experiences (other than the colors theyare experiences of).” This is meant to support(P2) If the B-theory is true then either both the red and green experiences areavailable to me, or neither the red nor the green experiences are available tome.From this it follows(C) The B-theory is false.The same kind of argument does not work against the moving spotlight theory be-cause the analogue of (P2) is false in the moving spotlight theory. The moving spot-light theory can say that all and only the experiences with presentness are availableto me. And only the red experiences have presentness.24What is wrong with this argument? The argument makes use of a new andunexplained notion: the notion of an experience being available to someone. Onereply to the argument focuses on this notion. What is it for an experience to beavailable to someone? A natural answer is that at any time the experiences thatare available to someone at that time are the experiences he has at that time. Thisanswer makes availability a time-relative (and, of course, person-relative) notion.How does the argument look if we read it as using this notion of availability? Since(P1) is uttered on Tuesday, a reading on which it is true makes it equivalent to(P1.1) Only the red experiences are available to me on Tuesday.But then I reject the analogous reading of (P2):(P2.1) If the B-theory is true then either both the red and green experiences areavailable to me on Tuesday, or neither the red nor the green experiences areavailable to me on Tuesday.That’s not right. The green experiences certainly are not available to me on Tuesday.The moving spotlight theorist supported (P2) by saying that there are no relevantdifferences between the experiences. But he was looking in the wrong place. Thedifference in availability is grounded in a difference in the relation each experiencebears to the temporal perspective from which I ask which experiences are availableto me.Moving spotlight theorists will insist that this is not how they intended theargument to be understood. The notion of availability the argument employs, theywill say, is one that is not time-relative.22 So the intended reading of (P1) is(P1.2) Only the red experiences are available to me simpliciter.(The “simpliciter” is meant to indicate a lack of time-relativity.) Similarly, theintended reading of the second premise is22Understood this way this argument for passage resembles Lewis’s argumentfrom temporary intrinsics for the doctrine of temporal parts (Lewis 1986, 202-04).The resemblance will become closer in the next section.25(P2.2) If the B-theory is true then either both the red and green experiences areavailable to me simpliciter, or neither the red nor the green experiences areavailable to me simpliciter.In response to this I want to put my foot down and say that it makes no sense totalk about which experiences are available to me simpliciter. The argument failsbecause both premises (P1.2) and (P2.2) falsely presuppose that this does makesense. If I am tempted to say that the red experiences are available to me simpliciterit is only because the red experiences occur on Tuesday and it is on Tuesday thatI sit around contemplating which experiences are available to me. So they are theones that are available to me at the time I do the contemplating.6 The Argument from the Presented Experience, IISometimes I think that this is a perfectly adequate response to the argument fromthe presented experience. But at other times I think the response is weak. In thissection I want to present the reasons I have for thinking it is weak. Then I willsuggest a different response to the argument that is compatible with those thoughts.When I think about the spatial analogue of this debate it is not so obviousto me that the B-theorist is right. So what is the spatial analogue of the debate? Ihave been talking about a story in which I see different colors on different days. Isee only red on Tuesday and only green on Monday. The spatially analogous storyis one in which I simultaneously see different colors in different places. So in thestory I will be simultaneously located in two different places.Of course, I am already simultaneously located in two different places. I amover here, where my left hand is, and I am also over there, where my right hand is.But anyone who looked in either of the locations I just indicated would see only ahand. In the scenario I have in mind something far more spectacular is going on. Inthat scenario I am meditating in a red room in Massachusetts while simultaneouslymeditating in a green room in Florida. Anyone who walked into the red room wouldsay he saw a whole person: head, torso, arms, legs, and so on. Anyone who walkedinto the green room would say the same.(Do I manage to be both in Massachusetts and in Florida by having one26man-shaped part wholly in Massachusetts and another man-shaped part wholly inFlorida? Or do I have just one man-shaped part that is simultaneously wholly lo-cated in Massachusetts and in Florida? These questions are analogues of questionsabout how I persist over time: do I exist on Monday and on Tuesday by having atemporal part that exists only during Monday and another that exists only duringTuesday? Or am I wholly located during both days? The temporal versions of thesequestions will be important soon. For now set them aside.)The “spatial B-theory” says that I see red in Massachusetts and I see green inFlorida and that is all. The picture of reality that goes with this theory is the one infigure 7.Figure 7: My meditations according to the spatial B-theoryMassachusetts FloridaWhat picture goes with the “spatial moving spotlight theory”? That pictureis obtained from the picture in figure 7 by adding an special intrinsic property hadby only the things in Massachusetts (see figure 8). A yellow halo represents thisproperty.The spatial moving spotlight theory does not just endorse the picture in figure8. It also says that there is some spatial analogue of “primitive tense.” So the theoryalso says something like this: although the spotlight shines on Massachusetts, to thesouth it shines on Florida. This is a very mysterious statement. Fortunately, I thinkwe can set aside this part of the theory. Let us just focus on the part that says thatthe spotlight shines on Massachusetts.27Figure 8: My meditations according to the spatial moving spotlight theoryMassachusetts FloridaNow: which of the spatial pictures is better — the one in figure 7 or theone in figure 8? It is hard to say, because both are ridiculous. Both say that Iam simultaneously in Massachusetts and in Florida. But I am not; I am only inMassachusetts.Still, suppose that I have become convinced that I am simultaneously in Mas-sachusetts and in Florida. Perhaps the oracle of philosophy revealed it to me. Andsuppose you have become convinced of something similar, and are contemplatinga similar pair of pictures depicting you. So we accept the common presuppositionof the spatial B-theory and the spatial moving spotlight theory. Now which theoryis better?Again the debate will focus on a question about which experiences are avail-able to me. The spatial moving spotlight theorist will say: you see red in Mas-sachusetts and green in Florida. But there must be more to it than that. Surelyyou think that it is only the red experiences that are available to you. The spatialspotlight theory captures this fact and the spatial B-theory does not.The response to this argument that parallels the one I described in the last28section is: it makes no sense to talk about which experiences are available to yousimpliciter. The only intelligible notion of availability (that is relevant in this con-text) is location-relative. The red experiences are available to you in Massachusettsand the green ones are available to you in Florida. Insofar as you are tempted tosay that the red ones are available to you simpliciter, that is just because this entireconversation is going on in Massachusetts.Sometimes I just find this response difficult to believe. Maybe the followingis one way to bring out the difficulty. Try turning the argument around. Suppose thatthe oracle, instead of telling you that you are in Massachusetts and in Florida, toldyou instead (what you already believed) that the special intrinsic property that thespatial moving spotlight theorist believes in does not exist. If someone less reliablethan the oracle then told you that you are in Florida as well as in Massachusetts, Ibet you would be tempted to reply with the following argument:That is not true. I am seeing red. The guy in Florida is not seeing red.By Leibniz’s Law, we are distinct.Plenty of people, myself included, do want to give this argument. Plenty wantto give this argument even in a context in which the debate about the passage oftime has not been mentioned. For example, some versions of the many worldsinterpretation of quantum mechanics say something like what the oracle said. Theysay that each of us is simultaneously located in widely separated regions of space(or in regions of space that are not even spatially connected to each other), havingquite different experiences in the different regions. When I have tried to explainthis theory to students many of them insistently object and give an argument likethe argument from Leibniz’s law.But the argument from Leibniz’s Law is good only if there is an intelligiblenotion of availability that is not location-relative. If there is no such notion thenthe argument is unsound. (Exactly why it fails depends on how it is interpreted.One of the premises is: “BAS is seeing red.” If this means “BAS is seeing red sim-pliciter” (where here the “simpliciter” indicates an absence of location-relativity)then it contains a nonsensical notion and so is not true. If it means “BAS is seeingred in Massachusetts” then it is true. But then the argument is valid only if the29next premise is interpreted to mean “The guy in Florida is not seeing red in Mas-sachusetts.” And we have been given no reason to accept this premise. We onlyknow about what the guy in Florida is seeing in Florida.)So I am sometimes tempted to think that there is an intelligible notion ofavailability that applies to me and is not location-relative. Now this does not entailthat there is also an intelligible notion of availability that applies to me and is nottime-relative. But I think that time and space are similar enough that I would notwant to defend a view that accepted one kind of relativity and not the other. Andonce I accept a time-independent notion of availability I cannot give the objectionto the argument from the presented experience that I described in the last section.Fortunately there is another reply to that argument that is compatible with theclaim that there is a notion of availability that is not time-relative. In the rest of thissection I want to explain how that reply works.Look back at figure 5. I said that it contains the picture of reality that goeswith the B-theory. But I presupposed some metaphysical claims in addition to theB-theory when I drew that picture. In particular, I presupposed that I exist on bothMonday and Tuesday. This assumption certainly does not follow from the B-theory.It is an independent assumption.Of course, even though this assumption is independent of the B-theory itlooks like it is true in the scenario that figure 5 depicts. That scenario is one inwhich today I am meditating in my red room and in which yesterday I meditated inmy green room. (Today is Tuesday, yesterday is Monday.) Certainly if I meditatedin my green room yesterday then I existed yesterday.But wait: not every theory of persistence through time endorses this lastclaim. The stage view, in particular, does not.23 The stage view says that “BASmeditated in his green room on Monday” is true on Tuesday but denies that I existon Monday. The stage view is important because if I accept the stage view then Ican accept a notion of availability that is not time-relative but still reject one of themoving spotlight theorist’s premises.Before saying how that goes let me explain the stage view in more detail. The23See (Sider 1996) for an explanation and defense of the stage view. The idea ofappealing to the stage theory to defend the B-theory comes from Balashov (2005).30stage view says that I exist at only one time. Instead of identifying me with a four-dimensional spacetime worm, it identifies me with just a single three-dimensional“slice” of that worm. But the theory does not go on to say (for example) that “BASwas a child” is false. (It had better not.) Why not? Well, that BAS was never a childfollows from the claim that BAS exists at only one time only if a certain analysis oftemporal predication is correct. That analysis is, roughly:• “S was F” is true at t iff S exists at some time T earlier than t and at T S is F.But the stage view rejects this analysis. It uses an alternative analysis: temporalcounterpart theory. That analysis of temporal predication says, roughly (here S isan expression that refers to a person):• “S was F” is true at t iff at a time earlier than t there is a person (who existsfor just an instant) who (i) is S’s temporal counterpart, and (ii) is F.Who are my temporal counterparts? We do not need a definitive answer here. Dif-ferent views about the “persistence conditions” for human persons correspond todifferent candidate counterpart relations. One common theory says that my coun-terparts are the people who are physically and psychologically continuous with mein the right way. This package of views — the claim that no person exists at morethan one time and temporal counterpart theory — is the stage view.To summarize, the stage view says this about me: there is no time at whichI am a child. But I was a child. That is because there is someone who is a childand who exists at a time earlier than the current time and who is psychologicallycontinuous with me.Now let us look at what the argument from the presented experience lookslike if I accept the stage view.If I accept the stage view then I reject both the picture in figure 5 and thepicture in figure 6. Instead the pictures we need to focus on are the picture in figure9 and the picture in figure 10. (In these pictures the stick figure drawn solid is me.The one drawn dashed is someone else.)The first is the picture the B-theorist draws and the second is the picture themoving spotlight theorist draws. Importantly, the two episodes of seeing in figure 931Figure 9: My meditations according to the B-theory (on the stage view)TuesdayMondayare not exactly the same except for the color seen. There is an extremely importantdifference: in that picture I see red and someone else sees green.24Once I accept the stage view I can say that it makes sense to ask which expe-riences are available to me simpliciter. My answer is: all the experiences someone(tenselessly) has are available to that person. So I say that (P1.2) makes sense and istrue. But the argument from the presented experience still fails, because now (P2.2)is false.7 The Argument from the Presented Experience, IIII have now presented two responses to the argument from the presented experience.The second response sheds additional light on the first one. So I want to go backand say a bit more about it.24Of course, “I saw green on Monday” is true because that person sees green onMonday. The stage view also says that while the guy who exists on Monday is (thisis the tenseless “is”) distinct from me, he was identical to me. Neither of these factsis important right now though.32Figure 10: My meditations according to the moving spotlight theory (on the stageview)TuesdayMondayThe first response is available to a B-theorist who rejects the stage view. Butthere are two alternatives to the stage view: endurantism, the thesis that a persistingthing is wholly located at each time at which it exists; and perdurantism, the thesisthat a persisting thing has an instantaneous temporal part at each time at which itexists. A B-theorist who accepts either of these theories should deny that it makessense to ask which experiences are available to me simpliciter.But endurantism and perdurantism are not in exactly the same position withrespect to the argument. Perdurantism provides a kind of half-way house betweenthe two replies to the argument. Accepting it allows one to accept some of themotivations behind the second reply without going so far as believing the stageview.25 Let me explain.A B-theorist who accepts perdurantism can accept that there are some things25Ted Sider pressed me on this point. I owe a lot of what I say in this section tocorrespondence with him.33to which experiences are available simpliciter: instantaneous stages of persons.All and only the experiences a stage ever has are available to it. But since thetheory identifies persons (like me) with four-dimensional spacetime worms ratherthan stages, no experiences are available simpliciter to me, or to persons generally.So a B-theorist who accepts perdurantism can still reject (P1.2) and (P2.2) of theargument.But he does not need to say that the ideas behind the second reply are com-pletely off-track. He can say something like this:The discussion of your meditations in Massachusetts and Florida def-initely motivates the idea that there is a space- and time-independentnotion of availability. Since endurantism cannot recognize such a no-tion endurantism is false. But the discussion does not go so far as tomotivate the idea that this notion applies to you. The claim that someexperience is available simpliciter to you is overreaching. Reflectionon your experience can only justify being confident that the red ex-periences are available simpliciter to something. And perdurantism isconsistent with that: it says that the red experiences are available sim-pliciter to your Massachusetts and your Tuesday stages (the stages thatare “doing the thinking” at the place, or time, at which you reflect inthe scenarios).26Notice that the perdurantist can have only modest ambitions for the argument fromLeibniz’s Law. He cannot endorse it as formulated above. He cannot use it to refutethe claim that I have multiple spatial locations. Instead he can endorse a modifiedversion of the argument that refutes the claim that I am wholly located in more thanone location. But maybe that is a good thing; maybe it should not be so easy to26This claim resembles something Lewis says about the problem of temporaryintrinsics. It seemed at first that Lewis’s complaint about endurantism was thatif endurantism is true then no tennis ball (for example) is round simpliciter. Butthat is also false on perdurantism, his preferred theory. Lewis (1988) correctedthis impression: his complaint about endurantism is that if endurantism is true thennothing is round simpliciter. It is enough if some things — stages of tennis balls —are round simpliciter, even if no tennis ball is.34refute the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.So what are the relative merits of the perdurantist and the stage-theoretic re-sponses to the argument from the presented experience? How one answers thisquestion turns on how one thinks the motivation for accepting a time-independentnotion of availability works. The perdurantist (who is also a B-theorist) says: “Iam confident that the red experiences are available simpliciter to something, but Iam not so sure whether they are available simpliciter to me. Maybe they are justavailable to a part of me — my current stage.” One might find this claim difficultto believe. I myself am inclined to believe that I can only be confident that the redexperiences are available simpliciter to something by being confident that they areavailable simplicter to me. A B-theorist who thinks this should prefer the stageview to perdurantism.8 Conclusion“An excellent reason to believe in an objective passage of time is that our experi-ence suggests that there is such a thing.” In this paper I have tried to figure outwhat argument lies behind claims like this. I have discussed three arguments indetail. The first argument starts from the claim that it is part of the content of ourexperience that there is an objective passage of time. The second starts from theclaim that our experiences have some distinctive phenomenal character that is bestexplained by the hypothesis that there is an objective passage of time. I do not thinkthese arguments are very good.The third argument is better. It starts from the idea that not all of the expe-riences I (tenselessly) have are on a par. Some of them are special. Some of themare “presented to me” while the others are not. What’s more, which ones are pre-sented keeps changing. The moving spotlight theorist says that his theory can makebetter sense of this phenomenon. I suggested three responses a B-theorist can maketo this claim. He can reject talk of which experiences are presented to someone, oravailable to someone, simpliciter. Or he can accept such talk, agree that some expe-riences are available to him simpliciter, but deny that only some of his experiencesare available to him simpliciter. He can embrace the stage view and say instead that35all his experiences are available to him simpliciter. Finally, he can accept talk oftime-independent availability but deny that some of his experiences are available tohim simpliciter. He can embrace perdurantism and say instead that the experiencesare available simpliciter only to his stages, not to him.27ReferencesBalashov, Yuri (2005). “Times of Our Lives: Negotiating the Presence of Experi-ence.” American Philosophical Quarterly 42: 295-309.Byrne, Alex (2009a). “Experience and Content.” Philosophical Quarterly 59: 429-51.— (2009b). “Sensory Qualities, Sensible Qualities, Sensational Qualities.” InBrian P. McLaughlin and Ansgar Beckermann (eds.), The Oxford Handbookof Philosopy of Mind, chapter 14. Oxford: Oxford University Press.— (forthcoming). “Knowing What I See.” In D. Smithies and D. Stoljar (eds.),Introspection and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Callender, Craig (2008). “The Common Now.” Philosophical Issues 18: 339-61.Dainton, Barry (2011). “Time, Passage, and Immediate Experience.” In Craig Cal-lender (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Time, chapter 12. Oxford:Oxford University Press.Evans, Gareth (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Forrest, Peter (2004). “The real but dead past: a reply to Braddon-Mitchell.” Anal-ysis 64: 358-62.Grünbaum, Adolf (1967). “The Status of Temporal Becoming.” Annals of the NewYork Academy of Sciences 138: 374-95.Hare, Caspar (2010). “Realism About Tense and Perspective.” Philosophical Com-pass 5: 760-769.Hestevold, H. Scott (1990). “Passage and the Presence of Experience.” Philosophyand Phenomenological Research 50: 537-52.Le Poidevin, Robin (2007). The Images of Time. Oxford: Oxford University Press.27Many thanks to Fred Feldman, David Gray, Caspar Hare, Liz Harman, MaryLou Maher, Ned Markosian, L. A. Paul, Agustin Rayo, Ted Sider, and Steve Yablo.This paper would have been far worse without their feedback and advice.36Lewis, David (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.— (1988). “Rearrangement of particles: reply to Lowe.” Analysis 48: 65-72.Maudlin, Tim (2007). “On the Passing of Time.” In The Metaphysics WithinPhysics, chapter 4. New York: Oxford University Press.McTaggart, J. E. M. (1908). “The Unreality of Time.” Mind 17: 457-74.Mellor, D. H. (1981). Real Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Paul, L. A. (2010) “Temporal Experience.” The Journal of Philosohpy 107: 333-59.Price, Huw (1996). Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point. New York: Oxford Uni-versity Press.Prior, A. N. (1959). “Thank Goodness That’s Over.” Philosophy 34: 12-17.Prosser, Simon (2007). “Could We Experience The Passage of Time?” Ratio 20:75-90. — (forthcoming-a). “Passage and Perception.” Nous.— (forthcoming-b). “Why Does Time Seem To Pass?” Philosophy and Phe-nomenological Research.Schlesinger, George (1994). “The Stream of Time.” In L. Nathan Oaklander andQuentin Smith (eds.), The New Theory of Time, 257-85. New Haven: YaleUniversity Press.Sider, Theodore (1996). “All The World’s A Stage.” The Australasian Journal ofPhilosophy 74: 433-53.Siegel, Susanna (2011). The Contents of Visual Experience. Oxford: Oxford Uni-versity Press.Skow, Bradford (forthcoming). “On the Meaning of the Question ‘How Fast DoesTime Pass?’.” Philosophical Studies.Smart, J. J. C. (1980). “Time and Becoming.” In Peter van Inwagen (ed.), Time andCause: essays presented to Richard Taylor, pp.3-15. Dordrecht, the Nether-lands: D. Reidel Publishing Company.Smith, Quentin (1994). “The Phenomenology of A-Time.” In L. Nathan Oaklanderand Quentin Smith (eds.), The New Theory of Time, pp.351-59. New Haven:Yale University Press.Taylor, Richard (1992). Metaphysics. 4th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall.Zimmerman, Dean (2005). “The A-theory of Time, the B-theory of time, and ‘Tak-37ing Tense Seriously’.” Dialectica 59: 401-57.38