ABSTRACT: 
Travel time stability is investigated in environments consisting of a range-independent background sound-speed profile on which a highly structured range-dependent perturbation is superimposed. The stability of both unconstrained and constrained (eigenray) travel times are considered. Both general theoretical arguments and analytical estimates of time spreads suggest that travel time stability is largely controlled by a property $\omega ^{\prime}$ of the background sound speed profile. Here, $2\pi/\omega (I)$ is the range of a ray double loop and $I$ is the ray action variable. Numerical results for both volume scattering by internal waves in deep ocean environments and rough surface scattering in upward refracting environments are shown to confirm the expectation that travel time stability is largely controlled by $\omega ^{\prime}$.Comment: Submitted to J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 30 June 200. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Travel time stability is investigated in environments consisting of a range-independent background sound- speed profile on which a highly structured range-dependent perturbation is superimposed. The stability of both unconstrained and constrained (eigenray) travel times are considered. Both general theoretical arguments and analytical estimates of time spreads suggest that travel time stability is largely controlled by a property   of the background sound speed profile. Here, 2pi/(I) is the range of a ray double loop and I is the ray action variable. Numerical results for both volume scattering by internal waves in deep ocean environments and rough surface scattering in upward refracting environments are shown to confirm the expectation that travel time stability is largely controlled by  . 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 ar X iv :n lin /0 30 70 02 v2 [ nli n.C D] 2 Ju l 2 00 3 Travel time stability in weakly range-dependent sound channels F. J. Beron-Veraa) and M. G. Brown RSMAS/AMP, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33149 (Dated: November 1, 2018) Travel time stability is investigated in environments consisting of a range-independent background sound- speed profile on which a highly structured range-dependent perturbation is superimposed. The stability of both unconstrained and constrained (eigenray) travel times are considered. Both general theoretical arguments and analytical estimates of time spreads suggest that travel time stability is largely controlled by a property ω ′ of the background sound speed profile. Here, 2pi/ω(I) is the range of a ray double loop and I is the ray action variable. Numerical results for both volume scattering by internal waves in deep ocean environments and rough surface scattering in upward refracting environments are shown to confirm the expectation that travel time stability is largely controlled by ω ′. PACS numbers: 43.30.Cq, 43.30.Ft, 43.30.Pc I. INTRODUCTION Measurements made during the Slice89 propagation experiment1, performed in the eastern North Pacific Ocean, suggested that in that environment the near-axial energy is more strongly scattered than the energy corresponding to the steeper rays. Similar behavior was subsequently observed in measurements made during the AET experiment2,3, also per- formed in the eastern North Pacific Ocean. Motivated in large part by these observations, several studies4,5,6,7 have been car- ried out to investigate the dependence of ray stability on en- vironmental parameters. All of these studies have focused on ray stability in either physical space (depth, range) or phase space (depth, angle). The present study extends the earlier work by considering the sensitivity of ray travel times to en- vironmental parameters. Our focus on travel times is more closely linked to the Slice89 and AET observations than the earlier sensitivity studies inasmuch as both sets of measure- ments were made in depth and time at a fixed range. In this study we consider ray motion in environments con- sisting of a range-independent background on which a range- dependent perturbation, such as that produced by internal waves in deep ocean environments, is superimposed. We con- sider the influence of the background sound speed structure on both unconstrained and constrained (eigenray) measures of travel time spreads. Surprisingly, the conclusion of this work is that travel time stability is largely controlled by the same property7 of the background sound speed structure that controls ray trajectory stability. Although this work was moti- vated by the deep ocean measurements mentioned above, the results presented apply to a much larger class of problems. To illustrate this generality we include numerical simulations of ray scattering by a rough surface in upward refracting envi- ronments. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II the equations on which our analysis is based are presented. a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: fberon@rsmas.miami.edu These are the coupled ray/travel time equations written in terms of both the usual phase space variables and action–angle variables. In Sec. III two simple expressions for unconstrained travel time spreads in terms of action–angle variables are de- rived (trivially) and shown to be in good agreement with nu- merical simulations. In Sec. IV an expression for constrained (eigenray) time spreads is derived, again using action–angle variables, and shown to be in good agreement with numerical simulations. The same result was recently derived using a dif- ferent argument by Virovlyansky14. The combination of the results presented in Secs. III and IV provide strong evidence that, quite generally, travel time spreads are largely controlled by the same property ω ′ = dω/dI of the background sound speed structure. Here, 2pi/ω(I) is the range of a ray double loop and I is the ray action variable. In Sec. V our results are summarized and discussed. Two explanations for why ω ′ controls travel time spreads are given. II. BACKGROUND A. Theory This paper is concerned with the scattering of sound, in the geometric limit, by weak inhomogeneities. Consistent with these assumptions, our analysis is based on the one-way form (cf. e.g. Ref. 8 and references therein) of the ray equations, dp dr =− ∂h ∂ z , dz dr = ∂h ∂ p , (1a) and travel time equation, dT dr = p dz dr − h, (1b) where h(p,z,r) =− √ c−2(z,r)− p2. (2) Here, r, which is the independent variable, denotes range; z is depth; p is vertical ray slowness; T is travel time; and Typeset by REVTEX 2c(z,r) is sound speed. Equations (1) constitute a canonical Hamiltonian system with h the Hamiltonian, (z, p) the gen- eralized coordinate–conjugate momentum pair, and T play- ing the role of the mechanical action. It follows from Eqs. (1a) and dz/dr = tanϕ , where the ray angle ϕ is measured relative to the horizontal, that cp = sinϕ . We shall assume the sound speed to be the sum of a range-independent back- ground component, C(z), plus a (weak) range-dependent per- turbation, δ c(z,r). This allows us to write the Hamiltonian as the sum of a range-independent (integrable) component, H(p,z) = − √ C−2(z)− p2, plus a range-dependent (noninte- grable) perturbation, δh(p,z,r)≈−δc(z,r)/[C3(z)H(p,z)]. In the background environment, i.e. when δc = 0, the ray motion is naturally described using action–angle variables (I,ϑ). The transformed ray equations maintain their Hamil- tonian structure with Hamiltonian ¯H(I) = H(p(I,ϑ),z(I,ϑ )), namely dI dr =− ∂ ¯H ∂ϑ = 0, dϑ dr = ∂ ¯H ∂ I = ω(I). (3a) The travel time equation, in turn, reads dT dr = Iω− ¯H + d dr (G− Iϑ) . (3b) Here, G(z, I) = piI± ∫ z z− dξ √ C−2(ξ )− ¯H2(I), (4) where the ± sign applies to ±p, is the (multiply-valued) gen- erating function of the canonical transformation that relates implicitly the new variables (I,ϑ) to the original variables (p,z) through p = ∂G ∂ z , ϑ = ∂G ∂ I . (5) The action variable is defined by I = 1 2pi ∮ dz p = 1 pi ∫ z+ z− dz √ C−2(z)−H2, (6) where the loop integral is taken along an isoline of H and thus z± correspond to the ray upper (+) and lower (−) turning depths. Equations (3a) show that in the background environment each ray trajectory forms a closed loop in (p,z)-space, or phase space, on which I is a constant. The line integral in Eq. (6) can also be expressed as an integral over the enclosed area in phase space. It follows from Eq. (6) that I = 0 for the axial ray and that I increases monotonically as axial ray angle increases. For rays making multiple loops G advances by 2piI and ϑ advances by 2pi each time a loop is completed. Fol- lowing a ray, the difference G− Iϑ makes small oscillations about zero. The term d(G− Iϑ)/dr gives small endpoint con- tributions to T. The fractional contributions from this term to T are nonnegligible only at very short range. The contribution from this term to several of the analytical travel time spread estimates presented below is zero. In those cases where this contribution is not identically zero, it is very small. In range-dependent environments, i.e. with δc 6= 0, action– angle variables can be defined using the same relations as in the unperturbed environment17. This is in fact possi- ble because the range-independent canonical transformation (p,z) 7→ (I,ϑ ) depends solely on the geometry of phase space, characterized by the symplectic two-form dp∧ dz, which is the same with δc = 0 or δ c 6= 0; it does not depend on the Hamiltonian itself (cf. e.g. Ref. 15). It is impor- tant to realize, however, that in the presence of a range- dependent pertubation δc, the action variable I as defined in Eq. (6) is not constant anymore because H is not a first in- tegral of (1). The Hamiltonian in the new variables takes the form ¯H(I)+δ ¯h(I,ϑ ,r), where ¯H(I) =H(p(I,ϑ),z(I,ϑ )) and δ ¯h(I,ϑ ,r) = δh(p(I,ϑ),z(I,ϑ ),r). The ray and travel time equations then read dI dr =− ∂δ ¯h ∂ϑ , dϑ dr = ω + ∂δ ¯h ∂ I , (7a) and dT dr = I dϑ dr − ¯H− δ ¯h+ ddr (G− Iϑ) . (7b) In realistic ocean environments Eqs. (7) are difficult to apply because in such environments the dependence of δ h on I and ϑ is not known explicitly. Because of this, most of the results presented below assume that the environment is piecewise range-independent. These results follow from piecewise application of Eqs. (3). This procedure eliminates difficulties associated with the lack of availability of an ex- plicit expression for δ ¯h(I,ϑ ,r). The endpoint correction term d(G− Iϑ)/dr in (3b) will be neglected throughout the re- minder of this paper. The reason for introducing action–angle variables is that these variables provide the most succinct description of the underlying ray dynamics. The equations presented in the next three sections that make use of action–angle variables can also be written in terms of the original phase space variables (p,z), but the (p,z) form of the equations are more complicated and obscure the important role, described below, played by ω ′ in controlling travel time spreads. B. Some qualitative features of scattered ray travel time distributions Some basic features of ray travel times in deep-ocean envi- ronments without and with internal-wave-induced scattering are shown in Fig. 1. Travel time and ray depth are plotted at r = 2 Mm for rays emitted from an axial source in each of the two sound channels shown in Fig. 2. The nonscattered ray travel times plotted in Fig. 1 correspond to rays with launch angles ϕ0 confined to 4◦ bands. The scattered ray travel times plotted in Fig. 1 correspond to an ensemble of 200 rays with a fixed launch angle, each in the same background sound speed structure but with an independent realization of the internal- wave-induced perturbation superimposed. (Independent real- izations were generated using the same internal wave field by 3 PSfrag replacements z [k m ] (a) T [s] z [k m ] (b) 1334 1335 1336 1337 1338.5 1339.5 1340.5 1341.5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 FIG. 1: (a) Ray travel time and depth at r = 2 Mm in the C0 sound channel (cf. Fig. 2) without (solid curve) and with (dots) internal- wave-induced sound speed perturbations superimposed. The source is on the sound channel axis in both cases. In the absence of internal- wave-induced perturbations 8◦ ≤ ϕ0 ≤ 12◦, where ϕ0 is ray launch angle. In the presence of internal-wave-induced perturbations ϕ0 = 10◦ in each of 200 realizations of the internal wave field. (b) Same as (a) except that the C14 sound speed was used with 10◦ ≤ ϕ0 ≤ 14◦ without internal-wave-induced perturbations, and ϕ0 = 12◦ with internal-wave-induced perturbations. staggering the initial range at which rays were launched with ∆r = 5 km; the vertical derivative of internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbations has a horizontal correlation length shorter than 5 km13, so this simple procedure ensures statisti- cal independence.) Figure 1 shows two examples of a portion of what is commonly referred to as a timefront, consisting of many smooth branches that meet at cusps. The internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbation used to produce Fig. 1—and all subsequent numerical calculations shown in this paper that include internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbations—was computed using Eq. (19) of Ref. 11. In that expression y and t were set to zero, i.e. a frozen vertical slice of an internal wave field was assumed. The range-averaged buoyancy frequency profile measured during the AET experiment was used. The dimensionless strength parameters E and µ were taken to be 6.3×10−5 and 17.3, re- spectively. Horizontal wavenumber and vertical mode number cutoffs of 2pi km−1 and 30, respectively, were used. The re- sulting sound speed perturbation field is highly structured and fairly realistically describes a typical deep-ocean midlatitude internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbation. Figure 1 shows that internal-wave-induced scattering is pre- dominantly along the background timefront. Internal-wave- induced scattering also causes a broadening of individual branches of the timefront. This broadening occurs even for C0 C14PSfrag replacements C0 C [km s−1] z [k m ] 1.475 1.5 1.525 1.55 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 FIG. 2: Background sound speed profiles used in the numerical work presented in Figs. 1, 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10. a single realization of the sound speed perturbation field if rays with a dense set of launch angles are plotted. In the two sections that follow, simple analytic expressions that de- scribe time spreads are derived and compared to numerical simulations. These expressions describe: (i) the relatively large scattering-induced travel time spreads along the time- front seen in Fig. 1 as a function of range, without regard to the depth or timefront branch on which a scattered ray falls; (ii) the relatively large scattering-induced travel time spreads of rays whose turning history and final depth are fixed, but whose final range is not; and (ii) the relatively small scattering-induced broadening of an individual branch of the timefront at a fixed depth and range as a function of range or ray double loops. We refer to (i) and (ii) as uncon- strained travel time spreads and (iii) as a constrained travel time spread. The latter is constrained by the imposition of an eigenray constraint. Both unconstrained and constrained measures of time spreads will be shown below to be largely controlled by ω ′(I). It is not surprising that time spreads in the presence of sound speed perturbations are largely controlled by ω ′ inas- much as travel time dispersion in the absence of pertur- bations is controlled by ω ′. Equation (3b), with the term d(G− Iϑ)/dr neglected, can be integrated immediately to give T (I;r) = [Iω(I)− ¯H(I)]r (8) where, from the first of Eqs. (3a), I is constant following a 4PSfrag replacements r [Mm] |h | [s k m − 1 ] 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0.653 0.6535 0.654 0.6545 0.655 0.6555 FIG. 3: Hamiltonian h vs. range for one of the scattered rays shown in Fig. 1b in the presence of an internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbation field. ray. It follows that dT/dI = Iω ′r, (9) where the second of Eqs. (3a) has been used. This simple ex- pression succinctly describes the travel time dispersion seen in Fig. 1. In both environments ω ′ is negative for all nonax- ial rays; because I is a nonnegative monotonically increasing function of |ϕ0| for an axial source, (9) describes the decrease in travel time with increasing |ϕ0| that is shown in Fig. 1. For one of the rays used to produce Fig. 1, the Hamilto- nian h (whose numerical value is identical to that of ¯H + δ ¯h, although they depend on different variables) as a function of range is shown in Fig. 3. It is seen that h vs. r consists of a sequence of approximately piecewise-constant segments, separated by fairly narrow transition regions. The transition regions coincide with each of the rays upper turning points. A useful and widely used approximation, the apex approx- imation, assumes that the width of each transition region is negligibly small. In the action–angle description of ray mo- tion that makes use of the apex approximation, I is piecewise constant following a ray, making jumps ∆I of negligibly small width ∆ϑ at each upper turning depth of the ray; between such jumps ϑ advances by 2pi. A slightly relaxed form of the apex approximation in which ∆ϑ is treated as a small parameter will be used in Sec. IV. Generally, the apex approximation works fairly well in typical midlatitude deep ocean environ- ments for rays with axial angles greater than about 10 ◦; it is usually a poor approximation for rays with axial angles less than approximately 5 ◦ . More generally, the apex approxima- tion can be thought of as a special case of a scattering model in which I is piecewise constant on a sequence of range in- tervals of variable extent. Such a model is used in Secs. III and IV. Although the apex approximation is a special case, it is useful to focus on this special case when considering con- strained spreads because it is often the case1,2,3 that only the steep ray travel time spreads can be measured experimentally. III. UNCONSTRAINED TIME SPREADS A. Spreading along the timefront In this section we imagine launching rays from a fixed source location with a fixed launch angle in an ensemble of oceans, each with the same background sound speed struc- ture, but with an independent realization of the internal-wave- induced perturbation field superimposed. At a fixed range we consider the resulting distribution of ray travel time perturba- tions without regard to the final ray depth or the ray turning point history. Such a distribution is seen in Fig. 1. With the assumption that I is piecewise constant following a ray, it follows from Eqs. (3), neglecting d(G− Iϑ)/dr, that ∆T = ∫ r 0 dξ I(ξ )ω ′(I(ξ ))∆I(ξ ). (10) Here, ∆T = T−T0, where T0(r) is the travel time of the unper- turbed ray whose initial action is I0; ∆I = I− I0; and I and ω ′ are understood to be piecewise constant functions of r. If the product Iω ′ ≈ I0ω ′(I0) over the domain of I-values assumed by the ray between ranges 0 and r, then (10) can be approxi- mated by ∆T ≈ I0ω ′(I0) ∫ r 0 dξ ∆I(ξ ). (11) Successive upper turns are typically separated by about 50 km, which is large compared to the horizontal correlation length of internal-wave-induced sound speed fluctuations, so each perturbation to I is independent. This leads to 〈(∆I)2〉1/2 ∼ r1/2, where 〈·〉 indicates ensemble average, and, in turn, to 〈(∆T )2〉1/2 ∼ r3/2. This r3/2-dependence was previously de- rived by F. Henyey and J. Colosi (personal communication), who also found that this dependence is in good agreement with simulations. [Our simulations also indicate that when (11) is valid, then 〈(∆T )2〉1/2 ∼ r3/2; our focus, however, is on the dependence of (10) and (7) on the background sound speed structure, via Iω ′. We note, in addition, that if 〈(∆I)2〉1/2 is computed using an ensemble of rays with the same launch an- gle then the r-dependence of this quantity is characterized by oscillations in r superimposed on the r3/2 trend. The oscilla- tions are caused by the cycling between relatively small time spreads when distributions are centered near the cusps where neighboring timefront branches join and relatively large time spreads when distributions are centered near the midpoint of timefront branches. At long range when scattered ray distribu- tions are very broad, this effect is greatly dimished.] At long range the contributions to (10) or (11) from ray partial loops near the source and receiver are unimportant. Then, because 2pi/ω is the range of a ray double loop, for a ray that has un- dergone N apex scattering events and has N complete double loops, (11) can be further approximated, ∆T ≈ 2pi I0ω ′(I0) ω(I0) N ∑ i=1 (Ii− I0). (12) Equation (12) provides an explanation for the observation (recall Fig. 1) that ϕ0 = 10◦ rays in the C0 environment are 5PSfrag replacements 〈( ∆ T )2 〉1 / 2 [s ] ϕ0 |α | (a) ϕ0 (b) 0◦ 3◦ 6◦ 9◦ 12◦0◦ 3◦ 6◦ 9◦ 12◦ 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1 FIG. 4: Estimates of unconstrained travel time spreads (upper pan- els) and the stability parameter α (lower panels) as a function of launch angle in background sound channels C0 (a) and C14 (b) (cf. Fig. 2). To generate the upper plots, ray simulations based on Eqs. (1) were performed by launching rays from a source located at the sound channel axis with a fixed launch angle in an ensemble of 50 oceans, each with the same background sound speed structure, but with an independent realization of the internal-wave-induced pertur- bation field superimposed. more strongly scattered than ϕ0 = 12◦ rays in the C14 en- vironment; the same internal wave field was used to gener- ate the ensemble of scattered rays, so the difference between these figures is due to the difference in the background sound speed profiles. The ϕ0 = 12◦ rays in the C14 environment have a |ω ′(I0)|-value that is approximately one-fourth that of the ϕ0 = 10◦ rays in the C0 environment, and this scattering- induced time spread is seen to be reduced by a nearly com- mensurate amount, consistent with Eq. (12). According to that equation, travel time perturbations are the product of the amplification factor Iω ′/ω and a term that depends on the his- tory of the scattering-induced perturbations to the ray action variable. It is convenient to introduce the stability parameter6,7,17 α = Iω ′/ω, (13) which, in addition to appearing in Eq. (12), is a natural nondi- mensional measure of ω ′. Figure 4 compares numerically sim- ulated time spreads 〈(∆T )2〉1/2 as a function of launch angle ϕ0 for a source on the sound channel axis at r = 2 Mm to α in the two different background environments shown in Fig. 2 on which identical internal-wave-induced sound speed perturba- tion fields were superimposed. In the Fig. 4 plots, dependence on I0 is replaced by dependence on the more familiar variable ϕ0; for an axial source this constitutes a simple stretching of the horizontal axis. Ensembles of ∆T for rays with the same launch angle were generated using the same technique that was used to generate Fig. 1. Figure 4 shows that in both environments almost all of the structure seen in 〈(∆T )2〉1/2 can be attributed to the stability parameter α . This is because in the environments considered Eq. (12) is generally a good approximation to Eq. (10). Also, the dependence of ∑Ni=1(Ii− I0) on axial ray angle is somewhat weaker than the dependence of α on axial ray angle. We con- PSfrag replacements PA PB C [km s−1] z [k m ] 1.45 1.5 1.55 1.6 1.65 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 FIG. 5: Background sound speed profiles used to construct the curves in Fig. 6. clude from Fig. 4 that travel time spreads along the timefront are largely controlled by the background sound speed struc- ture via α , and that, provided α(I) does not have too much structure, the dependence of ∆T on α in Eq. (10) can be taken outside the integral. B. Spreading of rays with fixed turning history and final depth We now consider a different measure of unconstrained travel time spread. To illustrate the generality of the results presented, we consider rays in upward refracting environ- ments (Fig. 5) in the presence of rough surface scattering. In such environments the action–angle form of the ray equations is unchanged. The action I is defined as in (6) with the upper turning depth z+ = 0 for all rays. It follows from Eqs. (3), neglecting d(G− Iϑ)/dr, that the travel time for one ray cy- cle is T (I) = 2pi[I− ¯H(I)/ω(I)]. At each reflection from the rough surface the ray action gets modified. After N surface reflections and N+1 ray cycles the travel time perturbation to the ray is ∆TN ≈ 2pi ¯H(I0)ω ′(I0) [ω(I0)]2 N ∑ i=1 (Ii− I0), (14) where I0 is the initial action of the ray, and the first of Eqs. (3a) has been used. Note that Eq. (14) constrains the ray geometry and final ray depth but not the final range of the scattered rays. 6PSfrag replacements |ϕ0| ∆ T 2 0 [s ] ϕ0 |α | (a) |ϕ0| ϕ0 (b) 0◦ 5◦ 10◦ 15◦ 20◦ 25◦ 0◦ 5◦ 10◦ 15◦ 20◦ 25◦ 0◦ 5◦ 10◦ 15◦ 20◦ 25◦ 0◦ 5◦ 10◦ 15◦ 20◦ 25◦ 0 2 4 6 0 10 20 30 40 50 FIG. 6: Upper panels: absolute value of the difference between per- turbed (rough surface) and unperturbed (flat surface) ray travel time after 20 surface reflections as a function of initial ray angle at the surface for sound speed profiles PA (a) and PB (b) shown in Fig. 5. Lower panels: stability parameter as a function of ray angle in each of the two environments. Figure 6 shows plots of ∆T20, defined in (14), vs. launch an- gle ϕ0 for a source at the surface [so, again, ϕ0(I0) is a simple stretching] in the environments shown in Fig. 5. The rough surface was a single frozen realization of a surface gravity wavefield with a k−7/2 surface elevation wavenumber spec- trum with 0.02 rad m−1 ≤ k ≤ 0.16 rad m−1, ∆k = 10−3 rad m−1, and an r.m.s. slope of 4× 10−3. Ray reflections from this surface were specular, but with a linearized boundary con- dition; the surface elevation was neglected, but the nonzero slope was not approximated. The same environments were used in Ref. 7. Consistent with Eq. (14), Fig. 6 shows that travel time perturbations are largely controlled by the background sound speed structure via α , rather than details of the rough surface. IV. CONSTRAINED TIME SPREAD In this section we focus on deep ocean conditions and consider the scattering-induced broadening of an individual branch of the timefront. Note that this broadening is much smaller than the scattering-induced spreading along the time- front that was considered in section III.A. We refer to the broadening of an individual branch of the timefront as a con- strained time spread because to calculate this broadening two constraints must be incorporated into the calculation. First, the rays contributing to the spread must have the same fixed endpoints in the (z,r)-plane. Second, the rays contributing to the spread must have the same turning point history, i.e. the same ray inclination (positive or negative) at the source, and the same number of turning points M (upper and lower) between source and receiver. Note, however, that these con- straints do not fix the values of the ray angle at either the source or receiver. The approach taken here to compute appropriately con- strained travel time spreads is based on a perturbation expan- sion that exploits the assumed smallness of the sound speed perturbation δ c. The method by which the constraints are incorporated into the travel time perturbation estimates pre- sented below is different than the method that was used in Ref. 10; that approach can be shown to give the same result that is presented below when terms of O((∆I)2), neglecting endpoint corrections, are retained. The perturbation expansions presented below make use of a scattering model in which I following a scattered ray is piece- wise constant; the apex approximation is then treated as a special case. Away form the scattering events Eqs. (3) are valid piecewise, with I making a jump at each scattering event. Thus Eqs. (3) can be used to compute, in a piecewise fashion, the contribution of each ray segment to the travel time and range of the scattered ray. To impose the eigenray constraint, the total range of each scattered ray must be constrained to be equal to the range of the unperturbed ray. In addition, the turning point history, starting depth, and ending depth of the scattered ray must be the same as those of the unperturbed ray. This is accomplished by constraining the total change in ϑ following the scattered ray to be equal to that of the unper- turbed ray. For some choices of the source–receiver geom- etry this procedure exactly enforces the eigenray constraint. In general, however, small endpoint corrections must be ap- plied. For simplicity, these small endpoint corrections, which are important only at very short range, will be neglected. We assume that between source and receiver the environ- ment can be approximated as n piecewice range-independent segments. Let Ii denote the action of a scattered ray in the ith segment whose horizontal extent is ∆ri = ∆ϑ i/ω(Ii), and let ˜I denote the action of the unperturbed ray. The eigenray con- straint requires the perturbed ray total range, r, to be equal to the unperturbed ray total range. This condition reads r = n ∑ i=1 ∆ϑ i ω(Ii) = 1 ω( ˜I) n ∑ i=1 ∆ϑ i, (15) which, for sufficiently small ∆Ii = Ii− ˜I, can be approximated by ω ′( ˜I) [ω( ˜I)]2 n ∑ i=1 ∆Ii∆ϑ i = 1 2 d2 dI2 ∣∣∣∣ I= ˜I ( 1 ω ) n ∑ i=1 (∆Ii)2∆ϑ i. (16) The r.h.s. term of (16) is almost always negligible compared to the l.h.s. term in deep ocean environments, even at ranges comparable to basin scales. Then, because ∆ϑ i = ω(Ii)∆ri ≈ ω( ˜I)∆ri, the eigenray constraint reduces approximately to a statement that the range-weighted average of the perturbed ac- tion is equal to the unperturbed action, i.e. ˜I ≈ r−1 n ∑ i=1 Ii∆ri. (17) This equation constrains the action history of scattered eigen- rays. The difference between the perturbed and unperturbed ray 7travel times is ∆T = n ∑ i=1 [ Ii− ¯H(Ii) ω(Ii) ] ∆ϑ i− [ ˜I− ¯H( ˜I) ω( ˜I) ] n ∑ i=1 ∆ϑ i ≈ ω ′( ˜I) ¯H( ˜I) [ω( ˜I)]2 n ∑ i=1 ∆Ii∆ϑ i− 1 2 d2 dI2 ∣∣∣∣ I= ˜I ( ¯H ω ) n ∑ i=1 (∆Ii)2∆ϑ i = 1 2 ω ′( ˜I) ω( ˜I) n ∑ i=1 (∆Ii)2∆ϑ i, (18) where the eigenray constraint (16) has been used. Virovlyansky14 recently derived an expression for ∆T consisting of Eq. (18) [written as an integral over r using ∆ϑ i = ω(Ii)∆ri] plus a correction term. We will discuss his result in more detail below. It should also be noted that the same symbol ∆T is being used to denote a constrained (eigenray) travel time perturbation that was used in the previous section to denote an unconstrained travel time perturbation. We believe that is obvious in all cases which is the relevant quantity. This choice was made to keep the notation simple. Also, for the same reason, we make no notational distinction between a theoretical estimate of ∆T and a numerically computed ∆T. The apex approximation is a special case of the analysis leading to Eqs. (15)-(18). If the contributions to ∆T from the incomplete ray cycles at the beginning and end of the ray path are neglected, Eq. (18) applies with ∆ϑ i = 2pi and n = N, the number of complete ray cycles. (For large N the neglected incomplete ray cycle contributions to ∆T constitute small cor- rections to the sum of the retained contributions.) In Ref. 10 a relaxed form of the apex approximation was considered. The transition width of the jump ∆IT = Ii − Ii−1 had a width ∆ϑ T, which is assumed here to be small, ∆ϑT < 2pi. In the transition region a particular form ¯h(I − ϑ∆IT/∆ϑ T) of the Hamiltonian was assumed. This finite width transition region was shown not to contribute to a range perturbation, but gives a travel time perturbation 1 2 ∆IT∆ϑT for a single scattering event. After N scattering events, assuming the transition width ∆ϑ T of each is the same, this gives a contribution 12 (IN − I0)∆ϑ T to ∆T (18), while the eigenray constraint (16) is unaltered. With this additional term (18), with ∆ϑ i = 2pi and n = N, is replaced by ∆T = 1 2 (IN − I0)∆ϑT +pi ω ′( ˜I) ω( ˜I) N ∑ i=1 (∆Ii)2. (19) For convenience we shall refer to the first and second terms on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19) as ∆T1 and ∆T2, respectively. For steep rays in typical deep ocean environments ∆ϑT/(2pi) ≈ 0.05 while ω ′∆IT/ω ≈ 0.01. (The latter estimate is variable owing to variations in ω ′.) Thus one might expect that ∆T1 dominates ∆T2. For small N this is indeed the case. But under typical deep ocean conditions consecutive apex scattering events are independent (because the ray cycle distance 2pi/ω ≈ 50 km exceeds the horizontal correlation length of internal waves, about 10 km), so ∆T1 and ∆T2 grow approximately like N1/2 and N, respectively. Thus ∆T2 is expected to dominate ∆T1 at long range. Note that when ∆T2 dominates ∆T1, this equation PSfrag replacements T [s] z [k m ] (a) T [s] (b) 2006.4 2006.9 2007.4668.25 668.75 669.25 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 FIG. 7: (a) Ray travel time and depth of rays with positive launch an- gles and which have N = 18 upper turning points at r = 1 Mm in the C0 environment shown in Fig. 2. The solid curve correponds to rays in the absence of internal-wave-induced scattering. Dots correspond to rays scattered by internal waves. (b) Same as the left panel except that r = 3 Mm and N = 54. PSfrag replacements ∆T [ms] ∆ T 1 [m s] (a) ∆T [ms] ∆ T 2 [m s] (b) −80 −40 0−2 −1 0 1 2 −80 −40 0 −2 −1 0 1 2 FIG. 8: (a) Constrained travel time spread (∆T ) vs. the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19) (∆T1) at r = 500 km for rays with axial launch angles 11◦ ≤ ϕ0 ≤ 13.5◦ in the C0 environment with an internal- wave-induced sound speed perturbation superimposed. (b) As in (a) but vs. the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19) (∆T2) and at r = 3 Mm. predicts a scattering-induced travel time bias in the direction of sgnω ′. These observations are consistent with the simulations shown in Fig. 7. There, scattered and unperturbed (δc = 0) ray travel times are shown in the vicinity of two branches of the timefront at r = 1 Mm (N = 18) and r = 3 Mm (N = 54). At both ranges the source was on the sound channel axis in the C0 environment shown in Fig. 2; launch angles for the rays shown are near 10◦ at both ranges. In that environment sgnω ′ = −1. It is seen in this figure that there is no indica- tion of a negative travel time bias at 1 Mm, while there is a clear negative bias at 3 Mm, consistent with Eq. (19). At ranges sufficiently short that ∆T1 dominates, travel time bi- ases of either sign can be expected as IN − I0 can be of either sign. Because IN− I0 is a continuous function of launch angle, such biases should have a nonzero correlation scale along the timefront. These features are readily evident in our simula- tions in the presence of realistic internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbations. Quantitative tests of the correctness of Eq. (19) are shown in Fig. 8. There numerically computed travel time differences ∆T are compared separately to ∆T1 and ∆T2 under conditions in which one of the two terms dominates the other. The con- strained travel time difference ∆T was computed using a sin- gle realization of an internal-wave-induced sound speed per- 8turbation as the difference between the perturbed ray with the same turning history and the same final depth as the unper- turbed ray. In Fig. 8 attention is restricted to rays that are suf- ficiently steep that the apex approximation is approximately valid, but not so steep that rays reflect off the surface. In Fig. 8a ∆T is compared to ∆T1 at r = 500 km; for the rays used to construct this plot the mean value of ∆T2 is −0.3 ms, which is seen to represent a small correction, on aver- age, to ∆T1. The value of ∆ϑT used to construct this plot is 0.25≈ 2pi/25.The domain and gross distribution of ∆T points plotted in Fig. 8a is seen to coincide with the domain and gross distribution of ∆T1 points plotted. Thus ∆T1 is a fairly good statistical descriptor of ∆T . The point-by-point compar- ison between ∆T and ∆T1 is not good, however. This is seen by noting that the points plotted do not cluster along the diag- onal line with slope unity. Thus, although ∆T1 has the correct qualitative features and appears to be a useful statistical de- scriptor of ∆T, it is evidently a poor deterministic predictor of ∆T. This shortcoming, we believe is attributable to the overly idealized form of the Hamiltonian in the apex transition region that was used to derive ∆T1. It is interesting to note that ∆T1 is the only term presented in this paper describing a travel time spread that is independent of ω ′, and this term is the one that gives the poorest agreement with simulations. In Fig. 8b ∆T is compared to ∆T2 at r = 3 Mm; for the rays used to construct this plot the r.m.s. value of ∆T1 is 2 ms, which is seen to represent a small correction, on average, to ∆T2. The agreement between ∆T and ∆T2 in this plot is seen to be very good, indicating that for the rays used to construct this plot ∆T2 is a very good predictor of ∆T. Overall, for steep rays we have found good qualitative agreement at short range between simulations of ∆T and ∆T1, and a good quantitative agreement at long range between ∆T and ∆T2. Figure 9 shows plots of ∆T vs. launch angle and α vs. launch angle at r = 3 Mm in each of the two background sound speed profiles shown in Fig. 2. Again, the constrained travel time spread ∆T was computed using a single realization of an internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbation as the dif- ference between the perturbed ray travel time and the travel time of the unperturbed ray with the same turning history and the same final depth as the perturbed ray. The small gaps in the plot correspond to perturbed rays whose final depth lies outside the bounds of the portion of the timefront which has the same turning history as the perturbed ray. In Fig. 9 ray angles are not limited to the band for which the apex approxi- mation is expected to be valid. Thus Eq. (19) is not expected to be valid for the entire band of angles. Equation (18) should be approximately valid across the entire band, however, so the trend in α(ϕ0) should be approximately reproduced in the ∆T (ϕ0) points plotted. This is seen to be the case; variations in ∆T are caused by variations in ∑ni=1(∆Ii)2∆ϑ i. The prob- able cause of the positive values of ∆T for near-axial rays in the C0 environment seen in Fig. (9) will be discussed below. Even after fitting a smooth curve through the fluctuations seen in the Fig. 9 ∆T plot for the C14 environment, the peak in |∆T | is seen to be less pronounced than the peak in |α|. This is ex- pected because the scattering process leads to a local average over a band of adjacent α-values. With these minor caveats, PSfrag replacements ∆ T [m s] ϕ0 α (a) ϕ0 (b) 0◦ 3◦ 6◦ 9◦ 12◦0◦ 3◦ 6◦ 9◦ 12◦ −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 −60 −40 −20 0 20 FIG. 9: Travel time difference ∆T = TIW −T0 at r = 3 Mm vs. ray launch angle ϕ0 for an axial source, and stability parameter α vs. ϕ0, in each of the environments C0 (a) and C14 (b) shown in Fig. 2. Here, TIW is the travel time of a ray in the presence of an internal- wave-induced sound speed perturbation field, and T0 is the travel of a ray in the same background environment, but without the sound speed perturbation field superimposed, whose turning point history and final depth are the same as those of the TIW ray. Fig. 9 shows that constrained travel time spreads at long range are largely controlled by the background sound speed struc- ture via the stability parameter α . The same conclusion can be drawn from Fig. 8b. The probable cause of the positive computed values of ∆T for near-axial rays seen in Fig. 9 in the C0 environment is not the failure of Eq. (19); rather it is the failure of our ray label- ing scheme for near axial rays. We have implicitly assumed that the ray identifier ±M uniquely identifies each timefront branch. This assumption fails for near-axial rays. (The as- sumption also fails for steep rays in the vicinity of the cusps where adjacent timefront branches join, and whenever ω ′ has isolated zeros. We have intentionally avoided the latter situa- tion.) The correct way to identify timefront branches is by the Maslov index8 µ which, for waves in two space dimensions, advances by one unit each time a caustic is touched. For near- axial rays the portion of the timefront corresponding to a con- stant value of the ray identifier consists of two adjacent partial branches joined at a cusp. For these rays a ray-identifier-based definition of ∆T can lead to either undefined or nonuniquely defined ∆T values. We noted earlier the quantitative correctness of ∆T2 and the qualitative correctness of ∆T1. The weakest link in our analy- sis is clearly ∆T1. Virovlyansky14 derived an alternate correc- tion to ∆T2 whose validity, like (18), is not linked to the apex approximation. In our notation, this correction reads ∆T V1 = ∫ r 0 dξ ∆I(ξ )∂δ ¯h∂ I (I(ξ ),ϑ(ξ ),ξ ) − ∫ r 0 dξ δh(p(ξ ),z(ξ ),ξ ). (20) Unfortunately, the lack of explicit knowledge on the func- tional dependence of δ ¯h on (I,ϑ ,r) makes the numerical eval- uation of the first term on r.h.s. of (20) quite difficult—if not impossible. Virovlyansky argued that that term can be ne- 9glected. We have evaluated numerically the second term on r.h.s. of (20); this resulted in significantly poorer agreement with our simulations that was found using our ∆T1. (Note, however, that the parameter ∆ϑ T in our expression for ∆T1 was adjusted to approximately match the simulations.) We expect, but have not confirmed, that the evaluation of both terms on the r.h.s. of (20) would result in good agreement with simulations. V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS In this paper we have investigated three measures of travel time spreads for sound propagation in environments consist- ing of a range independent background on which a range- dependent perturbation is superimposed: (i) unconstrained spread of ray travel time along the timefront; (ii) uncon- strained spread of rays whose turning history and final depth are fixed but whose final range is not; and (iii) scattering- induced broadening of an individual branch of the timefront at a fixed location. All three measures of time spreads were shown to be largely controlled by a property ω ′ of the background sound speed profile. Surprisingly, this is the same property that controls ray spreading and, hence, ray amplitudes7. We now present two arguments that provide some insight into why travel time spreads should be controlled by the same property of the background sound speed profile that controls ray spreading. The variational equations that describe how small per- turbations (δ I,δ ϑ ,δT ) evolve in the extended phase space (I,ϑ ,T ) are given by d dr ( δ I δϑ δ T ) =   −δ ¯h,Iϑ δ ¯h,ϑϑ 0ω ′+ δ ¯h,II δ ¯h,Iϑ 0 Iω ′+ Iδ ¯h,II Iδ ¯h,Iϑ − δ ¯h,ϑ 0  ( δ Iδϑ δT ) , (21) where a short-hand notation for partial differentiation has been introduced. In general Eqs. (21) and (7) constitute a set of six coupled differential equations. For the special case δ ¯h = 0, I and ω ′ are constant following trajectories and (21), like (7), have a simple analytical solution. For the class of problems treated in this paper the nonzero sound speed perturbation terms in the matrix on the r.h.s. of (21) are generally much smaller than the ω ′ and Iω ′ terms, corresponding to contri- butions from the background sound speed profile. Thus one expects that generically the dominant cause of the growth of (δ I,δ ϑ ,δT ) is the background sound speed structure via ω ′, rather than the small sound speed perturbation terms. Loosely speaking, the perturbation terms provide a seed for the growth of (δ I,δϑ ,δ T ), while subsequently growth of these quanti- ties is largely controlled by ω ′. Additional insight into the role played by ω ′ is obtained by making a fluid mechanical analogy. Equations (1) define a flow in the three-dimensional space (p,z,T ) with velocity components d(p,z,T )/dr. (Recall that r plays the role of the independent or time-like variable in the one-way ray equa- tions.) Alternatively, the flow in this three-dimensional space can be described using action–angle variables (I,ϑ ,T ). The coordinates (I,ϑ ,T ) behave qualitatively like cylindrical co- ordinates (ρ ,θ ,ζ ), say. If we neglect the contributions from the sound speed perturbation term δ ¯h, then the velocity com- ponents of the background flow in these coordinates are uI = dI/dr = 0, uϑ = (dϑ/dr)I = ωI, and uT = dT/dr = Iω− ¯H. The strain rate tensor, S i j := 1 2 ( ∇ jui +∇iu j ) , (22) where ∇i denotes covariant derivative, describes how small elements of fluid are deformed by the flow12. With the identification (I,ϑ ,T )↔ (ρ,θ ,ζ ) and with the velocity field (uI,uϑ ,uT ) defined above, the strain rate tensor is S=   0 12 Iω ′ 12 Iω ′1 2 Iω ′ 0 0 1 2 Iω ′ 0 0   . (23) Although (23) is only qualitatively correct [because of the qualitative connection between (I,ϑ ,T ) and (ρ ,θ ,ζ )], the conclusion to be drawn from this tensor is extremely impor- tant: deformation of small elements of the extended phase space (I,ϑ ,T ) by the background sound speed structure is caused entirely by shear (off-diagonal elements of S) and is quantified by the product Iω ′. This behavior is consistent with the discussion above concerning Eq. (21) and the growth of small perturbations in the extended phase space (I,ϑ ,T ). Arguments similar to those given above relating to Eqs. (21) and (23) were given in Ref. 7; in that study, however, attention was confined to ray spreading in (p,z) or, equiva- lently, (I,ϑ). That problem is described by the first two of Eqs. (1) or (7), the upper 2× 2 system in Eqs. (21) and (23), etc. In that study it was shown that ray spreading is largely controlled by ω ′. The surprising result of the present study is that travel time spreads are also largely controlled by ω ′. This is evident from the unconstrained and constrained travel time spread estimates, (10), (14), (18), and (19), and the more heuristic arguments associated with Eqs. (21) and (23). Inasmuch as the AET experimental observations2,3 pro- vided much of the motivation for the present work, it is note- worthy that the results presented here are consistent with the ray-based analysis of those observations presented in Ref. 10. Two points relating to the results in Ref. 10 deserve further comment. First, it was argued in Ref. 10 that, for moderately steep rays, constrained travel time spreads could be approx- imately estimated using ∆T1, the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19). This is moderately surprising in that the AET range was 3.25 Mm, which is large enough that one would expect that the second term on r.h.s. of (19) should be important. The neglected term, however, is proportional to α , which is unusually small (cf. Ref. 10) in that environment for the rel- evant band of launch angles. Thus the estimated travel time spread reported in Ref. 10 is close to what one obtains using both terms on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19). Second, it was noted in Ref. 10, without explanation, that in the AET environment constrained travel time spreads are much larger for near axial rays than for steeper rays. This behavior is consistent with Eq. (18) and the observation10 that in the AET environment |α| is very large for the near-axial rays. 10 The results presented in this paper, coupled with those pre- sented in Refs. 7,14, represent an important step toward the development of a theory of wave propagation in random inho- mogeneous media (WPRIM). These studies have shown that both ray amplitude statistics and ray travel time statistics are largely controlled by the background sound speed profile, via ω ′. It follows that finite frequency wavefield intensity statis- tics should also be largely controlled by the background sound speed profile via ω ′. This is different from the classical treat- ment of the problem of wave propagation in random media (WPRM) which assumes that the background sound speed structure is homogeneous—for which ω ′ = 0. Ideally one would like to develop a uniformly valid theory of WPRIM that reduces to known WPRM results in the limit ω ′ → 0. A more modest goal is to develop an approximate theory of WPRIM, appropriate for long-range underwater sound propa- gation, that treats the case where the wavefield intensity statis- tics are largely controlled by ω ′. To develop such a theory the results presented here and in Refs. 7,14 have to be com- bined and extended. Necessary extensions are the inclusion of finite frequency effects (interference and diffraction) and a more accurate treatment of the link between sound speed per- turbations and perturbations to I and ϑ . These topics will be explored in future work. Acknowledgments We thank A. Virovlyansky, J. Colosi, S. Tomsovic, M. Wolfson, G. Zaslavsky, F. Henyey, and W. Munk for the bene- fit of discussions on ray dynamics. We note, in particular, that A. Virovlyansky independently derived Eq. (18); S. Tomsovic independently derived Eq. (14) and the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19); W. Munk, J. Colosi, and F. Henyey independently derived the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (19), although not in the action–angle form given here; and F. Henyey and J. Colosi independently derived Eq. (11) but not in the action– angle form given here. Also, the technique of staggering the starting range in a single realization of an internal wave field to generate effectively independent realizations was pointed out to us by F. Henyey. This research was supported by Code 321OA of the Office of Naval Research. 1 T. F. Duda, S. M. Flatte´, J. A. Colosi, B. D. Cornuelle, J. A. Hilde- brand, W. S. Hodgkiss, P. F. Worcester, B. M. Howe, J. A. Mercer, and R. C. Spindel, “Measured wavefront fluctuations in 1000 km pulse propagation in the Pacific Ocean,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 92, 939–955 (1992). 2 P. F. Worcester, B. D. Cornuelle, M. A. Dzieciuch, W. H. Munk, J. A. Colosi, B. M. Howe, J. A. Mercer, A. B. Baggeroer, and K. Metzger, “A test of basin-scale acoustic thermometry using a large-aperture vertical array at 3250-km range in the eastern North Pacific Ocean,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 105, 3,185–3,201 (1999). 3 J. A. Colosi, E. K. Scheer, S. M. Flatte´, B. D. Cornuelle, M. A. Dzieciuch, W. H. Munk, P. F. Worcester, B. M. Howe, J. A. Mer- cer, R. C. Spindel, K. Metzger, and T. Birdsall, “Comparison of measured and predicted acoustic fluctuations for a 3250-km prop- agation experiment in the eastern North Pacific Ocean,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 105, 3,202–3,218 (1999). 4 T. F. Duda and J. B. Bowlin, “Ray-acoustic caustic formation and timing effects from ocean sound-speed relative curvature,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 96, 1,033–1,046 (1994). 5 J. Simmen, S. M. Flatte´, and G. Yu-Wang, “Wavefront folding, chaos and diffraction for sound propagation through ocean inter- nal waves,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 102, 239–255 (1997). 6 I. P. Smirnov, A. L. Virovlyansky, and G. M. Zaslavsky, “Theory and application of ray chaos to underwater acoustics,” Phys. Rev. E 64, 036221, 1–20 (2001). 7 F. J. Beron-Vera and M. .G. Brown, “Ray stability in weakly range-dependent sound channels,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (2003), in press. 8 M. G. Brown, J. A. Colosi, S. Tomsovic, A. L. Virovlyansky, M. Wolfson, and G. M. Zaslavsky, “Ray dynamics in long-range deep ocean sound propagation,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (2003), in press. 9 W. H. Munk, “Sound channel in an exponentially stratified ocean with application to SOFAR,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 55, 220–226 (1974). 10 F. J. Beron-Vera, M. G. Brown, J. A. Colosi, S. Tomsovic, A. L. Virovlyansky, M. A. Wolfson, and G. M. Zaslavsky, “Ray dynam- ics in a long-range acoustic propagation experiment,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (2003), conditionally accepted. 11 J. A. Colosi and M. G. Brown, “Efficient numerical simula- tion of stochastic internal-wave-induced sound speed perturbation fields,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 103, 2,232–2,235 (1998). 12 G. K. Batchelor, An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics (Cambridge University, 1964). 13 M. G. Brown and J. Viechnicki, “Stochastic ray theory for long- range sound propagation in deep ocean environments,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 104, 2,090–2,104 (1998). 14 A. L. Virovlyansky, “Ray travel times at long range in acoustic waveguides,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 113, 2,523–2,532 (2003). 15 V. I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, 2nd edn. (Springer, 1989). 16 L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics, 3rd edn. (Pergamon, 1976). 17 S. S. Abdullaev and G. M. Zaslavsky, “Classical nonlinear dy- namics and chaos of rays in problems of wave propagation in in- homogeneous media,” Usp. Fiz. Nauk 161, 1-43 (1991). 