ABSTRACT: 
Severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs) are a group of inherited disorders responsible for severe dysfunctions of the immune system. These diseases are life-threatening when the diagnosis is made too late; they are the most severe forms of primary immunodeficiency. SCID patients often die during the first two years of life if appropriate treatments to reconstitute their immune system are not undertaken. Conventionally, SCIDs are classified according either to the main pathway affected by the molecular defect or on the basis of the specific immunologic phenotype that reflects the stage where the blockage occurs during the differentiation process. However, during the last few years many new causative gene alterations have been associated with unusual clinical and immunological phenotypes. Many of these novel forms of SCID also show extra-hematopoietic alterations, leading to complex phenotypes characterized by a functional impairment of several organs, which may lead to a considerable delay in the diagnosis. Here we review the biological and clinical features of SCIDs paying particular attention to the most recently identified forms and to their unusual or extra-immunological clinical features. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs) are a group of inherited disorders responsible for severe dysfunctions of the immune system. These diseases are life-threatening when the diagnosis is made too late; they are the most severe forms of primary immunodeficiency. SCID patients often die during the first two years of life if appropriate treatments to reconstitute their immune system are not undertaken. Conventionally, SCIDs are classified according either to the main pathway affected by the molecular defect or on the basis of the specific immunologic phenotype that reflects the stage where the blockage occurs during the differentiation process. However, during the last few years many new causative gene alterations have been associated with unusual clinical and immunological phenotypes. Many of these novel forms of SCID also show extra-hematopoietic alterations, leading to complex phenotypes characterized by a functional impairment of several organs, which may lead to a considerable delay in the diagnosis. Here we review the biological and clinical features of SCIDs paying particular attention to the most recently identified forms and to their unusual or extra-immunological clinical features. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. ISSN 0077-8923ANNALS OF THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCESIssue:The Year in ImmunologySevere combined immunodeficiency—an updateEmilia Cirillo, Giuliana Giardino, Vera Gallo, Roberta D’Assante, Fiorentino Grasso,Roberta Romano, Cristina Di Lillo, Giovanni Galasso, and Claudio PignataDepartment of Translational Medical Sciences, Pediatrics Section, Federico II University, Naples, ItalyAddress for correspondence: Claudio Pignata, M.D., Ph.D., Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Unit ofImmunology, Federico II University, via S. Pansini 5–80131, Naples, Italy. pignata@unina.itSevere combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs) are a group of inherited disorders responsible for severe dysfunctionsof the immune system.These diseases are life-threateningwhen the diagnosis ismade too late; they are themost severeformsof primary immunodeficiency. SCIDpatients oftendie during thefirst twoyears of life if appropriate treatmentsto reconstitute their immune system are not undertaken. Conventionally, SCIDs are classified according either to themain pathway affected by the molecular defect or on the basis of the specific immunologic phenotype that reflectsthe stage where the blockage occurs during the differentiation process. However, during the last few years many newcausative gene alterations have been associated with unusual clinical and immunological phenotypes. Many of thesenovel forms of SCID also show extra-hematopoietic alterations, leading to complex phenotypes characterized by afunctional impairment of several organs, which may lead to a considerable delay in the diagnosis. Here we reviewthe biological and clinical features of SCIDs paying particular attention to the most recently identified forms and totheir unusual or extra-immunological clinical features.Keywords: severe combined immunodeficiency; SCID; primary immunodeficiency; nude/SCID;DiGeorge syndrome;cytokine; thymusIntroductionSevere combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs) area group of inherited disorders responsible for se-vere dysfunctions of the immune system that leadto the absence or dysfunction of the T and B cellsderived from the thymus gland and bone marrow,thus affecting both cellular and humoral adaptiveimmunity. Recently, Kwan et al., on the basis of dataobtained from 11U.S. newborn screening programsin the general population, reported an incidence ofSCID of 1 in 58,000 live-births, an incidence muchhigher than the previous estimate of one in 100,000based on retrospective clinical diagnosis of SCID.1This group of diseases belongs to the most severeforms of primary immunodeficiency (PID), whichare often fatal when the diagnosis is made too late.2Even though children with SCID appear healthy atbirth, they are predisposed to severe bacterial, vi-ral, and fungal infections as the maternal trans-ferredantibodiesdecline.During thefirst yearof life,failure to thrive, diarrhea, and oral candidiasis arecommon findings; Pneumocystis jiroveci may fre-quently cause a severe interstitial pneumopathy;andmaternal engraftment of lymphocytes can causegraft-versus-host disease (GVHD).3 SCID patientsoften die during the first two years of life if appropri-ate treatments to reconstitute their immune systemare not undertaken.4 For most patients, the onlycurative treatment is the allogeneic hematopoieticstem cell transplantation (HSCT).5 Gene therapyoffers a cure for two specific forms of SCID and,although other SCID forms may become amenableto this treatment in the future, it is likely that HSCTwill continue to be used for the majority of SCIDpatients.6Conventionally, SCIDs canbe classified accordingeither to the main pathways affected by the molecu-lar defect or on the basis of the specific immunologicphenotype related to that genetic defect, as T cell–deficient but normal B cell (T−B+) SCID and bothT cell– and B cell–deficient (T−B−) SCID, with afurther subdivision depending on the presence ordoi: 10.1111/nyas.1284990 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficienciesabsence of NK cells (NK+ or NK–, respectively).2This classification, traditionally considered as rep-resentative of the stage where the blockage occursduring the differentiation process, was, until a fewyears ago, very useful in directing molecular studiestoward a certain genetic alteration.However, duringthe last years many new causative gene alterationshave been identified with peculiar clinical and im-munological phenotypes. In a few cases, the geneticalteration allows for a normal T cell differentiationprogram but compromises T cell functionality byaffecting the initial or final phase of intracellularsignaling. These functional T cell disorders arecharacterized by immune dysregulation and cancerpredisposition, as well as infections. In addition,hypomorphic mutations in some SCIDs genesmake possible the development of nonfunctionaloligoclonal T cells that are responsible for a complexof clinical conditions thatmay include hyperinflam-mation or autoimmunity. Many of the novel formsof SCID also show extra-hematopoietic alterations,leading to complex phenotypes characterized byfunctional impairment of organs different fromprimary lymphoid organs, which can make thediagnostic process very complex by standardmethods. Taking this into account, the traditionalinternational classification of SCIDs based onimmunophenotype may no longer be optimalfor clinical and research purposes7,8––diagnosticcriteria have to be continuously updated to take intoaccount these unusual phenotypic presentations. Inhis work of 2014, Shearer emphasizes that currentlythere is no consensus among clinical immunologistson how best to diagnose and treat these rare disor-ders. It is not surprising that an important clinicaldilemma concerns the distinction of SCIDs fromother diseases such as combined immunodeficien-cies (CIDs). Recently, it was proposed that patientswho exhibit an absence or a severe reduction ofT cells (CD3+ < 300/L), absence or severe reduc-tion (<10% of the lower limit) of a proliferativeresponse to phytohemagglutinin, or a maternallymphocyte engraftment should be defined as hav-ing typical SCID.5 Moreover, the European Societyfor Immunodeficiency suggested as criteria for thediagnosis ofCID thepresence of oneof the followingparameters: one severe infection, an immunodys-regulation disorder, cancer, familial CID associatedwith moderate age-related reduction of CD3+,CD4+, CD8+ T cells or of naive T cells. However,a cutoff to distinguish SCID from CID has not yetbeen well defined.A main aim of this review is to report on thebiological and clinical features of SCID, paying at-tention to the most recently identified forms andto the unusual or extra-immunological clinical fea-tures (Table 2). An attempt to relate together patho-genetic mechanisms to specific clinical features isproposed (Table 1).SCID due to defective survival ofhematopoietic lineage precursorsReticular dysgenesis (RD) is an autosomal recessiveform of SCID characterized by both early myeloidlineage differentiation arrest and impaired lym-phoid development.9 It is considered the most se-vere form of SCID, accounting for less than 2%. Apeculiarity of this disorder is the presence of sen-sorineural deafness. RD is caused by biallelic muta-tions in the adenylate kinase 2 gene (AK2), whichcause the absence or the strong reduction of theexpressionofAK2protein.9,10 The syndrome is char-acterized by the absence of granulocytes and lym-phocytes in peripheral blood. Compared to all theother forms of SCID, RD-associated neutropenia,which is unresponsive to granulocyte-colony stim-ulating factor (G-CSF), predisposes the patients tosevere infections.11 The only available treatment forRD is allogeneic HSCT, which indicates that theinherited defect is cellular and not linked to themicro-environment, as previously thought. Neu-trophil differentiation abnormalities of RD patientsare corrected by the restoration of AK2 expressionin the bone marrow, thus confirming the specificrole of AK2 in the development of the myeloidlineage.12 Moreover, AK2 is specifically expressed inthe stria vascularis region of the inner ear, which ex-plains the sensorineural deafness observed in theseindividuals.10 AK2 is localized in the mitochondrialintermembrane space where it regulates adeninenucleotide interconversion within the intermem-brane space;13 a very similar function is mediatedby the cytoplasmatic enzyme AK1. The functionof AK1/2 is classically described to be the main-tenance of a constant concentration of adeninenucleotides and the monitoring of mitochondrialenergy state through a finemechanismof nucleotidesensing and signaling. The molecule also plays acentral role in the control of apoptosis through theFas-associated protein with death domain (FADD)91Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.Table 1. New clinical phenotypes associated with old forms of nonsyndromic SCID/CID and new genetic defectsGene defect Old phenotype New phenotype Pathogenetic mechanismReferenceAK2 Absence of granulocytes, severelymphopenia sensorineuraldeafnessOS Peripheral expansion ofoligoclonal T lymphocytes15IL2RG (c)JAK3T–B+NK– SCID, leaky T+B+NK–SCID, immune-dysregulationand autoimmunityHodgkin like features,invagination and HLHSelective CD4+T lymphopeniaNot clear; maternal GVHDHypomorphic mutationassociated with somaticchimerism55,5651RAG Severe hypogamma-globulinemia, markedreduction of T and B cells, OS,incomplete OSGranulomatous lesions,EBV-related lymphoma,Idiopatic CD4+ Tlymphopenia withextensive chickenpoxHypomorphic mutations 70CORO1A T–B–NK+ SCID, severepostvaccination chickenpox,language delay, behavioral andcognitive impairmentEBV B celllymphoproliferationNot clear; null andhypomorphic mutationsof Coro1A in mice areassociated with defectsin T cell survival andmigration79FOXN1 Human nude/SCID Eczematous rash,erythroderma, severediarrhea and alopeciaResidual T cell developmentsustained by rudimentarythymus or extrathymiclymphoid sites80IL21R NA Cryptosporidiosis, chroniccholangitis and liverdisease, abnormal IL-21induced proliferation,defect of immunoglobulinclass-switching, and NKcell cytotoxicityAbrogation of IL-21 ligandbinding, defectivecytokine secretion99ZAP70 Selective CD8+ lymphopenia andnormal/elevated numbers ofnot functional CD4+ T cellsLate onset disease, cutaneous,erythematous lesions,immune dysregulationerythrodermaPossible role of hypomorphicmutations on Tlymphocytes effector andsuppressive function113MALT1 NA CID Abnormal IL-12 production,failure of IB degradation114BCL10 NA Profound T and B memorycell deficiency, severehypogammaglobulinemiaImpairment of NF-Bpathways115CARD11 NA CID Abnormal IL-12 production,Treg cells deficiency101TTC7A NA CID-MIA Defective thymopoiesis 116LCK, UNC119 NA CD4+ lymphopenia,restricted T cell repertoire,immune dysregulationImpaired TCR signaling 122IKBK2 NA Mycobacterium avium andtuberculosis infections,neurological impairment,hypogammaglobulinemia,normal T cells count withabsence of Treg and  /T cellsImpairment of IKK2–NF-Bsignaling124Note: OS, Omenn syndrome; HLA, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, GVHD, graft versus host disease; MIA,multiple intestinal atresia; NA, not applicable.92 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficienciesTable 2. Pathogenetic mechanisms of SCIDPathogenetic mechanism Defect Phenotype InheritanceDefective survival of haematopoieticprecursorsAK2 T–B–NK– ARToxic metabolite accumulation ADA T–B–NK– ARPNP T–B+NK– ARCytokine signaling anomalies IL-2RG T–B+NK– XLJAK3 T–B+NK– ARIL-7RA T–B+NK+ ARV(D)J recombination and TCRabnormalitiesRAG1/RAG2, Artemis,DNA-PKcs, Cernunnos,LIG4T–B–NK+ ARTCR abnormalities CD45 T–B+NK+ ARCD3ε, ,  T–B+NK+ ARCORO1A T–B–NK+ ARThymic abnormalities FOXN1 T–/lowB+NK+ ARDiGeorge sindrome T–B+NK+ De novo or ADand caspase 10 pathways.14 Omenn syndrome (OS),resulting from residual development and periph-eral expansion of oligoclonal T lymphocytes, hasrecently been described in a patient with RD dueto missense mutation in AK2.15 OS is a clinicalcondition characterized by generalized skin rash,hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy(similar to that which occurs in SCID patientswith detectable CD3+ T cells), absent or lowT cell proliferation to common antigens, and nomaternal engraftment. Increased IgE serum levelsand eosinophil count are also common features.In rare patients with RD, no mutations in AK2have been found, suggesting a potential role forother molecules involved in this pathway. For in-stance, a similar phenotype has been described ina murine models either deficient for growth factorindependence-1 (Gfi-1) or transgenic for expressionof Gfi-1b nucleoproteins, suggesting a role for thesetwo factors in the pathogenesis of RD.16SCID due to accumulation of toxicmetabolitesAdenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency and purinenucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deficiency areinherited disorders of the purine metabolism char-acterized by abnormal accumulation of toxic nucle-oside products.17 ADA deficiency is responsible fora T cell–, B cell–, and NK cell–deficient (T–B–NK–)form of SCID associated with thymic hypoplasiaand absence of lymphocyte proliferative response.Before the introduction of newborn screening, theincidence of this autosomal recessive disorder wasestimated tobebetween1:375,000and1:660,000 livebirths.18 However, a recent trial on a population-based neonatal screening revealed that the inci-dence of ADA-SCID is much higher, and closer to1:50,000.19 The ADA gene of 12 exons is located ina 32 kb region on chromosome 20q13.11. Severalgenetic alterations, with more than seventy muta-tions, have been identified in ADA-SCID patients.20The product of ADA is an ubiquitous enzyme thatcatalyzes the irreversible deamination of adenosine(Ado) and deoxyadenosine (dAdo) to inosine anddeoxyinosine, respectively. Despite ADAprotein be-ing present in virtually every cell of the humanbody,it is particularly expressed in the lymphoid system,especially in the thymus, where it plays a key role inits differentiation and maturation. The absence ofADA activity is responsible for a massive accumula-tion of Ado and dAdo, in particular in thymocytes,lymphocytes, and erythrocytes.17,21 dAdo phospho-rylation by nucleoside kinases leads to the pro-duction of deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dATP)whose accumulation, altering lymphocyte signalingpathways and serving as a danger signal, may causethe severe lymphopenia observed inADAdeficiency.Another alternative pathogenic mechanism pro-posed is the inhibition of S-adenosylmethionine–mediated transmethylation reactions required for93Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.cell viability and normal differentiation.22 By thefirst 6monthsof ageup to80%ofpatients showmul-tiple recurrent opportunistic infections that rapidlymay become fatal and hypoplasia or apparent ab-sence of lymphoid tissue. However, in the remain-ing patients, a late-onset phenotype, presenting attwo or three years of life, or even later,23 has beenreported. These patients may also present with au-toimmune diseases and usually exhibit a milder Tcell immunodeficiency, which gradually progresses.Owing to its ubiquitous expression normally, ADAdeficiency can affect several organs, leading to thedevelopment of skeletal alterations, such as anteriorrib cupping, scapular spurring, and pelvic dyspla-sia, which can be reversible with appropriate ther-apy. In addition, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis,probably caused by a surfactant metabolism defect,and hepatic, gastrointestinal, and neurological dis-orders, mainly due to Purkinje cell damage, may befound. Bone marrow hypocellularity and myeloiddysplasia also have been observed in some ADA-deficient patients; in others, renal impairment.24,25A genotype–phenotype correlation has been docu-mented and, in particular, severity of disease seemsto correlate with residual ADA activity and the typesof substrates that accumulate.26 The therapeutic ap-proach currently available for this particular formofSCID includes three options: enzyme replacementtherapy with polyethylene glycol-modified bovineadenosine deaminase, HSCT, or gene therapy.27–29The use of dried blood spot samples tested by tan-demmass spectrometry has been recently proposedas part of a neonatal program of screening in severalcountries.Purine nucleoside phosphorylase gene (PNP)mutations result in an extremely rare autosomalrecessive disorder accounting for 4% of all formof SCIDs.30 Autoimmunity, recurrent infections,failure to thrive, and neurologic dysfunction aresome of the main features of PNP deficiency. PNPmaps to chromosome 14q13 and encodes a pro-tein that catalyzes the phosphorolysis of guano-sine, deoxyguanosine, inosine, and deoxyinosine,to their respective purine bases.17,31,32 Mutations inthe PNP pathways result in elevated deoxyguano-sine triphosphate storage and in T cell toxicity dueto the inhibition of the mechanisms of DNA syn-thesis and repair, resulting in an increased sensitiv-ity to DNA damage and apoptosis, especially in Tlymphocytes during selection within the thymus.33T cell defects typically become evident by the firstyear of life, with a milder phenotype than what isnormally seen in ADA deficiency. PNP deficiencycan be suspected when lymphopenia is associatedwith reduced PNP enzymatic activity in red bloodcells in a patient with recurrent respiratory infec-tions and other typicalmanifestations.34 Low serumuric acid (hypouricemia) is usually found, althoughPNP deficiency should not be ruled out if patientsdo not exhibit it. The immunodeficiency in thesepatients is progressive, since the severe T cell de-ficiency usually appears after the second year oflife and is characterized by a normal B cell com-partment. Among the neurological disorders asso-ciated with PNP deficiency, ataxia, developmentaldelay, and spasticity have been described. Autoim-mune diseases observed include hemolytic anemiaand sclerosing cholangitis,35 and in some patientsmegaloblastic or dysplastic bone marrow has beendescribed.33SCID due to cytokine signaling anomaliesCytokines are soluble regulators of immune systemhomeostasis. Alterations of their signaling are im-plicated in the pathogenesis of the major SCIDs.In particular, SCIDs caused by defects of the com-mon gamma chain (c), Janus kinase 3 (JAK3), orthe IL-7 receptor  chain (IL-7R) are prototypiccytokine-associated disorders, accounting for 67–74% of all cases of SCIDs.36,37Mutations of c gene cause X-linked SCID(X-SCID), one of themost common forms of SCID,accounting for50%of all cases.Thec gene (IL2RG)maps to chromosome Xq13.1 and encodes a trans-membrane protein that is a component of severalcytokine receptors, including IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9,IL-15, and IL-21, all critical for lymphocyte devel-opment and function.38 The c interacts with theintracellular tyrosine kinase JAK3, which acts as atransducing element39 indispensable for cell growthand control of hematopoietic cell development. Ev-idence indicates that c is widely expressed in non-hematopoietic cells as well, even though its functionin these cells has not yet been clearly elucidated.It has been reported that c is implicated in thegrowth hormone receptor signaling, suggesting theexistence of a subtle interaction between endocrineand immune systems.40–44JAK3, mainly expressed in lymphoid andmyeloid cells, is essential for the differentiation of94 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficiencieshematopoietic precursors;45–47 its deficiency is re-sponsible for an autosomal recessive SCID. Molec-ular alteration of JAK3 may affect any of itsfunctional domains and results in a T–B+NK–form of SCID, with a clinical phenotype simi-lar to that observed in c deficiency.48 The im-munological phenotype is due to the key role ofc/JAK3 signaling in both early T and NK cell,but not B cell, differentiation programs. However,B cell–intrinsic abnormalities, suchas impaired classswitch recombination and defective antibody pro-duction, have been documented. The identificationof IL-7R–deficient SCID patients with a selectiveT cell defect37 implies that the T cell defect observedin SCID due to mutations of c/JAK3 results fromdefective IL-7 signaling. The ability of IL-15 to driveNK cell development49 explains the lack of NK cellsin c/JAK3-deficient patients as a consequence ofdefective IL-15 signaling.50 The molecular basis ofthe B cell functional abnormalities in patients withc/JAK3 deficiency is probably linked to a defectin IL-21 secretion, a cytokine involved in prolifer-ation, Ig isotype switching, plasma cell generation,and antibody secretion through activation of theJAK/STAT pathway.Recently, hypomorphic mutations in JAK3 asso-ciated with somatic chimerism have been reportedin a patient with predominant CD4+ lymphope-nia.51 This observation suggests that hypomorphicmutations and/or somatic chimerism inother genes,which usually cause a SCID phenotype, eventu-ally could be implicated in selective CD4+ lym-phopenia. Individuals with mutations that result inthe production of a small amount of gene prod-uct or a protein with residual activity are less fre-quently seen. These individualsmayhave an atypical“leaky” disease characterized by T+B+NK– pheno-type that is associated with immune dysregulationand autoimmunity, rashes, splenomegaly, gastroin-testinal malabsorption, and/or short stature;52,53 afewpatientshavepresentedwithanOSphenotype,54which is characterized by elevated IgE, erythro-derma, and an expansion of cells with a lymphocyteprofile.A peculiar extranodal lymphoproliferative dis-order characterized by a polymorphous CD20+B lymphocyte infiltrate, resembling Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells, has also been observed in twopatients affected with X-SCID.55 Recently, a novelmutation in exon 5 of the c gene has been reportedthat causes a classical severe immunological pheno-type associated with invagination and hemophago-cytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).56 The HLHphenotype, previously described in two other caseswith c gene mutations,57 is probably explained bymaternal GVHD, and highlights the need for a fine-grained evaluationof the immunological phenotypeand associated genotypes in patients with HLH.58As for the mechanism by which maternal engraftedT cells may be responsible for HLH in such cases, itis reasonable to hypothesize that unchecked T celldysregulation of CD8+ cells, activated by alloanti-gens, may result in cytokine hypersecretion andmassive macrophage activation, eventually leadingto hemophagocytosis.The mutations of IL-7R gene (IL7R) cause aT–B+NK+ SCID with an autosomal recessive trans-mission that is responsible for 10% of all SCIDs.The human IL7R maps to chromosome 5p13.2 andencodes for a protein59 that is a component oftwo cytokine receptors, namely IL-7R and thymicstromal lymphopoietin receptor (TSLPR). Follow-ing the binding of IL-7 to IL-7R, JAK1 (coupledto IL-7R) and JAK3 are activated, which inducesthe phosphorylation of IL-7R, the recruitment ofSTAT5, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) atthe receptor signaling apparatus. STAT5 moleculesdimerize and translocate to the nucleus, leading tothe transcription of IL-7–dependent genes. PI3Kinduces Akt activation, which prevents cell deaththrough inhibition of Bad and regulates the kinaseactivity of Tor, eventually leading to the inductionof several nuclear targets, including nuclear factorof activated T cells (NF-AT), NF-B, and cyclin D1.Finally, activation of the Ras/MAPK/ERK pathwayresults in the inductionof other nuclear targets, suchas c-Myc, STAT1/3, and the Ets transcription fac-tors. IL-7R is almost exclusively expressed by cells ofthe lymphoid lineage and is involved in thymocytesurvival and maturation, particularly during CD8+positive selection.60TSLPR, expressed mainly on monocytes, den-dritic cells (DCs), and some types of T lymphocytes,is able to activate JAK2/STAT5 pathway, althoughthis does not lead to cell proliferation. Human TSLPacts primarily on DCs, promoting DC-mediatedexpansion of CD4+ T lymphocytes that acquire amemory T cell phenotype. The clinical phenotypeof this form of SCID is quite heterogeneous and in-cludes peculiar features such as OS,61 cytopenia,6295Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.severe and unresponsive cytomegalovirus (CMV)infection, or diarrhea of probable viral origin.61SCID due to V(D)J recombination and TCRabnormalitiesV(D)J recombination is a complex process that oc-curs in early B and T cell development. It is re-sponsible of the introduction of site-specific DNAdouble strand breaks (DSBs) by the recombina-tion activating genes (RAG) 1 and 2.63,64 Thecleavage of the hairpin and the joining of thesesegments requires the DNA nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) DNA repair factors, which generatethe diversity through recombination of theV,D, andJ segments and junction.NHEJ also plays a role in preserving the genomicstability of cells exposed to X-ray DNA damage.Consistent with these functions, it is not surprisingthat mice lacking NHEJ components exhibit a SCIDphenotype and radiosensitivity (RS), a phenotypereferred to as RS-SCID. In humans, several muta-tions in NHEJ genes have been identified, includingmutations in genes for DNA ligase IV (LIG4),XLF/Cernunnos (NHEJ1), DNA-PKcs (PRKDC),and Artemis (DCLREIC), that are associated withSCID.64–66 Of note, the increased radiosensitivitypeculiar to these forms of SCID can be used as adiagnostic tool.67,68Owing to the essential role of RAG1/RAG2 genesin V(D)J recombination,mutations ofRAG1 and/orRAG2, associated with partial protein expressionand limited production of T and B cells, havebeen associated with a T–B–NK+ SCID, OS, andautoimmunity.69 Hypomorphic RAG gene muta-tions have also been described in patients with gran-uloma formation70 and EBV-related lymphoma.71Since different clinical phenotypes have been as-sociated with similar RAG mutations resulting inthe same biological effect, a complex pathogeneticmechanism, based not only on the residual recom-binase activity but also on the type and the momentof antigenic pressure has been postulated.Artemis deficiency causes T cell maturation andB cell differentiation arrest at the pre-B cell check-point, resulting in a T–B–NK+ SCID.68 DNA-PKcsis involved in Artemis regulation and activation byboth phosphorylation and complex formation, thusregulating enzymatic activities critical for V(D)Jrecombination.64,72 Deficiency of DNA-PKcs causesa phenotype similar to Artemis deficiency.The deficiency of XLF/Cernunnos causesa T–B–NK+ SCID phenotype associated withmicrocephaly.73 Inparticular, the phenotype is char-acterized by a progressive decrease of B cells and thepresence of only memory T cells. Crystallographystudies showed that XLF/Cernunnos is a compo-nent of the LIG4/XRCC4 complex, which exerts arole in aligning the twoDNAends in theDNA repaircomplex machinery. Deficiency of LIG4 is respon-sible for facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly, andvariable forms of PID, ranging from SCID/OS tohypogammaglobulinemia or moderate defects in Tand B cell functions.74Gene mutations that abrogate early TCR signal-ing are associated with profound abnormalities ofT lymphocyte development and function. CD45(leukocyte common antigen) is a transmembranetyrosine phosphatase involved in both TCR signal-ing and T cell development within the thymus andB cell development and maturation. CD45 de-ficiency is responsible for a very rare form ofT–B+NK+ SCID in which lymph nodes lack germi-nal centers.75 Despite a normal monocyte numbers,T lymphocyte numbers are considerably decreased,with normal expression of TCR  chains but areduction of TCR+ cells. B cells, even thoughnonfunctional, are increased in number.CD3 is a multimeric complex involved in TCRsignaling and required for T cell differentiation.Defects of the complex can involve all the chains,resulting in a T–B+NK+ phenotype. Alterations ofthe subunits epsilon (CD3ε), delta (CD3), and zeta(CD3 ), have been reported in patients with severeforms of SCID, while alterations of the CD3 havebeen associated with a more benign course. Thesedisorders are rare and inherited as autosomal reces-sive SCIDs. Some mutations can allow residual Tcell maturation, even though the cross-talk betweenthymocytes and thymic epithelial cells may be im-paired, thus compromising central tolerance andregulatory T cell (Treg) development. Autoimmunemanifestations, including autoimmune hemolyticanemia, vitiligo, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, autoim-mune enteropathy, Evans syndrome, autoimmunehepatitis, and nephrotic syndrome are frequentlyobserved in such patients.76Coronin-1A is important for regulation of actinpolymerization of cytoskeleton and essential forT cell migration from the thymus to the secondarylymphoid organs.77 The human coronin-1A gene96 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficiencies(CORO1A) maps to chromosome 16p11.2 andencodes a highly conserved 57-kDa actin-bindingprotein expressed in both hematopoietic andimmune cells. Coronin 1A–deficient neutrophilsof mice have a normal adherence, membranedynamics, migration, phagocytosis, and oxidativeburst; dendritic cells are similarly not impaired.However, coronin 1A–deficient mice exhibit T celllymphocytopenia and a normal number of B andNK cells, thus confirming its prominent role inT cell homeostasis and TCR signaling. In humans,deficiency of coronin 1A is associated with theabsence of peripheral T cells.78 However, differentfrom other SCIDs due to other genetic alterations,a normal size thymus has been observed in thecontext of coronin 1A deficiency.79 HypomorphicCORO1A mutations have been associated withaggressive Epstein Barr virus–associated B celllymphoproliferation, occurring at an early age.79SCID due to thymic abnormalities: fromDiGeorge syndrome to nude/SCIDThe prototype of athymic disorders caused byabnormalities of the stromal component of thethymus––the primary lymphoid organ for T celldifferentiation––is the nude/SCID syndrome, de-scribed in humans in 1996.80 This form of SCID isthe only one not primarily related to an intrinsicabnormality of the hematopoietic cell, but ratherto a defect in hematopoietic cell–supporting thymicepithelial cells.81–83 This human SCID is the equiva-lent of the murine nude/SCID phenotype describedin 1966, although in humans the phenotype is moresevere. It is one of the rarest forms of SCID, andonly three mutations have been associated thus farwith nude/SCID.84 The gene responsible for thedisease in humans is FOXN1, located on chromo-some 17,85 which encodes a member of the fork-head/winged helix class proteins; this same gene ismutated in the same type of SCID in mice and rats.Forkhead/winged helix proteins is a large family oftranscriptional factors implicated in several biolog-ical processes governing development, metabolism,cancer, and aging. FOXN1 ismainly expressed in theepithelial cells of the skin and thymus, where it playsa role in maintaining the balance between growthand differentiation. Thymic epithelial cell precur-sors require FOXN1 for full differentiation intocortical and medullary thymic epithelial cells capa-ble of supporting T cell development. In epithelialcells, FOXN1 contributes to keratinocyte prolifera-tion and differentiation in hair follicles, and to thedevelopment of the choroid plexus epithelium; thiscould explain the major features that characterizepatients with nude/SCID, namely the absence of thethymus,with a severe T cell defect (thoughnormal Band NK cells) and abnormal skin development, in-cluding congenital alopecia and nail dystrophy. Thesyndrome belongs to the T–B+NK+ subgroup ofSCIDs.81 Usually, there is a significant reduction ofCD3+CD4+ T helper lymphocytes, while the num-ber of CD3+CD8+ T cells is less reduced. Function-ally, there is a severe impairment of the proliferativeresponse to mitogens, as found in the other formsof SCIDs.The mutations described in nude/SCID cause acomplete absence of functional FOXN1protein. Thefirst known mutation identified in humans, R255X,truncates the protein before the start of the forkheaddomain, while a secondmutation, R320W, leads to asubstitution in the protein’s DNA binding domain.A third mutation, c.562delA, results in a frameshiftand premature truncation of the protein (p.S188fs)after thefirst 24aminoacidsof the forkheaddomain.The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessivetrait.Heterozygous patients showminor ectodermalanomalies, such as nail dystrophy and, in particular,leukonychia or koilonychia (spoon nail).86,87 Recentstudies support a role for FOXN1 as cofactor inthe development and differentiation of the centralnervous system.88Bonemarrow transplantation (BMT) to treat thisnude/SCID, despite the favorable clinical course,often results in a progressive decline of the CD4+T cell compartment89 owing to the fact that a nor-mal thymus is necessary for the generation of theCD4+ naive subset. Conversely, the production ofCD8+ naive lymphocytes after BMT is less thymusdependent and even occurs in nude/SCID patients.In addition, a recent study showed the presence of Tlymphocytes in aFOXN1–/– human fetus, suggestingpartial T cell ontogeny in a thymus- and FOXN1-independent process.90 Thymus transplantation hasbeen shown to lead to immune reconstitution intwo nude/SCID patients affected with disseminatedBacillusCalmette-Gue´rin infectionandcytopenia.91Before the identification of human nude/SCID,the DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) was long consid-ered the model of a severe T cell differentiationdefect. DGS is a complex disorder that typically97Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.comprises T cell deficiency due to thymic hypo/aplasia, hypoparathyroidism, conotruncal cardiacdefects, facial abnormalities, cognitive defects,speech delay, other birth defects, and gastrointesti-nal disorders.92 Deletion of 22q11.2 is the most fre-quent chromosomal change associated with DGS,93with an incidence of one in 4000–5000 live births.The alteration is inherited in a familial autosomaldominant pattern in 8–28% of the cases.94 Most pa-tients have a deletion of 3 Mb that includes about30 genes, while in 8% of the cases a smaller dele-tion of 1.5 Mb containing 24 genes is detected. Nospecific genotype–phenotype relationship has beendocumented. Both deletions include the gene T-box transcription factor 1 (TBX1), which seems tobe necessary for normal development of the thymusand parathyroid, the large arteries of heart, and themuscles and bones of face and neck. Thymic hy-poplasia, responsible for the thymic dysfunction,is observed in more than 80% of patients. Thesyndrome may be associated with variable T celldeficiencies, ranging from close to normal T cellnumbers and functions, to complete DGS with aT–B+NK+ SCID-like phenotype accounting for lessthan 1% of DGS.95 Recently, a phenotype charac-terized by a T–B–NK+ SCID has been describedin two DGS patients with a concomitant Artemisdeficiency.96 Patients with complete DGS, like otherinfants with SCID, suffer from severe opportunis-tic infections and exhibit a high risk of acquiredGVHD if transfused. Furthermore, a few patientsaffected with an atypical complete DGS have ma-ture T cells derived from maternal engraftment oroligoclonal expansion of memory T cells responsi-ble for a severe inflammation. These patients maydevelop an OS, characterized by erythrodermia,enteropathy, and lymphadenopathy. On the otherhand, there are also subjects carrying the deletionwho only have a mild phenotype. Some patients di-agnosed as 22q11.2DS in early childhood remainclinically asymptomatic and exhibit only minimalimmune alterations. Increased prevalence of atopicand autoimmune diseases has been reported inpatients with partial deletion syndrome.97 Whilenormal B, NK, and T cell numbers are frequentlyobserved in 22q11.2DS individuals, sometimes, adecrease of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes maybe found97 due to lower thymic output of the naiveT cell subset, oligoclonal T lymphocyte expansion,98or altered T cell differentiation. These observationscan be explained by the dysregulation of peripheralT cell homeostasis due to a defect in IL-7 signal-ing, crucial for T lymphocyte survival and expan-sion and for homeostasis of the naive CD4+ T cellpool. Indeed, subjects with 22q11.2DS show a sig-nificant decrease ofCD3+ T lymphocytes expressingIL-7Ra; adults have accelerated conversion of naiveto memory cells, shorter telomeres, and a defect inthe variability of the TCR repertoire.98A DGS phenotype has been described in pa-tients carrying a 10p deletion, the clinical featuresbeing almost undistinguishable from 22q11.2DS.Even though low numbers of T cells, reducedimmunoglobulin,80 and thymus hypoplasia havebeen observed in 28% of such patients, none havebeen affected with a severe SCID-like phenotype.95SCID/CIDs associated with syndromicfeaturesAccording to the International Union of Immun-ological Societies (IUIS), there are forms of PIDassociated with highly pleomorphic extra-immu-nological features responsible for complex syn-dromes with a genetic basis. Typical features ofthese syndromes comprise peculiar facial dysmor-phism, growth delay, microcephaly, and ectodermalabnormalities. While an increased susceptibility toautoimmunity and (occasionally) cancer associ-ated with the depletion of other blood cell lines isfrequently reported, an increased susceptibility toinfections is usually less frequent, and its clinicalrelevance is lower than in other PIDs. The patho-genetic mechanism resides in the involvement ofseveral genes expressed in multiple cell lines, genesresponsible for both ontogenesis and maturationof the immune system, as well as morphogenesisand organogenesis of other organs. Some of theseconditions may be associated with a SCID/CIDphenotype. Several syndromes are included inthis group (Table 3), such DGS and CHARGEsyndrome. Patients with CHARGE syndrome ex-hibit variable grades of immune defects, rangingfrom severe to mild T cell lymphopenia and ab-normal T cell functionality, sometimes associatedwith hypogammaglobulinemia.102 The incidence ofSCID in patients with CHARGE is unknown, eventhough it may be, as in DGS, rare.103 These pa-tients, whose clinical phenotype is characterized bycoloboma, heart defect, atresia choanae, retardedgrowth and development, genital hypoplasia, and98 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficienciesTable 3. Peculiar clinical and laboratory findings in the main genetic syndromes which in a few cases may beassociated with a SCID/CID phenotypeDisorder Genetic defect Clinical phenotype Immunological featuresCHARGE syndrome CHD7 Coloboma, hearth defect,atresia choanae, retardedgrowth and developmentT–B+NK+ SCID, OS,T cell lymphopenia,hypogamma-globulinemiaCartilage–hair hypoplasia(CHH)RMRP Short limb with metaphysealdysostosis, sparse hair,neural dysplasia of intestineT cell lymphopenia,hypogammaglobuline-mia, antibodydeficiencySchimke immuno-osseousdysplasiaSMARCAL1 Short stature, IUGR,spondiloepiphysealdysplasiaT cell lymphopenia, bonemarrow failureHyper IgE syndrome PGM3 Short stature, brachydactyly,facial dysmorphism,intellectual disabilityCongenital leucopenia,neutropenia, B andT cell lymphopeniaHoyeraal-Hreidarssonsyndrome (HHS)DKC1 Microcephaly, cerebellarhypoplasia, IUGRBone marrow failure, CIDor T+B–NK– SCIDFolate and cobalaminmetabolism defectPCFT, TCN2,MTHFD1Failure to thrive, weakness,mental retardation,megaloblastic anemia,neurological diseasePancytopenia, SCID-likephenotype, hypogam-maglobulinemiaAnhydrotic ectodermicdysplasia withimmunodeficiencyNEMO Hypohidrosis, hypodontia,conical teeth, facialdysmorphismSCID/CID-like phenotypeIUGR, intrauterine growth restriction.ear anomalies/deafness, may suffer from a T–B+NK+ SCID and, in some cases, OS.103 The disor-der is caused by mutations in the chromodomainhelicase DNA binding protein 7 gene (CHD7), amember of the chromo domain helicase DNA bind-ing domain family of adenosine-5′-triphosphate de-pendent chromatin remodeling enzymes. CHD7is expressed throughout the neural crest contain-ing mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches, suggest-ing a pathogenetic overlap between CHARGE andDGS.In other syndromes, several peculiar skeletric ab-normalities are the main feature, which lead the pa-tient to themedical attention, as observed inpatientswith cartilage–hair hypoplasia (CHH), character-ized by severe disproportionate short stature dueto short limb with metaphyseal dysostosis, sparsehair and neural dysplasia of the intestine,104 or inSchimke immuno-osseous dysplasia, which some-times may show a CID phenotype.In humans, defects in gene involved in telom-ere maintenance (TERT, TERC, DKC1, WRAP53/TCAB1, NOP10, NHP2, and TINF2) are respon-sible for the dyskeratosis congenita (DC), a rarecongenital disorder characterized by progressivebone marrow failure, premature aging, mucocuta-neous abnormalities, and cancer predisposition.106The most sever infantile variant of X-linked DC isthe Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome (HHS), whosemain clinical features are microcephaly, cerebellarhypoplasia, and intrauterine growth retardation.The early-onset bonemarrow failure usually leads toeither a combined immunodeficiencyor aT+B–NK–SCID, which may require HSCT.107Recently, several inborn errors in folate andcobalamin metabolism have been described as hav-ing a profound impact on many systems, includinghematopoiesis and neuronal function. Immuno-deficiency of variable degrees has been associatedwith defects in these pathways. A CID phenotype99Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.characterized by lymphopenia, responsiveness tofolate replacement therapy, and severe bacterial andviral infections has been described in patients withfunctional methionine synthase deficiency causedby hereditary folatemalabsorption due to deficiencyin the proton coupled folate transporter (PCFT)and in transcobalamin II (TCN2); this CID usuallypresents in early infancy in untreated patientsas failure to thrive, weakness, pancytopenia, andintellectual disability. Recently, exomic sequencingdemonstrated that heterozygous mutations in thetrifunctional protein MTHFD1 is responsible fora SCID-like phenotype characterized by T–B–NK–lymphopenia, marked hypogammaglobulinemia,megaloblastic anemia, and neurologic disease.108A partial immune reconstitution after vitamin B12and folate replacement therapy has been docu-mented.In summary, it must be noted that several syn-dromes, together with the more typical severe man-ifestations, can share clinical and immunologicalsigns of SCID/CID, as for example patients affectedby NEMO deficiency.Recently identified combinedimmunodeficienciesCombined immunodeficiency (CID) is a group ofgenetic heterogeneous disorders characterized bysevere recurrent infections, moderate reduction ofT and B lymphocytes, and impaired cellular andhumoral functionality that may reflect late defectsin T cell development and function.109,110 In mostcases, it is not always easy to distinguish betweenpatients affected with more severe forms and thosewith CID. Furthermore, a greater difficulty in mak-ing a clear classification is due to the fact that manyinborn defects, which underlie these immune dis-orders, have recently been associated with bothSCID and CID, in particular hypomorphic mu-tations. Several genetic defects responsible for awide number of clinical conditions are comprisedin this group (Table 2).111 Besides the well-knowngenetic defects responsible for MHC class I (TAP1,TAP2, TAPBP) or class II deficiency (CIITA,RRFX5, RFXAP, RFXANK) associated with a pre-dominant CD8+ or CD4+ selective deficiencyrespectively, the very rare CD8A defects and manyothers (see the new International Union of Im-munological Societies classification, Ref. 111)have been identified recently. Since the numberof these conditions is large, we have chosen todiscuss only the most common form associatedwith new phenotypes and novel ones reported overthe past 3 to 4 years.ZAP70-related immunodeficiency is inherited inan autosomal recessive manner. It is caused by ab-normal TCR signaling, which leads to a selectiveabsence of CD8+ T cells and normal or elevatednumbers of non-functional CD4+ T cells. ZAP70has a key role in bothmatureT cell signaling anddif-ferentiation of thymic precursors. Finally, in somepatients peculiar phenotypes have been observed.In particular, some patients exhibit an attenuatedphenotype with a late onset disease and preservedproduction of CD4+ T follicular helper (TFH),T helper type I (TH1), TH17, and Treg cells. Immunedysregulation and severe erythroderma resemblingOS have also been described, characterized by skininfiltrative lesionswith activatedCD4+ T cells in theperipheral blood.113Thanks to next generation sequencing technolo-gies, which have provided a powerful tool to identifythemolecular cause of PIDsof unknowngenetic ori-gin, new defects have been detected, even though inmost cases the genetic cause still remains unknown.Whole-exome sequencing recently demonstratedthe presence of deleterious mutations in the phos-phoglucomutase 3 gene (PGM3) in three unre-lated subjects with recurrent infections, congenitalleukopenia, neutropenia, B and T cell lymphope-nia, and progression to bone marrow failure due toa congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG). Twoof the three children also had skeletal anomaliescharacterized by short stature, brachydactyly, dys-morphic facial features, and intellectualdisability.105Thanks to this technology, Kotlarz et al. identi-fied in 2013 two distinct homozygous loss of func-tions mutations in the interleukin-21 receptor gene(IL21R) in two unrelated children affected withcryptosporidiosis, chronic cholangitis and liver dis-ease, recurrent upper and lower airway infections,and failure to thrive.99 IL-21R binds to commonc and signals via JAK/STAT pathways.100,101 Theauthors observed that the mutation was responsi-ble for the aberrant trafficking of the IL-21R to theplasma membrane and for the abrogation of IL-21ligand binding. These molecular alterations lead todefective phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT3, andSTAT5. The immunophenotype of these patientswas normal, but abnormal proliferation induced by100 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficienciesIL-21 and defects in immunoglobulin class-switching in B cells and NK cell cytotoxicity weredocumented. A defect in T cell secretion of sev-eral cytokines, including TH17-associated cytokinesIL-17F and IL-22, was reported, thus putativelyexplaining the increased susceptibility to crypto-sporidial infection in these patients.In the last few years mutations in the CARD9–BCL10–MALT1 (CBM) complex involved inNF-Bsignaling have been associated with PID. In partic-ular, autosomal recessive mutations in MALT1 genehave been described in patients with CID and se-vere bacterial, fungal and viral infections.114 TheMALT1-deficient T cells are not able to degradeIB or produce IL-2 following T cell activation.BCL10 has a role in several immune pathways crit-ical for the function of the innate and the adaptiveimmune systems, and for the response to bacte-rial and fungal infections. Mutations in BCL10 andother genes encoding for proteins interacting withMALT1, such as CARD11 and CARD9, have alsobeen recently described. Patients with BCL10 defi-ciency show a profound defect of memory T andB cells and severe hypogammaglobulinemia, witha reduction of CD69 and CD25 percentages andICOS levels.115 Even though CARD9 deficiency hasbeen shown to selectively compromise defenses to-ward a limited number of fungal infections, mu-tations in CARD11, which plays a crucial role inthe differentiation of both neuronal and immuno-logic tissues as a scaffold protein, are associatedwith a more profound CID characterized by abnor-mal T cell proliferation to anti-CD3/CD28 stimula-tion, expansion of late transitional B cells, matureB cells deficiency, and hypogammaglobulinemia.101Furthermore, CARD11-deficient T cells do not pro-duce normal amounts of IL-2 or upregulate theIL-2 receptor chain (CD25) afterTCRstimulation,which contributes to Treg cell deficiency in thesepatients.Mutations in tetratricopeptide repeat domain7A (TTC7A), a member of the large family ofproteins containing the tetratricopeptide repeat(TPR) domain, have recently been found inpatients affected with CID and multiple intestinalatresia (MIA).116 MIA is a clinical condition thatcan be isolated or may occur in association withvariable grades of immunodeficiency ranging fromSCID to a mild decrease of T cells and partiallypreserved thymic function. However, in all thesegenetic forms, profound CD8+ T cell lymphopenia,reflecting the impaired cellular immunity andthe defective thymopoiesis, has been observed.Severe hypogammaglobulinemia is also frequent. Ahigher frequency of bloodstream infections due tointestinal microbes has also been reported.The clinical and immunological phenotypes ofRas homolog family member H gene (RHOH)deficiency is characterized by naive CD4+ T celldeficiency, absence of recent thymic emigrants,increased number of effector memory T cells, re-stricted T cell repertoire, and reduced in vitro pro-liferation via CD3 stimulation.117 Expressed mainlyin hematopoietic cells, RhoH is a small GTPasethat mediates interaction between Zap70 and LCK.RhoHdeficiency determines both alterations in pre-TCR–mediated signaling and in positive selection,as observed inZap70 deficiency. Expansion ofmem-ory T cells has also been observed in other CIDs,such as deficiency of DOCK8 or MST1. DOCK8deficiency is an autosomal recessive form of CIDassociated with a hyper-IgE phenotype. Viral infec-tions (especially of the skin) and malignancies arevery common. Lymphopenia of CD4+ and CD8+T cells, or predominantly CD4+ lymphocytes, maybe found. In addition, DOCK8 deficient patientsexhibit defective differentiation of TH17 cells and areduction of B lymphocytes.118The lymphocyte specific kinase LCK is involvedin the initiation of signaling from the TCR 121through the adaptor protein unc-119 lipid bindingchaperone (UNC119). Recently, mutations in LCKor UNC119, which impairs LCK activation andsignaling, have been identified. Main features ofthis phenotype include CD4+ T cell lymphope-nia, a restricted T cell repertoire, and impairedTCR signaling.122 Patients with LCK deficiencyfrequently present with immune dysregulationand autoimmunity. Mutations in the magnesiumtransporter protein1 gene (MAGT1) result in a CIDphenotype characterized by CD4+ lymphopeniaand abnormalT cell proliferation,which are respon-sible for chronic viral infections and EBV-relatedlymphoma, respectively.123 Recently, a CID was ob-served in four unrelated patients with mutation ofinhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancerin B-cells, kinase beta (IKBKB); the patients had se-vere bacterial, viral, fungal,mycobacterial infectionsassociated with failure to thrive and neurologicalimpairment. The immunological phenotype was101Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.characterized by a/hypogammaglobulinemia andabsence of Treg and  / T cells. Even though T cellcounts were normal, all the patients exclusivelyshowed naive T and B lymphocytes.124Newborn screening for SCIDRecently, T cell receptor excision circles (TREC)–based newborn screening has been implementedin several countries. Compared with patients iden-tified by the clinical features, patients identifiedthrough newborn screening programs, similar tochildren identified because of a positive familial his-tory, can receive an early and accurate diagnosisby one month of life and then undergo HSCT orgene therapy by 3 months of age, before the oc-currence of severe complications. This results in asignificantly improved outcome.125,126 The TRECassay, based on the detection of intracellular accu-mulation of products derived from process of T cellreceptor gene splicing and rearrangement, is able todetect several defects, which result in either SCID orprofound T cell lymphopenia that is also seen inpatients affected with 22q11.2DS, CHH, CHARGE,and AT.127 However, one limitation of the TRECassay is that it is not able to identify all forms ofCID or atypical SCID. Some genetic disorders, suchas deficiency of ZAP70, late onset ADA, Nijmegenbreakage syndrome, MHC class II deficiency, andmany others, are likely to be missed because TRECsare usually found at normal levels. The identifica-tion of kappa-deleting recombination excision cir-cles (KREC), a sensitive marker of newly formed Bcells, increases the possibility of identifying otherforms of SCID/CID that are associated with lownumbers of B lymphocytes, such asNBS and late on-setADA. Furthermore, it has been reported that tan-demmass spectrometry caneasily identify abnormalpurine metabolites in newborns with typical or lateonsetADAandPNPdeficiency,19 thus increasing thespectrum of disorders detectable through newbornscreening.ConclusionsSCIDs are a heterogeneous group of syndromes re-lated to alterations of distinct genes that cause ab-normalities in the maturation and/or function ofT, B, and/or NK cells. Recently, advances in nextgeneration DNA sequencing have allowed new geneidentification through whole exome sequencing orwhole genome sequencing of several forms of SCIDand CID of unknown cause. The phenotypic andthe molecular heterogeneity of SCIDs, as revealedby the expanding phenotypes observed, is makingtraditional classification of this group of disordersvery intricate. Frequently, differentmutations in thesame gene can lead to different clinical phenotypes,such as OS, leaky SCID, or CID, that may even beinherited with different mechanisms.In this review we have focused in detail on dif-ferent forms of SCID and CID, paying attention tothe distinctive peculiar clinical and laboratory fea-tures, in order to provide information to cliniciansfor recognizing and carefully managing these novelforms of PIDs.Conflicts of interestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.References1. Kwan, A. et al. 2014. Newborn screening for severe com-bined immunodeficiency in 11 screening programs in theUnited States. JAMA 312: 729–738.2. Van der Burg, M. et al. 2011. The expanding clinical andimmunological spectrum of severe combined immunode-ficiency. Eur. J. Pediatr. 170: 561–571.3. Denianke, K.S. et al. 2001. Cutaneous manifestations of-maternal engraftment in patients with severe combinedimmunodeficiency: a clinicopathologic study. Bone Mar-row Transplant. 28: 227–233.4. Palamaro, L. et al. 2012. SCID-like phenotype associatedwith an inhibitory autoreactive immunoglobulin. J. Inves-tig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 22: 67–70.5. Shearer, W.T. et al. 2014. Establishing diagnostic criteriafor severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID),leaky SCID, and Omenn syndrome: the primary immunedeficiency treatment consortiumexperience. J. AllergyClin.Immunol. 133: 1092–1098.6. Gaspar, H.B. et al. 2013. How I treat severe combined im-munodeficiency. Blood 122: 3749–3758.7. Chinen, J. et al. 2014. Advances in basic and clinical im-munology in 2013. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133: 967–976.8. Maggina, P. et al. 2013. Classification of primary immun-odeficiencies: need for a revised approach? J. Allergy Clin.Immunol. 131: 292–294.9. Pannicke, U. et al. 2009. Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocyto-sis) is caused bymutations in the gene encodingmitochon-drial adenylate kinase 2. Nat. Genet. 41: 101–105.10. Lagresle-Peyrou, C. et al. 2009. Human adenylate kinase 2deficiency causes a profound hematopoietic defect associ-ated with sensorineural deafness. Nat. Genet. 41: 106–111.11. Klein, C. 2011. Genetic defects in severe congenital neu-tropenia: emerging insights into life and death of hu-man neutrophil granulocytes. Ann. Rev. Immunol. 29:399–413.102 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficiencies12. Tanimura, A. et al. 2014. Differential expression of ade-nine nucleotide converting enzymes in mitochondrial in-termembrane space: a potential role of adenylate kinaseisozyme 2 in neutrophil differentiation. PLoS One 9:e89916.13. Dzeja, P. et al. 2009. Adenylate kinase and AMP signalingnetworks: metabolic monitoring, signal communicationand body energy sensing. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10: 1729–1772.14. Kim, H. et al. 2014. The DUSP26 phosphatase activatoradenylate kinase 2 regulates FADD phosphorylation andcell growth. Nat. Commun. 5: 1–11.15. Henderson, L.A. et al. 2013. First reported case of Omennsyndrome in a patient with reticular dysgenesis. J. AllergyClin. Immunol. 131: 1227–1230.16. Barjaktarevic, I. et al. 2010. Altered functional balance ofGfi-1 and Gfi-1b as an alternative cause of reticular dysge-nesis? Med. Hypotheses 74: 445–448.17. Nyhan, W.L. 2005. Disorders of purine and pyrimidinemetabolism. Mol. Genet. Metab. 86: 25–33.18. Sauer, A.V. et al. 2012. Autoimmune dysregulation andpurine metabolism in adenosine deaminase deficiency.Front Immunol. 3: 265.19. la Marca, G. et al. 2014. The inclusion of ADA-SCID in ex-panded newborn screening by tandem mass spectrometry.J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 88: 201–206.20. Vihinen, M. et al. 2001. Primary immunodeficiency muta-tion databases. Adv. Genet. 43: 103–188.21. Malacarne, F. et al. 2005. Reduced thymic output, increasedspontaneous apoptosis and oligoclonal B cells in polyethy-lene glycol-adenosine deaminase-treated patients. Eur.J. Immunol. 35: 3376–3386.22. Kameoka, J. et al. 1993. Direct association of adenosinedeaminase with a T cell activation antigen, CD26. Science261: 466–469.23. Hershfield, M. 2006. Adenosine deaminase deficiency.Gene Rev. [Internet]. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1483/24. Santisteban, I. et al. 1993. Novel splicing, missense, anddeletionmutations in seven adenosine deaminase-deficientpatients with late/delayed onset of combined immunode-ficiency disease: contribution of genotype to phenotype.J. Clin. Invest. 92: 2291–2302.25. Shovlin, C.L. et al. 1993. Adult presentation of adenosinedeaminase deficiency. Lancet. 341: 1471.26. Arredondo-Vega, F.X. et al. 1998. Adenosine deaminasedeficiency: genotype-phenotype correlations based on ex-pressed activity of 29 mutant alleles. Am. J. Hum. Genet.63: 1049–1059.27. Booth, C. et al. 2007. Management options for adenosinedeaminase deficiency: proceedings of the EBMT satelliteworkshop (Hamburg, March 2006). Clin. Immunol. 123:139–147.28. Gaspar, H.B. et al. 2006. Successful reconstitution of im-munity in ADA-SCID by stem cell gene therapy followingcessation of PEG-ADA and use of mild preconditioning.Mol. Ther. 14: 505–513.29. Aiuti, A. et al. 2009. Gene therapy for immunodeficiencydue to adenosine deaminase deficiency. N. Engl. J. Med.360: 447–458.30. Somech,R. et al. 2013.Purinenucleosidephosphorylasede-ficiency presenting as severe combined immune deficiency.Immunol. Res. 56: 150–154.31. Aytekin, C. et al. 2010. Kostmann disease with devel-opmental delay in three patients. Eur. J. Pediatr. 169:759–62.32. Alangari, A. et al. 2009. Purine nucleoside phosphorylasedeficiency in two unrelated Saudi patients.Ann. SaudiMed.29: 309–312.33. Dror, Y. et al. 2004. Purine nucleoside phosphorylase de-ficiency associated with a dysplastic marrow morphology.Pediatr. Res. 55: 472–477.34. Grunebaum, E. et al. 2004. Novel mutations and hot-spotsin patients with purine nucleoside phosphorylase defi-ciency.NucleosidesNucleotidesNucleicAcids 23: 1411–1415.35. Markert, M.L. 1991. Purine nucleoside phosphorylase de-ficiency. Immunodefic. Rev. 3: 45–81.36. Puel, A. et al. 2000. Mutations in the gene for the IL-7 re-ceptor result in T(-)B(+)NK(+) severe combined immun-odeficiency disease. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 12: 468–473.37. Puel, A. et al. 1998. Defective IL-7R expression inT(-)B(+)NK(+) severe combined immunodeficiency.Nat.Genet. 20: 394–397.38. Notarangelo, L.D. et al. 2009. Primary immunodeficiencies:2009 update. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 124: 1161–1178.39. Notarangelo, L.D. et al. 2000. Of genes and phenotypes: theimmunological and molecular spectrum of combined im-mune deficiency: defects of the gamma(c)-JAK3 signalingpathway as a model.Immunol. Rev. 178: 39–48.40. Du, C. et al. 2005. IL-2-mediated apoptosis of kidney tubu-lar epithelial cells is regulated by the caspase-8 inhibitorc-FLIP. Kidney Int. 67: 1397–1409.41. Ozawa, A. et al. 2004. Endogenous IL-15 sustains re-cruitment of IL-2Rbeta and common gamma and IL-2-mediated chemokine production in normal and inflamedhuman gingival fibroblast. J. Immunol. 173: 5180–5188.42. Adriani, M. et al. 2006. Functional interaction of commongamma chain and growth hormone receptor signaling ap-paratus. J. Immunol. 177: 6889–6895.43. Vigliano, I. et al. 2011.  Chain transducing element: ashared pathway between endocrine and immune system.Cell Immunol. 269: 10–15.44. Amorosi, S. et al. 2009. The cellular amount of the commong-chain influences spontaneous or induced cell prolifera-tion. J. Immunol. 182: 3304–3309.45. Kawamura, M. et al. 1994. Molecular cloning of L-JAK, aJanus family protein-tyrosine kinase expressed in naturalkiller cells and activated leukocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.U.S.A. 91: 6374–6378.46. Rane, S.G. et al. 1994. JAK3: a novel JAK kinase associ-ated with terminal differentiation of hematopoietic cells.Oncogene 9: 2415–2423.47. Notarangelo, L. 1996. Immunodeficiencies caused by ge-netic defects in protein kinases. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 8:448–453.48. Schumacher, R.F. et al. 2000. Complete genomic organi-zation of the human JAK3 gene and mutation analysis insevere combined immunodeficiency by single-strand con-formation polymorphism. Hum. Genet. 106: 73–79.103Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.49. Waldmann, T.A. 2006. The biology of interleukin-2 andinterleukin-15: implications for cancer therapy and vaccinedesign. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6: 595–601.50. Leonard, W.J. 1996. The molecular basis of X-linked severecombined immunodeficiency: defective cytokine receptorsignaling. Ann. Rev. Med. 47: 229–239.51. Ban, S.A. et al. 2014. Combined immunodeficiency evolv-ing into predominant CD4+ lymphopenia caused by so-matic chimerism in JAK3. J. Clin. Immunol. 34: 941–953.52. DiSanto, J.P. et al. 1995. Lymphoid development in micewith a targeteddeletionof the interleukin2 receptor gammachain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92: 377–381.53. Stephan, V. et al. 1996. Atypical X-linked severe combinedimmunodeficiency due to possible spontaneous reversionof the genetic defect in T cells. N. Engl. J. Med. 335:1563–1567.54. Wada, T. et al. 2008. Detection of T lymphocytes with asecond-sitemutation in skin lesions of atypical X-linked se-vere combined immunodeficiencymimickingOmenn syn-drome. Blood 112: 1872–1875.55. Slatter, M.A. et al. 2011. Polymorphous lymphoprolif-erative disorder with Hodgkin-like features in commongamma chain-deficient severe combined immunodefi-ciency. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 127: 533–535.56. Patiroglu, T. et al. 2014. X-linked severe combined im-munodeficiency due to a novel mutation complicated withhemophagocytyc lymphohistiocytosis and presented withinvagination: a case report. Eur. J. Microbiol. Immunol. 3:174–176.57. Grunebaum, E. et al. 2000. Haemophagocytic lymphohis-tiocytosis in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.Br. J. Haematol. 108: 834–837.58. Dvorak, C.C. et al. 2008. Maternal T-cell engraftment as-sociated with severe hemophagocytosis of bone maroowin untreated X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.J. Pediatr. Hematol. Oncol. 30: 396–400.59. Lynch, M. et al. 1992. The interleukin-7 receptor gene is at5p13. Hum. Genet. 89: 566–568.60. Yu, Q. et al. 2003. In vitro evidence that cytokine receptorsignals are required for differentiation of double positivethymocytes into functionally mature CD8+ T cells. J Exp.Med. 197: 475–487.61. Giliani, S. et al. 2006. Interleukin-7 receptor a (IL-7Ra)deficiency: cellular and molecular bases. Analysis of clin-ical, immunological, and molecular features in 16 novelpatients. J. Pediatr. 148: 272–274.62. Zago,C.A. et al. 2014.Autoimmunemanifestations in SCIDdue to IL-7Rmutations: Omenn syndrome and cytopenias.Hum. Immunol. 75: 662–666.63. Bassing, C.H. et al. 2002. The mechanism and regulationof chromosomal V(D)J recombination. Cell 109: S45–S55.64. Woodbine, L. et al. 2013. PRKDC mutations in a SCIDpatient with profound neurological abnormalities. J. Clin.Invest. 123: 2969–2980.65. Cagdas, D. et al. 2012. Two SCID cases with Cernunnos-XLF deficiency successfully treated by haematopoietic stemcell transplantation. Pediatr. Transplant. 16: 167–171.66. Schwarz, K. et al. 2003. Human severe combined immunedeficiency and DNA repair. Bioassays 25: 1061–1070.67. Aloj, G. et al. 2012. Severe combined immunodeficiences:new and old scenarios. Int. Rev. Immunol. 31: 43–65.68. Noordzij, J.G. et al. 2003. Radiosensitive SCIDpatientswithArtemis gene mutation schow a complete B-cell differenti-ation arrest at the pre-B-cell receptor checkpoint in bonemarrow. Blood 101: 1446–1452.69. Niehues, T. et al. 2010. More than just SCID–the pheno-typic range of combined immunodeficiencies associatedwith mutations in the recombinase activating genes (RAG)1 and 2. Clin. Immunol. 135: 183–192.70. Schuetz, C. et al. 2008. An immunodeficiency diseasewith RAG mutations and granulomas. N. Engl. J. Med. 8:2030–2038.71. Lee, Y.N. et al. 2014. A systematic analysis of recombina-tion activity and genotype-phenotype correlation in hu-man recombination-activating gene 1 deficiency. J. AllergyClin. Immunol. 133: 1099–1108.72. van der Burg, M. et al. 2009. DNA-PKcs deficiency in hu-man: long predicted, finally found.Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin.Immunol. 9: 503–509.73. Turul, T. et al. 2011. Cernunnos deficiency: a case report.J. Invest Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 21: 313–316.74. van der Burg, M. et al. 2006. B-cell recovery after stemcell transplantation of Artemis-deficient SCID requireselimination of autologous bone marrow precursor-B-cells.Haematologica 91: 1705–1709.75. Kung, C. et al. 2000. Mutations in the tyrosine phosphataseCD45 gene in a child with severe combined immunodefi-ciency disease. Nat. Med. 6: 343–345.76. Tokgoz, H. et al. 2013. Variable presentation of primaryimmuno deficiency: two cases with CD3 gamma deficiencypresenting with only autoimmunity. Pediatr. Allergy Im-munol. 24: 257–262.77. Foger, N. et al. 2006. Requirement for coronin 1 in T lym-phocyte trafficking and cellular homeostasis. Science 313:839–842.78. Shiow, L.R. et al. 2008. The actin regulator coronin 1A ismutant in a thymic egress-deficient mouse strain and ina patient with severe combined immunodeficiency. Nat.Immunol. 9: 1307–1315.79. Moshous, D. et al. 2013. Whole-exome sequencing iden-tifies Coronin-1A deficiency in 3 siblings with immunod-eficiency and EBV-associated B-cell lymphoproliferation.J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 131: 1594–1603.80. Pignata, C. et al. 1996. Progressive deficiencies in bloodT cells associated with a 10p12-13 interstitial deletion.Clin. Immunol. Immopathol. 80: 9–15.81. Pignata, C. 2002. A lesson to unraveling complex aspectsof novel immunodeficiencies from the human equivalentof the nude/SCID phenotype. J. Hematother. Stem Cell Res.11: 409–414.82. Romano, R. et al. 2013. FOXN1: a master regulator gene ofthymic epithelial development program. Front Immunol. 4:187.83. Palamaro, L. et al. 2014. FOXN1 in organ development andhuman diseases. Int. Rev. Immunol. 33: 83–93.84. Chou, J. et al. 2014. A novelmutation in FOXN1 resultinginSCID: a case report and literature review. Clin. Immunol.155: 30–32.104 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Cirillo et al. Severe combined immunodeficiencies85. Romano, R. et al. 2012. From murine to human Nude/SCID: the Thymus, T-cell development and the missinglink. Clin. Dev. Immunol. 2012: 467101.86. Auricchio, L. et al. 2005. Nail distrophy associatedwith a heterozygous mutation of the Nude/SCID hu-man FOXN1 (WHN) gene. Arch. Dermatol. 141: 647–648.87. Adriani, M. et al. 2004. Ancestral founder mutation of thenude (FOXN1) gene in congenital severe combined im-munodeficiency associated with alopecia in southern Italypopulation. Ann. Hum. Genet. 68: 265–268.88. Amorosi, S. et al. 2008. FOXN1 homozygous mutationassociated with anencephaly and severe neural tube de-fect in human athymic Nude/SCID fetus. Clin. Genet. 73:380–384.89. Pignata, C. et al. 2001. Human equivalent of the mousenude/SCID phenotype: long-term evaluation of immuno-logical reconstitution after bone marrow transplantation.Blood 97: 880–885.90. Fusco, A. et al. 2013. Molecular evidence for a thymus-independent partial T cell development in a FOXN1−/−athymic human fetus. PLoS One 8: e81786.91. Markert, M.L. et al. 2011. First use of thymus transplanta-tion therapy for Foxn1 deficiency (nude/SCID): a report oftwo cases. Blood 117: 688–696.92. Giardino, G. et al. 2014. Gastrointestinal involvment inpatients affected with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Scand.J. Gastroenterol. 49: 274–279.93. Cancrini, C. et al. 2014. Clinical features and follow-up inpatients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. J. Pediatr. 164:1475–1480.94. Cirillo, E. et al. 2014. Intergenerational and intrafamilialphenotypic variability in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome sub-jects. BMC Med. Genet. 15: 1.95. Davies, E.G. 2013. Immunodeficiency in DiGeorge syn-dromeandoption for treating caseswith complete athymia.Front. Immunol. 4: 322.96. Heimall, J. et al. 2012. Diagnosis of 22q11.2 deletionsyndrome and artemis deficiency in two children withT–B–NK+ immunodeficiency. J. Clin. Immunol. 32:1141–1145.97. Ferrando-Martinez, S. et al. 2014. Low thymic output, pe-ripheral homeostasis deregulation, andhastened regulatoryT cells differentiation in children with 22q11.2 deletionsyndrome. J. Pediatr. 164: 882–889.98. Piliero, L.M. et al. 2004. T-cell homeostasis in humans withthymic hypoplasia due to chromosome 22q11.2 deletionsyndrome. Blood 103: 1020–1025.99. Kotlarz, D. et al. 2013. Loss-of-function mutations in theIL-21 receptor gene cause a primary immunodeficiencysyndrome. J. Exp. Med. 210: 433–443.100. Spolski, R. et al. 2008. Interleukin-21: basic biology andimplications for cancer and autoimmunity. Ann. Rev. Im-munol. 26: 57–79.101. Stepensky, P. et al. 2014. Extending the clinical and im-munological phenotype of human Interleukin-21 receptordeficiency. Haematologica 99: e72–e76.102. Jyonouchi, S. et al. 2009. CHARGE syndrome and chro-mosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a comparison ofimmunologic and non-immunologic phenotypic features.Pediatrics 123: e871–e877.103. Gennery, A.R. et al. 2008. Mutations in CHD7 in patientswith CHARGE syndrome cause T−B+NK+ severe com-bined immune deficiency and may cause Omenn-like syn-drome. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 153: 75–80.104. Roifman, C.M. et al. 2006. Mutations in the RNA compo-nent of RNase mitochondrial RNA processing might causeOmenn syndrome. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 117: 897–903.105. Zhang, Y. et al. 2014. Autosomal recessive phosphogluco-mutase 3 (PGM3) mutations link glycosilation defects toatopy, immune deficiency, autoimmunity, and neurocog-nitive impairment. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133: 1400–1409.106. Touzot, F. et al. 2012.Heterogeneous telomere defects in pa-tients with severe forms of dyskeratosis congenita. J. AllergyClin. Immunol. 129: 473–82.107. Cossu, F. et al. 2002. A novel DKC1 mutation, se-vere combined immunodeficiency (T+B−NK− SCID) andbone marrow transplantation in an infant with Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome. Br. J. Haematol. 119: 765–768.108. Keller, M.D. et al. 2013. Severe combined immunodefi-ciency resulting from mutations in MTHFD1. Pediatrics131: e629–e634.109. Notarangelo, L. 2013. Functional T cell immunodeficien-cies (with T cells present).Ann. Rev. Immunol. 31: 195–225.110. Roifman, C.M. et al. 2012. Defining combined immunod-eficiency. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 130: 177–183.111. Al-Herz, W. et al. 2014. Primary immunodeficiency dis-eases: an update on the classification from the Interna-tional union of immunological societies expert committeefor primary immunodeficiency. Front. Immunol. 5: 460.112. Elder, M.E. et al. 1994. Human severe combined immun-odeficiency due to a defect in ZAP-70, a T cell tyrosinekinase. Science 264: 1596–1598.113. Turul, T. et al. 2009. Clinical heterogeneity can hamper thediagnosis of patients with ZAP70 deficiency. Eur. J. Pediatr.168: 87–93.114. Jabara, H.H. et al. 2013. A homozygous mucosa-associatedlymphoid tissue 1 (MALT1) mutation in a family with2 combined immunodeficiency. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.132: 151–158.115. Torres, J.M. et al. 2014. Inherited BCL10 deficiency impairshematopoietic and nonhematopoietic immunity. J. Clin.Invest. 124: 5239–5248.116. Chen, R. et al. 2013. Whole exome sequencing identi-fies TTC7A mutations for combined immunodeficiencywith intestinal atresias. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 132: 656–664.117. Yang, J. et al. 2009. Activation of Rho GTPases by DOCKexchange factors ismediated by a nucleotide sensor. Science325: 1398–1402.118. Zhang, Q. et al. 2009. Combined immunodeficiency as-sociated with DOCK8 mutations. N. Engl. J. Med. 361:2046–2055.119. Huck, K. et al. 2009. Girls homozigous for an IL-2 inducibleT cell kinase mutation that leads to protein deficiencydevelop fatal EBV-associated lymphoproliferation. J Clin.Invest. 119: 1350–1358.105Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.Severe combined immunodeficiencies Cirillo et al.120. Picard, C. et al. 2009. STIM1 mutation associated witha syndrome of immunodeficiency and autoimmunity.N. Engl. J. Med. 360: 1971–1980.121. Goldman, F.D. et al. 1998. Defective expression of p56lck inan infant with severe combined immunodeficiency. J. Clin.Invest. 102: 421–429.122. Gorska, M. et al. 2012. Consequences of a mutationin the UNC119 gene for T cell function in idiopathicCD4 lymphopenia. Curr. Allergy Asthma Rep. 12: 396–401.123. Li, F.Y. et al. 2011. Loss of MAGT1 abrogates, theMg2+ flux required for T cell signaling and leads to anovel human primary immunodeficiency.Magnes. Res. 24:S109–S114.124. Pannicke, U. et al. 2013. Deficiency of innate and acquiredimmunity caused by an IKBKB mutation. N. Engl. J. Med.369: 2504–2514.125. Dvorak, C.C. et al. 2013. The natural history of childrenwith severe combined immunodeficiency: baseline featuresof the first fifty patients of the primary immune deficiencytreatment consortium prospective study 6901. J. Clin. Im-munol. 33: 1156–1164.126. Gaspar, H.B. et al. 2014. The case for mandatory newbornscreening for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).J. Clin. Immunol. 34: 393–397.127. Verbsky, J. et al. 2014. Screenings for and treatment ofcongenital immunodeficienciency diseases. Clin. Perinatol.41: 1001–1015.106 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1356 (2015) 90–106 C© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.