ABSTRACT: 
“I am as American as April in Arizona,” Nabokov claimed in a 1966 interview. Although he repeatedly emphasized his American citizenship and the affection he held for his adopted nation, my argument is that his 1947 novel, Bend Sinister, offers us an opportunity to interrogate the received narrative of Nabokov's unproblematic arrival and assimilation into the United States. In examining the engagement with mass culture in this dystopian novel, my intention is to restore some of the political valence denied the novel by both Nabokov and his readers, and to suggest how it functions as a critique of American culture which reveals the author's profound ambivalence about his adopted nation in the early to mid-1940s. Drawing on unpublished archive material, as well as theoretical work by Theodor Adorno, this paper opens up a new approach to Nabokov's American work and demands a reassessment of his avowed apoliticism. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Vladimir Nabokov's 1947 novel, Bend Sinister, offers us an opportunity to interrogate the received narrative of Nabokov's unproblematic arrival and assimilation into the United States. In examining the engagement with mass culture in this dystopian novel, my intention is to restore some of the political valence denied the novel by both Nabokov and his readers, and to suggest how it functions as a critique of American culture which reveals the author's profound ambivalence about his adopted nation in the early to mid-1940s. Drawing on un-published archive material, as well as theoretical work by Theodor Adorno, this paper opens up a new approach to Nabokov's American work and demands a reassessment of his avowed apoliticism. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Journal of American Studieshttp://journals.cambridge.org/AMSAdditional services for Journal of AmericanStudies:Email alerts: Click hereSubscriptions: Click hereCommercial reprints: Click hereTerms of use : Click hereNabokov's Dystopia: Bend Sinister, America andMass CultureWILL NORMANJournal of American Studies / Volume 43 / Issue 01 / April 2009, pp 49 - 69DOI: 10.1017/S0021875809006549, Published online: 01 May 2009Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0021875809006549How to cite this article:WILL NORMAN (2009). Nabokov's Dystopia: Bend Sinister, America and MassCulture. Journal of American Studies, 43, pp 49-69 doi:10.1017/S0021875809006549Request Permissions : Click hereDownloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/AMS, IP address: 130.132.173.109 on 04 Nov 2013http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Nabokov’s Dystopia : Bend Sinister,America and Mass CultureWILL NORMAN‘‘I am as American as April in Arizona, ’’ Nabokov claimed in a 1966 interview. Although herepeatedly emphasized his American citizenship and the affection he held for his adoptednation, my argument is that his 1947 novel, Bend Sinister, offers us an opportunity to interrogatethe received narrative of Nabokov’s unproblematic arrival and assimilation into the UnitedStates. In examining the engagement with mass culture in this dystopian novel, my intention isto restore some of the political valence denied the novel by both Nabokov and his readers,and to suggest how it functions as a critique of American culture which reveals the author’sprofound ambivalence about his adopted nation in the early to mid-1940s. Drawing on un-published archive material, as well as theoretical work by Theodor Adorno, this paper opensup a new approach to Nabokov’s American work and demands a reassessment of his avowedapoliticism.‘‘ I am as American as April in Arizona, ’’ Nabokov claimed to Herbert Gold,in an interview for the Paris Review in 1966.1 The setting, ironically, wasNabokov’s new residence, one he was to keep until his death in 1977 – asuite of rooms at the top of the Montreux Palace Hotel in Switzerland.Nabokov was consistently effusive about America during the years after heleft it, and often emphasized his ongoing citizenship.2 Only three of hisnovels were completed in the USA, however. One of them, Lolita (1955), wasabout the seduction of a young American girl with a saccharine taste formovie stars, pop songs and sodas. Pnin (1957) also presented the United Statesthrough the eyes of Europe, as an eccentric e´migre´ academic struggles toassimilate himself into the alien world of an American university campus.Will Norman is Lecturer in North American Literature at the University of Kent. He iscoeditor of a new collection of essays entitled Transitional Nabokov (forthcoming in 2009) andis currently completing a study of Nabokov in relation to modernism, time and history. He isalso beginning a research project on e´migre´ responses to American popular culture in the1930s and 1940s.1 Nabokov, Strong Opinions (1973) (New York: Vintage, 1990), 98.2 See, for example, this assertion from a 1969 interview: ‘‘ I am an American, I feel American,and I like that feeling. I live in Europe for family reasons, and I pay a US federal income taxon every cent I earn at home or abroad. ’’ Ibid., 124. Nabokov lived in America from 1940to 1959.Journal of American Studies, 43 (2009), 1, 49–69 f Cambridge University Press 2009doi:10.1017/S0021875809006549 Printed in the United Kingdomhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Both novels refract America through popular culture in a way that, even ifthe operation of irony leaves room for ambivalence, seems not to contradictNabokov’s later enthusiasm for the USA. Bend Sinister (1947) has shared littleof the scholarly attention or critical success of these other American novels.3This is Nabokov’s dystopian work, one which appears to have obscure, ifany, relations to the country it was written in. As Nabokov readily admitted,in writing the novel he drew heavily on his knowledge of the regimes ofHitler and Stalin.4 Its setting seems unmistakably European. My argument,though, is that Bend Sinister offers us an opportunity to interrogate the re-ceived narrative of Nabokov’s unproblematic arrival in, and assimilationinto, the United States. In examining the engagement with mass culture inthe novel, my intention is to restore some of the political implications deniedit by both Nabokov and his readers, and to suggest how it functions as acritique of America which reveals the author’s profound ambivalence abouthis adopted nation in the early to mid-1940s. This contention will be sup-ported by reading Nabokov historically, alongside the intellectual immi-gration and the New Criticism, and by paying particular attention toformulations of history and cultural temporality within those contexts.To introduce history and politics into the reading of Nabokov’s fiction iscertainly to operate against intention. In his foreword to The Eye in 1965,Nabokov wrote of his ‘‘ indifference to community problems and to theintrusions of history, ’’5 one of many statements which insist on his absoluteaesthetic autonomy. Bend Sinister, though, like its Russian-language com-panion piece, Invitation to a Beheading (Priglashenie na kazn’, 1938), takes as itsgenre the political dystopia. In his polemic introduction to the 1963 editionof the novel, Nabokov testifies to the impact that these two regimes had onthe work,6 but in the same piece also undermines attempts at political read-ings by insisting that the story ‘‘ in Bend Sinister is not really about life anddeath in a grotesque police state, ’’ before directing the reader towards the3 Boyd’s assertion that Bend Sinister is ‘‘ less successful than much of Nabokov’s other maturefiction ’’ is representative of the ambivalence with which both scholars and reviewers havereceived it. Brian Boyd, Vladimir Nabokov : The American Years (Princeton : PrincetonUniversity Press, 1991), 105–6. John Burt Foster Jr., ‘‘Bend Sinister, ’’ in Vladimir E.Alexandrov, ed., The Garland Companion to Vladimir Nabokov (New York: Garland, 1995),25–36, 25–26, surveys these mixed responses.4 ‘‘Without those infamous models before me I could not have interlarded this fantasy withbits of Lenin’s speeches, and a chunk of the Soviet constitution, and gobs of Nazistpseudo-efficiency. ’’ Nabokov, ‘‘ Introduction ’’ (1965), in Bend Sinister (London: Penguin,2001), 6.5 Nabokov, ‘‘Foreword ’’ to idem, The Eye, trans. Dmitri Nabokov in collaboration with theauthor (1965) (London: Panther, 1968), 7–10, 8.6 Nabokov, Bend Sinister (1947) (London: Corgi, 1967), 6.50 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109more overtly formal features of the novel (what he calls ‘‘ stylistic distor-tions ’’) like intertextual allusion, multilingual play and recurrent patterns in-timating the presence of an alternative ‘‘otherworld. ’’7 The majority ofspecialist criticism on Bend Sinister has willingly followed Nabokov’s path ineffectively divorcing the novel’s material, historical content from its stylisticvirtuosity, and either has viewed the latter as a means by which to overcomeand master the former, or has ignored the political implications altogether infavour of a benign commentary on formal devices.8 In what follows, myapproach owes more to critics such as David Rampton, Brian D. Walter andCharles Baxter, who have been willing to pursue the contradictions inheringin Nabokov’s apolitical political novel.9In an unpublished lecture (‘‘The Proletarian Novel ’’), written for his stu-dents at Wellesley College soon after his arrival in America, Nabokov wrote,This country has produced exquisite writers. One of the best, perhaps the best shortstory in world literature has been written a hundred years ago by an American ; but atthe present moment this country is facing a grave danger : that danger is the best-seller, that fat healthy whale of a book that spouts high for a season and then plungesleaving not a bubble on the surface.107 Ibid., 8–11.8 Probably the most influential work done on Bend Sinister is in D. Barton Johnson’sWorlds inRegression : Some Novels of Vladimir Nabokov (Ann Arbor, MI: Ardis, 1985). As the titlesuggests, Johnson is primarily interested in examining the links between Nabokov’s variouscreated worlds, leading to metaphysical conclusions (ibid., 187–205). David Rampton, in achapter on Bend Sinister and Invitation to a Beheading, surveys the apolitical slant on mostcriticism dealing with those novels, up to the publication of his book in 1984. DavidRampton, Vladimir Nabokov : A Critical Study of the Novels (Cambridge : CambridgeUniversity Press, 1984). In addition see, as examples of critical work which engages witheither intertextual allusion or the discovery of hermetic textual patterns without inter-rogating the novel’s political or historical implications, Richard F. Patteson, ‘‘Nabokov’sBend Sinister : The Narrator as God, ’’ Studies in American Fiction, 5 (1977), 241–53; MichaelH. Begnal, ‘‘Bend Sinister : Joyce, Shakespeare, Nabokov, ’’ Modern Language Studies, 15, 4(1985), 22–27 ; and David H. Larmour, ‘‘The Classical Allusions in Bend Sinister, ’’ RussianLiterature TriQuarterly, 24 (1991), 163–72.9 Brian D. Walter, ‘‘Two Organ Grinders : Duality and Discontent in Bend Sinister, ’’ in DavidJ. H. Larmour, ed., Discourse and Ideology in Nabokov’s Prose (London: Routledge, 2002),24–40 ; Charles Baxter, ‘‘Nabokov, Idolatry and the Police State, ’’ Boundary 2, 5, 3 (1977),813–27.10 Quotations from Nabokov’s unpublished essays ‘‘The Proletarian Novel ’’ (typescript draft(incomplete) of classroom lecture notes, with his ms. revisions, signed and undated, un-published material from the Berg Collection, New York Public Library, consulted 20December 2006) and ‘‘Expatriates ’’ (typescript draft (photocopy) of class lecture notes,signed and undated, unpublished material from the Berg Collection, New York PublicLibrary, consulted 8 December 2006.), as well as his ‘‘Correspondence with EdmundWilson ’’ (unpublished material from the Berg Collection, New York Public Library, con-sulted 13 December 2006), are given with permission from the Estate of VladimirNabokov’s Dystopia 51http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109It might be supposed that the ‘‘grave danger ’’ facing the USA at this timewould have something more to do with global conflict, or the threat ofcommunism. In focussing on the American best-seller, though, Nabokovreveals something crucial about his own perspective, which encompasses allof those concerns. The title of this lecture is ‘‘The Proletarian Novel, ’’ andthere the author makes explicit his equating of American and Soviet popularfiction: ‘‘The novels of Alexis Tolstoy or Sholokhov are as blissfully andsmugly second-rate as those of John Galsworthy or Jules Romain or SinclairLewis and Hemingway. ’’11 This lecture, which signals Nabokov’s alarm atAmerican popular fiction, also makes a crucial connection between his newhome and the one he left – between the United States of the 1940s and thetotalitarian Soviet Union – setting a precedent for his treatment of massculture in Bend Sinister.A number of references to, and parodies of, popular mass culture areembedded in the text of Bend Sinister. The duality arising out of the encounterbetween Nabokov’s high-modernist aesthetics and these elements forms thebasis for the novel’s encoded cultural politics. In these instances it becomesclear that best-selling fiction, newspapers and cinema are complicit with thepolitical hegemony of the dominant, repressive Ekwilist regime portrayed inthe novel. Some of the allusions are brought to our attention in Nabokov’sintroduction, but the precise function of these cultural references remainsunexplained :When in Chapter Three Ember recalls four best-selling novels, the alert commutercannot fail to notice that the titles of three of them form, roughly, the lavatorialinjunction not to Flush the Toilet when the Train Passes through Towns andVillages, while the fourth refers to Werfel’s trashy Song of Bernadette, half altar breadand half bonbon. Similarly, at the beginning of Chapter Six, where some otherpopular romances of the day are mentioned, a slight shift in the spectrum ofmeaning replaces the title Gone with the Wind (filched from Dowson’s Cynara) withthat of Flung Roses (filched from the same poem) and a fusion between two cheapnovels (by Remarque and Sholokhov) produces the neat All Quiet on the Don.12The first passage referred to by Nabokov lists the most popular novels underthe Ekwilist regime. The scatological joke about their quality conceals a semi-serious point. Nabokov does not mention here (on page 31) that StraightNabokov. It is difficult to determine which American short story this might be, althoughEdgar Allan Poe’s ‘‘The Man of the Crowd’’ (1840), which was particularly admired byBaudelaire, fits with Nabokov’s dating and is a likely candidate.11 In the manuscript the words ‘‘Sinclair Lewis or Hemingway, ’’ though clearly legible, havebeen crossed out. 12 Bend Sinister, 9–10.52 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Flush (the first title in the sequence) is also the name of an openly anti-Semitic short story by Somerset Maugham, an author he was known todislike.13 Though British, Maugham spent most of the Second World War inthe USA, having fled, like Nabokov, from Nazi-occupied France. He spentmuch of his time there writing his best-selling novel The Razor’s Edge (1944),and then the screenplay, which was filmed by Twentieth Century Fox in1946. Werfel’s extraordinarily popular, ‘‘ trashy ’’ novel was published in 1941(the year in which Nabokov started work on Bend Sinister), spent thirteenweeks at the top of the New York Times best-seller list, and was filmed inAmerica in 1943, to become one of the five top-selling films of that year. TheSong of Bernadette tells the sentimental story of the miracles worked bySt. Bernadette in Lourdes during the nineteenth century and was obviouslyemblematic for Nabokov of second-rate fiction. The direct association,though, with the totalitarian dictatorship of Bend Sinister, is indicative of aparticular strain in Nabokov’s ideology which saw bad art as a means of masscontrol. Another fact that Nabokov does not mention is that Werfel, anAustrian Jew, was another who fled Europe for America at the beginning ofthe Second World War. This might be dismissed as coincidence if it were notfor the fact that this then unites him also with E. M. Remarque, author of theWorld War One novel All Quiet on the Western Front (1928), which is alsosubjected to ridicule by Nabokov. Remarque was a well-known magazineeditor in Berlin in the late 1920s when his social-historical novel brought himinstant fame and wealth. As a pacifist, his German citizenship was revokedunder Nazism and Remarque spent the war in the USA, where his harddrinking and sexual exploits (including an affair with Marlene Dietrich) kepthim in the headlines. Like Werfel, his novel was made into a sensationallysuccessful American film.14 Given the evidence, it is arguable that Nabokovresponded to more than just popular culture. In this case, the real locus for13 In the story referred to by Nabokov, the main character is an old, rich Jew who conformsto anti-Semitic stereotypes, having an ‘‘ancient, emaciated body, ’’ which ‘‘ looked as thoughit were already attacked by the corruption of the grave. The only expression he ever worewas cunning. ’’ Maugham, Somerset, ‘‘Straight Flush, ’’ in idem, The Complete Short Stories,Volume III (London: Heinemann, 1951), 1483–88. He has a ‘‘ thin, high-pitched cackle ’’and ‘‘ looked incredibly astute and malicious. ’’ Ibid., 1488. Nabokov (Strong Opinions, 118)called Maugham a ‘‘mediocre performer ’’ of ‘‘ easy platitudes. ’’14 One of the earliest ‘‘ talkies, ’’ it won several Oscars on its release in 1930, earned $100,000for Remarque in rights alone, and, perhaps most importantly, underwent a revival in theUSA during the Second World War as an emblematically pacifist story. Nabokov’s im-patience with pacifism during the war is suggested by his correspondence with EdmundWilson, in which he writes (18 July 1941) of his ‘‘ ardent desire that Russia, in spite ofeverything, may defeat or rather utterly abolish Germany – so that not a German be left inthe world ’’ (‘‘Correspondence with Edmund Wilson’’).Nabokov’s Dystopia 53http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109anxiety was in two kinds of transition. One was the adaptation of popularnovels into Hollywood films; the other was the transition of European cul-ture to America. These transactions provided wild fame and success in ex-change for what Nabokov saw as a cheapened version of Europeanexperience for a people who had little access to anything which might chal-lenge it.15The final operation described in the Nabokov introduction sharpens ourfocus on this question even further. The conflation of All Quiet on the WesternFront with another work of historical realism taking war as itstheme – Mikhail Sholokhov’s Quiet Flows the Don (Tikhii Don, serialized in theUSSR 1928–40) – is likely a reflection of pressures exerted on Nabokov bythe Russian faculty at Wellesley College, where he was teaching, to includeworks of socialist realism in his courses. In several letters, Nabokov ex-pressed his reluctance to compromise on his assertion that ‘‘Communismand its totalitarian rule have prevented the development of authentic litera-ture during these last twenty-five years, ’’ writing to the president of WellesleyCollege in order to suggest Yuri Olesha and Boris Pasternak as alternatives toKonstantin Simonov and other writers (like Sholokhov) of socialist realism.16Although Quiet Flows the Don would doubtless have attracted Nabokov’svitriolic contempt (particularly following Sholokhov’s acceptance of theStalin Award in 1941) it is once again the potential for an uncritical Americanreception of European literature which secures its place among the mostpopular works under Paduk’s totalitarian regime in Bend Sinister.Despite the fact that, in every other respect, Paduk’s nation seems un-questionably European, it is important that the popular culture complicitwith the maintenance of his power has a distinctly American flavour. Onekey example of this is the cartoon strip depicting an Ekwilist ‘‘Everyman’’hero, Mr. Etermon, and his wife :The young couple were as happy as any young couple ought to be : a visit to themovies, a rise in one’s salary, a yum-yum something for dinner – life was positivelycrammed with these and similar delights, whereas the worst that might befall onewas hitting a traditional thumb with a traditional hammer or mistaking the date ofthe boss’s birthday. Poster pictures of Etermon showed him smoking the brand thatmillions smoke, and millions could not be wrong_1715 The irony of this position is that Nabokov himself performed both of these transitions inhis own lifetime, importing versions of European and Russian literary culture intoAmerica, and adapting Lolita for Kubrick’s film (1962). With Bend Sinister’s commercialfailure, and his own financial worries, Nabokov’s attitude towards commercialism was tobecome increasingly savvy and pragmatic.16 Boyd, Vladimir Nabokov, 90–91. 17 Bend Sinister, 74.54 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Not only is Mr. Etermon complicit in advertising a cigarette brand, butin describing his life among ‘‘cosy armchairs and all sorts of electricthingumbobs and one thing-in-itself (a car), ’’ Nabokov evokes the Americanconsumerist drive of the 1940s, teeming with new technologies and labour-saving gadgetry.18 As John Burt Foster Jr. has noted, the cliche´s of Americanadvertising are evoked by Nabokov in his description of ‘‘poshlust ’’ in hisbook Nikolay Gogol (1944), written during the same period as Bend Sinister.19Nabokov’s parodic re-creations of idealized domestic life are common toboth works, and while, as Foster argues,20 the poshlost’ of the Gogol biogra-phy is intentionally internationalized by reference to German origins, thepredominance of specifically American cliche´ in the case of Bend Sinisterconstitutes a forceful instance of cultural critique.This example is particularly interesting because of the way Nabokovspecifically links Mr. Etermon to the empty, homogeneous time which ac-companies the regime. The paradox he elucidates is that while, on one hand,Mr. Etermon ‘‘ represented_ a living refutation of immortality, since hiswhole habitus was a dead end with nothing in it capable or worthy oftranscending the mortal condition, ’’ on the other he was immortal ‘‘becausenot a single detail of the setting (not even his playing poker with life in-surance salesmen) suggested the fact of absolutely inevitable death. ’’21Existing within a stagnant temporality, this character personifies precisely themeaningless of time under the regime. This particular form of temporality,characterized by Nabokov as one of the ‘‘gaps of history, ’’ or ‘‘ terrains vaguesof time, ’’22 is closely associated with the regime, and is often presented asmechanized or spatialized time, in opposition to the dynamic, subjectivity ofthe Bergsonian duree´ which both Krug and his creator hold as their ideal.2318 Ibid., 73. Rampton, 42, also points to the critique of American middle-class consumerismin the cartoon, writing that Mr. Etermon ‘‘ seems suspiciously like a vehicle for Nabokov’sattack on the American middle class, casually imported into Paduk’s distinctly Europeancountry, ’’ and noting that ‘‘ the tyranny is Fascist or Communist, but the vulgarity isAmerican. ’’19 Poshlost’ is the actual transliteration of this Russian term, which, Nabokov explains, issuggested by such English words as ‘‘cheap, sham, common, smutty, pink-and-blue, highfalutin’, in bad taste. ’’ Nabokov, Nikolay Gogol (1944) (Oxford : Oxford University Press,1989), 67.20 John Burt Foster Jr., ‘‘Poshlust, Culture Criticism, Adorno and Malraux, ’’ in JulianConnolly, ed., Nabokov and His Fiction : New Perspectives (Cambridge : Cambridge UniversityPress, 1999), 216–35, 22–27. 21 Bend Sinister, 74. 22 Ibid., 38.23 Nabokov’s interest in French philosopher Henri Bergson (1859–1941) informs many of hisworks. In particular, Nabokov often draws on Bergson’s notion of la dure´e, a pure, un-measurable and intuitive form of time, to be set against le temps, which is measurable clocktime. See Leona Toker, ‘‘Nabokov and Bergson, ’’ in Vladimir E. Alexandrov, ed., TheGarland Companion to Vladimir Nabokov (New York: Garland, 1995), 367–74, for a survey ofNabokov’s Dystopia 55http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Elsewhere in the novel, popular culture is found to inform the nature ofthe regime in far more alarming ways. The abduction of Krug and his sonfrom their apartment is one of the most unsettling episodes in Bend Sinister,largely because of the incongruity of a parodic, throwaway style narratingsuch a terrifying event. Mac, the government thug who carries out the ab-duction, is described in a way suggesting a filmic hard-boiled cop, or evenChester Gould’s comic strip hero, Dick Tracey, rather than an SS or KGBagent, with his ‘‘bushy black eyebrows, a square heavy jaw and the whitest ofwhite teeth. ’’24 It is his speech, though, which confirms his importation fromthe world of American popular culture. As he mutters ‘‘Aw, for Christ’s sake ’’and ‘‘hold it tight kiddo’’ while brutally disabling Krug and manhandlingDavid,25 the jarring between form and content reaches an uncomfortablepitch. This is one of the alienating stylistic devices which, in John Coleman’sreview,26 ‘‘ constitute[s] a running threat to our engagement in their [thecharacters’] lives. ’’ Its function here is partly to suggest how the pervasiveeffects of mass culture have developed the valency required to mount aviolent challenge to reality, in a way not dissimilar to totalitarian regimes inEurope. It also makes a demand of the reader : to question the authority withwhich cinema and popular fiction lay claim to represent the world – anauthority, this farcical scene implies, which is founded on false premises.We can see, then, that Bend Sinister manifests a cultural dichotomy bywhich the European high-modernist literary texts and styles usually asso-ciated with Nabokov are directly opposed to a lowbrow American popularculture, including best-selling novels, movies, advertising and newspapercartoons.27 The connections between this culture and the totalitarian politicsNabokov’s interaction with him. Among numerous moments of engagement withBergsonian time philosophy in Bend Sinister, the ‘‘pure Krugism’’ which insists on thedynamic unpredictability of the future (44–45) relates to Henri Bergson, Time and Free Will :An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness, trans. F. L. Pogson (London: George Allenand Unwin, 1910), 175–83. By contrast, the mechanized, homogeneous temporality asso-ciated with the regime is often expressed through the preponderance of watches, clocks,and hourglasses, often stopped or malfunctioning (Bend Sinister, 19, 38, 51, 105, 147, 203).24 Ibid., 183. 25 Ibid., 186 and 188.26 John Coleman, ‘‘Style and the Man, ’’ review of Bend Sinister by Vladimir Nabokov, Spectator,25 March 1960, 444–45, 444.27 The range of allusions to modernist texts and instances of modernist formal techniques inBend Sinister is beyond the scope of this paper. The novel’s indebtedness to modernistexperimentalism was noted as early as 1947, when Nathan Rothman wrote in a review,‘‘Nabokov has mastered every kind of virtuosity that has been developed in this century.Naturally he owes a great deal to Joyce ; it is there to be seen in the asides and the several(and simultaneous) depths of consciousness, in the bardic phrases, in the incessant literaryrecalls ’’ (see Norman Page, Nabokov : The Critical Heritage (London: Routledge and Kegan56 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109it maintains are to be found in its fundamentally imperialistic nature –imperialist not in the sense of territorial acquisition but in its unceasingdrive to recruit individuals to its own ready-made version of reality. Thisexpansion, the acquisition of passive consent and inhabitation of mentalterritory, is precisely how Nabokov depicts the totalitarian regime in‘‘Tyrants Destroyed, ’’ the short story written in 1938 which prefigures thethemes of Bend Sinister before his transatlantic migration and experience ofAmerican mass culture.28 It is only after this geographical and cultural shiftthat Nabokov found common ground between totalitarianism and massculture, uniting them in his dystopian novel. His deployment of high-modernist aesthetics is a form of resistance against these twinned forces.As we can see from the evidence of Bend Sinister’s early reviews, the noveldisplays some formal features strongly associated with modernism’s impulsestowards formal innovation and aesthetic autonomy.29 These include theconstruction of several competing temporal realms, Joycean parodies ofsubliterary forms, and abrupt shifts in the ambiguous narrative voice whichintroduce awareness of spatial dimensions in the narrative. Perhaps the mostimportant element of this modernist trace in Bend Sinister is the introductionof conflict into an otherwise unchallenged discourse ; in other words, a par-ticular form of modernist difficulty.Nabokov seems in Bend Sinister to be participating in an argument aboutthe value of modernist difficulty which, although it took root in the 1920s inPaul, 1982), 72). Foster, ‘‘Bend Sinister, ’’ 31–35, surveys some of the allusions to mod-ernist writers and suggests their impact on the novel.28 Nabokov, ‘‘Tyrants Destroyed ’’ (Istreblenie tiranov, 1938), trans. Vladimir Nabokov(1975), in idem, The Collected Stories of Vladimir Nabokov (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,1996), 438–60, also tells the story of one man’s attempts to resist the incursions of a farcicaltotalitarian regime into his life. The ambition of the regime is to take over and control notonly the physical, but also the mental, space of its subjects. The narrator, for example,‘‘ soon had the feeling that he [the leader]_ was penetrating everywhere, infecting with hispresence the way of thinking and the everyday life of every person’’ (442). Such is theextent, in fact, to which the leader encompasses the lives of his subjects, that the narratorresolves to commit suicide in order to kill the dictator, ‘‘ as he was totally inside me,fattened on the intensity of my hatred_ grown huge within me, ousting, to the last sun-bathed landscape, to the last memory of childhood, all the treasures I had collected ’’ (458).It is this last detail, in which space is transformed into time, in the form of memory, that Iwish to foreground here, because although the leader’s inexorable spatial expansion isstriking, it is the attempted control over time which stands out as Nabokov’s particularconcern.29 In addition to Coleman and Rothman, mentioned above, see also V. S. Naipaul, whodescribed Bend Sinister as ‘‘bizarre, puzzling and difficult_ too cerebral, ’’ and FrankKermode, who found the novel to be overly concerned with ‘‘a kind of thinking andpleasure which most readers have no hope of understanding or experiencing. ’’ Page, 74, 76.Nabokov’s Dystopia 57http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Europe, was very much current in the USA during the 1940s as a crucialcomponent of the debate surrounding the emergence of New Criticism. NewCriticism is not a critical term usually associated with Nabokov, tainted as itis by the legacy of his great bugbear, T. S. Eliot.30 It was with one of itsforemost proponents, however, Allen Tate, that Nabokov forged an unlikelyalliance in publishing his first American novel. While other American com-mentators like Edmund Wilson expressed doubts about the ‘‘ longeurs ’’ ofBend Sinister’s style,31 Tate, then editor at Henry Holt, pronounced it ‘‘ theonly piece of first-rate writing I have had the privilege of reading as aneditor. ’’ It was the style of the novel which impressed him most, as his blurbfor the edition testifies : ‘‘The mastery of English prose exhibited here hasnot been surpassed by any writer of our generation who was born toEnglish. ’’32The rise of New Criticism as an established school coincided withNabokov’s arrival in America in 1940, the year before John Crowe Ransompublished his seminal book The New Criticism. Nabokov’s early academiccareer inevitably brought him into contact with the central tenets of NewCriticism, as well as with several of its main proponents.33 Although it wouldbe misleading to suggest too many parallels between the school andNabokov’s aesthetics, there is nevertheless some illuminating shared ground,which goes some way towards explaining why Bend Sinister found such favourwith Tate and launched Nabokov’s American career.34 The New Criticalproject was responsible for maintaining the argument in support of mod-ernist difficulty in the USA. This is principally due to the fundamental linkNew Critics asserted between meaning and form, a link missing from theRussian Formalist tradition with which Nabokov was already familiar. TheNew Critics were interested in the integration of heterogenous or opposedelements within the literary work through ambiguity, irony and paradox. In30 Nabokov, although claiming to be ‘‘ indifferent ’’ to Eliot, often criticized him, calling him,for example (Strong Opinions, 43), ‘‘not quite first-rate. ’’31 Nabokov, Dear Bunny, Dear Volodya : The Nabokov–Wilson Letters, 1940–1971, revised andexpanded edition, ed. Simon Karlinsky (Berkeley : University of California Press, 2001),210. 32 Boyd, Vladimir Nabokov, 108.33 In addition to his friendship with Tate (who later introduced him to I. A. Richards),Nabokov developed a friendship with Yvor Winters in Stanford in 1941, and with JohnCrowe Ransom in 1949. Ibid., 33, 141).34 Evidence from the Nabokov archive in the Berg Collection at the New York Public Libraryshows that Tate, who also provided a reference for Nabokov in his successful applicationfor a Guggenheim fellowship, eventually resigned from Henry Holt due to what he re-garded as commercial, conformist pressures compromising his patronage of genuinelyexperimental writing. Nabokov, ‘‘Correspondence with Henry Holt and Co., ’’ unpublishedmaterial from the Berg Collection, New York Public Library, consulted 17 December 2006.58 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109other words, they regarded conflict itself as inherent to literature of value,and believed, much like Nabokov, that the act of reading constituted thetransformation of these heterogenous elements into a unified form. In thewords of Cleanth Brooks,35 literary structure was that which ‘‘unites the likewith the unlike. ’’ Bend Sinister clearly conforms, then, to this aspect of NewCritical aesthetics. Implicit in these assertions which attribute value to thoseworks which cohere through ambiguity, irony and paradox is the re-verse – the absence of value in artistic production which manifests onlyhomogeneous impulses. Allen Tate accordingly saw the duty of the writer topreserve the inherent complexity of language ‘‘at a time when all languagesare being debased by the techniques of mass control. ’’36 The ‘‘ techniques ofmass control ’’ remain undefined in this essay, but offer a semantic link be-tween the mass culture of newspapers, radio and film operating in manydemocratic nations including his own, and the totalitarian control enforcedby European dictatorships.A second, related, and perhaps more fertile, context for the cultural poli-tics of Bend Sinister may be found in the intellectual immigration which ar-rived in America from Europe in the years between Hitler’s rise to power in1933 and the end of the Second World War. Many of those intellectualimmigrants were able, like Nabokov, to find work in one of America’s manyhigher-education institutions, often thanks to the aid of various agencies andcommittees such as the Rockefeller Foundation and the Oberlaender Trust.37Difficulties presented themselves, however, in the confrontations that in-evitably occurred between European intellectual culture and that ofAmerican academia. This clash was to become one of the most importantthemes of Nabokov’s 1957 novel Pnin. It is also relevant, in a more indirectsense, to Bend Sinister. The experience of assimilation into American culture,which Nabokov always professed to have been no problem for him, was,according to Donald Peterson Kent, an American sociologist who wrote abook on the subject in 1953, ‘‘not a question of the immigrant’s preservingthe best of his culture and combining it with the best of American culture (assome refugees thought desirable), but of abandoning his culture and adopt-ing American culture. ’’38 It is tempting to assert that the American popularculture which lightheartedly pervades Pnin and Lolita was experienced35 Cleanth Brooks, The Well Wrought Urn : Studies in the Structure of Poetry (1947) (London:Dennis Dobson, 1968), 159.36 Allan Tate, ‘‘The Man of Letters in the Modern World, ’’ in idem, The Man of Letters in theModern World : Selected Essays 1928–1955 (New York: Meridian, 1955), 11.37 Donald Peterson Kent, The Refugee Intellectual : The Americanization of the Immigrants of 1933–1941(New York: Columbia University Press, 1953), 118. 38 Ibid., 239.Nabokov’s Dystopia 59http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109differently by Nabokov during the first years of his settlement there when hewrote Bend Sinister ; that the demand for complete submission to the culturalhegemony suggested an uncomfortable parallel with the European situationhe had fled.This parallel can only have been reinforced by the anti-Semitism whichNabokov encountered in America. Nabokov’s wife was of Jewish parentage,and rampant anti-Semitism was one of the reasons they had left Berlin forParis in 1937 and Paris for New York in 1940. In his first few years inAmerica, though, Nabokov witnessed a peak of anti-Semititic activity whichhad grown during the depression. Among numerous statistics indicating highlevels of anti-Semitism at this time, one opinion poll taken in August 1940suggested that between 15 and 24 percent of the population saw Jews ‘‘as amenace to America. ’’39 To make matters worse, American immigrationpolicy became increasingly restrictionist during the early 1940s, preventingmany Jewish refugees from reaching safety.40 In Bend Sinister the state ab-duction of David and his incarceration, and then murder, in an ‘‘ Institute forAbnormal Children’’ inevitably recall Nazi Jewish policy (as well as thattowards other nonconformist groups).41 More overtly, Nabokov’s 1945 shortstory ‘‘Conversation Piece, 1945 ’’ dwells on the casual anti-Semitism ofAmerican middle-class pseudo-intellectuals, who play host to a Germanfascist sympathizer at a drinks party.42 It is left to Theodor Adorno and MaxHorkheimer, though, to elucidate the connections between mass cultureand anti-Semitism which are left implicit in Nabokov’s 1940s work, arguingin relation to Hollywood that ‘‘ in the world of mass series production,39 David S. Wyman, The Abandonment of the Jews : America and the Holocaust 1941–1945 (New York:Pantheon Books, 1984), 15.40 For a survey of American anti-Semitism during the late 1930s and early 1940s see ibid.,9–15. On restrictionism and the failures of American immigration policymakers to takeJewish refugees during the holocaust see Saul S. Friedman’s No Haven for the Oppressed(Detroit : Wayne State University Press, 1973). 41 Bend Sinister, 200.42 There is considerable evidence for Nabokov’s continuing to probe connections betweenAmerican anti-Semitism and the Holocaust during the postwar period. See, for example,Douglas Anderson’s claims (‘‘Nabokov’s Genocidal and Nuclear Holocausts in Lolita, ’’Mosaic, 29, 2 (1996), 73–90) that Nabokov encodes images of the Holocaust into the text ofLolita, and Alexander N. Drescher’s similar claims about the short story ‘‘Signs andSymbols, ’’ published in 1948 (see Alexander N. Drescher, ‘‘Arbitrary Signs and Symbols, ’’Zembla, 23 July 2007, available at http://www.libraries.psu.edu/nabokov/forians.htm),about a Jewish couple and their son, newly immigrated to America. See also MichaelWood’s discussion of Bend Sinister and ‘‘Signs and Symbols ’’ in The Magician’s Doubts :Nabokov and the Risks of Fiction (London: Chatto & Windus, 1994), 55–74, especially hisarguments concerning the pervasive presence of the Holocaust in Nabokov’s fiction(ibid., 62).60 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109stereotypes replace individual categories. ’’43 This is the same logic as thatbehind the doctrine of Bend Sinister’s ‘‘Ekwilism, ’’ which advocates ‘‘ a re-moulding of human individuals in conformity with a well-balanced pat-tern. ’’44Ekwilist utopian ideals do not derive exclusively from European sources,then. While both Stalinist and Nazi ideologies were formulated in profoundlyutopian terms, there is also a utopian element to the American dream, whichbecomes inscribed in Bend Sinister. The disturbing parody of Freudianpsychoanalytic techniques which constitutes the ‘‘ release games ’’ performedat the ‘‘ Institute for Abnormal Children’’ needs to be understood in relationto the large-scale popularization of Freud which occurred in the UnitedStates during the 1940s. As Nathan H. Hale Jr. explains, an adapted‘‘Americanized’’ version of Freudian psychiatry (from which Freud tookpains to distance himself) underwent a surge in popularity during this period,publicized in novels, newspapers, magazines and even a musical comedy.45These techniques were often associated with the achievement of ‘‘ increasedvocational efficiency and personal satisfaction, ’’ as well as ‘‘normalcy andhappiness. ’’46 By the 1940s many of these ideas had filtered down to edu-cators such as Margaret Naumberg and Caroline Zachry, who encouraged amore permissive educational environment in which to provide a release forchildren’s libidinal energies. In this context (Nabokov himself had to con-sider educational options for his young son, Dmitri, at this time), the creationof ‘‘good citizens ’’ by encouraging patients to ‘‘vent in full their repressedyearnings_ upon some little creature of no value to the community ’’ takeson an urgent American aspect.47 That Paduk’s most insidious supporter, Dr.Alexander, shares his name with Franz Alexander, America’s most famousFreudian in the 1940s, can only strengthen this connection.48 Nabokov’svitriolic contempt for Freud is well known, and he claims in his introductionto Bend Sinister that ‘‘ all my books should be stamped Freudians Keep43 Theodor W. Adorno and Max Horkheimer, The Dialectic of Enlightenment (Dialektik derAufkla¨rung, 1944), trans. John Cumming (1972) (London: Verso, 1979), 200–2. For more ofAdorno’s writing on anti-Semitism during his American period see one of the sections hecontributed to the massive work Theodor W. Adorno, Else Frenkel-Brunswick, Daniel J.Levinson and R. Nevitt Sanford, The Authoritarian Personality (New York: Harper Brothers,1950), 605–53, based on research conducted during the mid-1940s in America into po-tentially fascist personality types. 44 Bend Sinister, 72.45 Nathan H. Hale Jr., The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States : Freud and theAmericans (Oxford : Oxford University Press, 1995), 76–77.46 Ibid., 75, 277. 47 Bend Sinister, 200.48 Hale, 7, 277, describes Franz Alexander as ‘‘one of the major figures in Americanpsychoanalysis, ’’ whose ‘‘missionary efforts ’’ to promote Freud were hugely influential.Nabokov’s Dystopia 61http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109Out. ’’49 In this case, however, a particularly American, and utopian, inflec-tion on Freudianism is evident.‘‘Majority rule ’’ was one of the features of American culture which struckthe intellectual immigrants the most. In 1953 Henri Peyre, an admirer ofNabokov’s writing, contributed a chapter to a book named The CulturalMigration : The European Scholar in America. Although noting the great value ofintellectual freedom in America, Peyre also found problems with the en-forced tolerance which marked the assimilation process : ‘‘Respect for themajority rule and courtesy seem so ingrained in this happy land that dissenthas become a rare occurrence. ’’ For Peyre, the connection was clear betweenthis lack of dissent (or conflict) and intellectual slackness. He noted,‘‘Theoretical freedom of thought becomes too little conducive to boldnessof thought, ’’ leading to ‘‘passive resistance to thinking ’’ and a ‘‘ lack of ad-venture in initiating new ideas, in making startling new discoveries. ’’50 Inmuch the same way as Nabokov, Peyre found in the acceptance of general-ities a threat to creativity, and saw American democratic ideals as a kind of‘‘ levelling down. ’’51 Significantly, he links this problem to American con-ceptions of time and history, criticizing historical writing for substitutingmyth for history, a problem ‘‘which has made the American an individualist,a pioneer, a tolerant and God-fearing democrat, ’’ while e´migre´ scholars are‘‘ struck by the frailty of the knowledge of, and of the sense for, history ’’ intheir adopted land.52 It seems, then, that the notion of America having adifferent relationship with the dynamics of time than did Europe carriedsome currency among the intellectual immigrants. Peyre’s chapter indicates atemporally disorientated, homogeneous culture overemphasizing the valueof an eternal present at the expense of a more nuanced (and potentiallyconflicting) temporal perspective which takes the past and potential futureinto account.It is Theodor Adorno, however, who provides the most compellingcorrelative for Nabokov’s critique of American popular culture from the49 Bend Sinister, 11.50 Henri Peyre, ‘‘The Study of Literature, ’’ in W. Rex Crawford, ed., The Cultural Migration :The European Scholar in America (Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press, 1953),27–81, 62–65.51 Nabokov often took the opportunity, especially with his American students, to discouragesatisfaction with generalizations. See, for example, his polemic lecture against commonlyheld opinions, ‘‘The Art of Literature and Commonsense, ’’ in idem, Lectures on Literature, ed.Fredson Bowers (London: Weidenfield and Nicholson, 1980), 371–80, and his earlierRussian-language piece, ‘‘On Generalities, ’’ ed. Alexander Dolinin, Zvezda, 4 (1999), 12–14.52 Peyre, ‘‘The Study of Literature, ’’ 59.62 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109perspective of European modernism.53 Like Nabokov, Adorno found lifeunder Nazism intolerable and went to the USA in search of an academicposition, having failed to secure one in the UK.54 His writings on massculture, inspired by his American experience, provide an illuminatingcounterpart to Nabokov’s own mediation of it. Adorno’s experience of exilein the United States was characterized by observations similar to those madeby Henri Peyre. He, too, was struck by the tendency of the new culture todemand complete submission. In Prisms for example, Adorno compares oldand new types of immigrant to the USA. The former came to America insearch of wealth, fortune and freedom, but now the nation no longer offeredlimitless opportunity but instead necessitated cultural adjustment in theEuropean intelligentsia which arrived there : ‘‘ there has arisen a civilizationwhich absorbs all life in its system. ’’ In addition to this latent cultural ex-pansionism, the new culture also presents a threat to individual autonomy,for ‘‘ it is made unmistakably clear to the intellectual from abroad thathe will have to eradicate himself as an autonomous being in order toachieve anything. ’’55 While the association with American mass cultureand European totalitarianism remains implicit in these relatively late reflec-tions, Adorno makes it very clear in his earlier writings on ‘‘ the cultureindustry ’’ :Participation in mass culture itself stands under the sign of terror. Enthusiasm notmerely betrays an unconscious eagerness to read the commands from above but53 Two scholarly articles have previously read Adorno and Nabokov side by side. Foster,‘‘Poshlust, Culture Criticism, Adorno and Malraux, ’’ 232–33, compares Adorno’s culturalcritique in The Dialectic of Enlightenment with Nabokov’s concept of ‘‘poshlust ’’ as asserted inhis book Nikolay Gogol, arguing that, despite superficial similarities, Nabokov ‘‘ swervesaway from mass culture in itself to condemn second-rate literature, especially when itmimics and usurps the first-rate. ’’ Anna Brodsky, ‘‘Nabokov’s Lolita and the Post-warEmigre´ Consciousness, ’’ Kultura Russkoi Diaspory : Vladimir Nabokov 100 (Tallinn: TPU¨Kirjastus, 2000), 371–90, argues that Nabokov should be viewed alongside Adorno,Horkheimer, Hannah Arendt and Ernest Bloch as part of an intellectual group which fledfrom Hitler ‘‘ and made the disturbing claim that confidence, conformity, cheerful-ness – qualities they found abundantly in America – lay very close to the springs of evilfrom which totalitarianism had sprung. ’’ She then goes on to read Lolita through thiscritical lens.54 From 1938 to 1949 he stayed in the United States, mainly on the West Coast at MaxHorkheimer’s Institute for Social Research, and later as codirector of a research unit at theUniversity of California, Berkeley. The result of his collaboration with Horkheimer was TheDialectic of Enlightenment (1944, revised 1947), in which the seminal notion of ‘‘ the cultureindustry ’’ was developed under the influence of American mass culture.55 Theodor W. Adorno, Prisms, trans. Shierry and Samuel Weber (London: Neville Spearman,1967), 97–98.Nabokov’s Dystopia 63http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109already reveals the fear of disobedience_ this anxiety is the ultimate lesson of theFascist era.56According to this argument, it is the uncritical acceptance of discoursesoffered for consumption which marks the contact point between the con-sumers of mass culture and those citizens who make totalitarianism possiblethrough their submission. In Bend Sinister Krug makes a similar connectionwhile walking with an enthusiastic Ekwilist :He remembered other imbeciles he and she had studied_ Men who got drunk onbeer in sloppy bars, the process of thought satisfactorily replaced by swine-tonedradio music. Murderers. The respect a business magnate evokes in his home town.Literary critics praising the books of their friends or partisans. Flaubertian farceurs.Fraternities, mystic orders. People who are amused by trained animals. The mem-bers of reading clubs. All those who are because they do not think_57The undistinguished grocer, recipient of Krug’s scorn, becomes symbolic ofthe participation in mass culture alongside authoritarian submission, a manwhose ‘‘best moment of the day ’’ is the return from work, along with ‘‘ somelight music, ’’ ‘‘ enjoying the jokes in the evening paper. ’’ For him, ‘‘ that iswhat we mean by true culture, true human civilization. ’’58 This man’s banaltastes and apparently wholesome hobbies mask a sinister anti-intellectualism,a desire to ‘‘ shoot the smart fellows who raise hell because a few dirty anti-Ekwilists at last got what was coming to them. ’’59The only element of mass culture missing from this episode is cinema, amedium associated elsewhere in the novel with totalitarianism. As I havealready shown, most of the popular novels which Nabokov associates withthe regime in Bend Sinister were also adapted by Hollywood. In addition,several critics have pointed out how film is aligned with mass control andmanipulation in the novel.60 This occurs most stikingly in the episode whichhas Krug (and, refracted through the text, the reader) forced to watch a‘‘movie picture ’’ of his vulnerable, kidnapped son, in an attempt to suggest56 Theodor W. Adorno, The Culture Industry : Selected Essays on Mass Culture, ed. J. M. Bernstein(London: Routledge, 1991), 82–83. 57 Bend Sinister, 15–16.58 Ibid., 23. Nabokov singles out radio as a focus for his critique in both of these quotes.Adorno also refers to it repeatedly, asserting, for example, that ‘‘ it turns all participants intolisteners and authoritatively subjects them to broadcast programs which are all exactly thesame’’ (Adorno and Horkheimer, The Dialectic of Enlightenment, 121).59 Bend Sinister, 24.60 Beverly Gray Bienstock, ‘‘Focus Pocus : Film Imagery in Bend Sinister, ’’ in J. E. Rivers andCharles Nicol, eds., Nabokov’s Fifth Arc : Nabokov and Others on His Life’s Work (Austin :University of Texas Press, 1982), 125–38, 126–27; Barbara Wyllie, Nabokov at the Movies :Film Perspectives in Fiction (London: McFarland, 2003), 180–83.64 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109that the child is still ‘‘healthy and happy, ’’61 when in fact he has been torturedand murdered. For Adorno, cinema is particularly guilty of displaying anartificial and misleading formal unity which mimics the social structurespropagated by Nazism. This ‘‘prearranged harmony is a mockery of whathad to be striven after in the great bourgeois works of art. In Germany thegraveyard stillness of the dictatorship already hung over the gayest films ofthe democratic era. ’’62 Although, as Barbara Wyllie argues,63 Nabokov’sperspective on cinema was often fraught with ambivalence, in Bend Sinister henevertheless shares some ground with Adorno, in viewing it as epitomizing‘‘ the worst of commercially driven populist culture. ’’ It should be noted thatboth Nabokov and Adorno single out The Song of Bernadette, with itsHollywood adaptation, for particular criticism. Adorno writes in The Dialecticof Enlightenment that ‘‘even before Zanuck acquired her, Saint Bernadette wasregarded by her latter-day hagiographer as brilliant propaganda for all inter-ested parties. ’’64 Darryl Zanuck was the notoriously interventionist vice-president of Twentieth Century Fox throughout the 1940s, and directed theadaptation of Maugham’s The Razor’s Edge as well as The Song of Bernadette. Incondemning both producer and author, Adorno assumes a comparable po-sition to Nabokov, in which the equivalence of these two mass forms isestablished.Adorno repeatedly emphasizes the qualities of artificial harmony andhomogeneity in his writings on the culture industry. The paradox of op-pressive freedom and tolerance discussed above in relation to Henri Peyre isarticulated as ‘‘ the freedom to choose what is always the same. ’’65 Thisinterchangeability of individual cultural items is precisely what is enacted byNabokov in the amalgamated titles of the best-sellers by Remarque andothers highlighted in the author’s introduction. It is not only the resemblancebetween items, but also their unified internal structure which renders themworthless for Adorno. As he argues in The Dialectic of Enlightenment,66 indi-vidual details become interchangeable, ‘‘ ready-made cliche´s to be slotted inanywhere ; they never do anything more than fulfill the purpose allotted themin the overall plan. ’’ This subordination of detail to immaculately flawlessplot is symptomatic of the ‘‘ false identity of the general and the particular ’’ inwhich ‘‘ there has ceased to be the slightest tension: these concordant ex-tremes are dismally identical. ’’67 Given Nabokov’s repeated polemics against61 Bend Sinister, 203. 62 Adorno and Horkheimer, 126.63 Wyllie, Nabokov at the Movies, 3 ; idem, ‘‘Nabokov and Cinema, ’’ in Julian Connolly, ed., TheCambridge Companion to Vladimir Nabokov (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2005),215–31, 215. 64 Adorno and Horkheimer, 129.65 Ibid., 167. 66 Ibid., 125. 67 Ibid., 121, 130.Nabokov’s Dystopia 65http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109generalization, and in favour of attention to detail, we can see how his ownaesthetic practice defines itself against these trends in popular culture.68 Wecan also see how the numerous caricatured types in Bend Sinister (such as Mac,the hard-boiled cop turned secret police thug) conform to the logic of theirorigins in subordinating themselves entirely to their plot function. The truedanger of this trend, according to Adorno, is that the falsity of the flawlesssurface might succeed in concealing itself, and become naturalized.Examining Nabokov’s treatment of Mac in the abduction episode, we findthat what appears as an unsettling contrast between plot and style performsthe task which Adorno sets himself in discussing ‘‘ the culture industry ’’ –showing how ‘‘ the lines of its artificial framework begin to show through. ’’69It should also be noted how Adorno’s concerns here overlap with thoseof Tate and the New Critics, who regarded ambiguity and conflict withinthe work as inherent to its value. In this way Adorno participates in theendorsement of modernist difficulty as a means of resisting an entropic de-crease in imaginative and creative activity. Adorno writes in The Dialectic ofEnlightenment of the ‘‘ stunting of the mass media’s consumer’s powers ofimagination and spontaneity, ’’70 while insisting on the effect of popular filmsfor which ‘‘ sustained thought is out of the question. ’’ The ‘‘pleasure ’’ at-tained through the consumption of mass media ‘‘must not demand any effortand therefore moves rigorously in the worn grooves of association. ’’71 If thiscritique, common to Adorno and the New Critics of the 1940s, is borne inmind as we approach Bend Sinister, then the strange jarrings and discordantstyles which its reviewers found so difficult seem much less out of place.Neither should we be surprised at Nabokov consciously writing a novelwhich presents itself as an antidote to the mass culture products on offer atthe time. As Boyd points out),72 Nabokov wrote in a magazine article forWellesley College in 1945 that best-sellers were ‘‘perhaps the worst form ofpropaganda, the propaganda of current ideas, easily digested brain food,fashionable worries ’’ whereas ‘‘brains must work the hard way or lose theircalling and rank. ’’ Adorno employs very similar terminology in the phraseshe uses to describe mass culture : ‘‘pre-digested ’’ and ‘‘baby-food. ’’73 Theshared contempt for the homogeneous uniformity of mass culture leaves aprofound mark on both Bend Sinister and The Dialectic of Enlightenment.Adorno’s critique of mass culture is also strongly tied to notions of tem-porality which find parallels with Nabokov’s own conception of totalitarian68 See note 41 above. 69 Adorno and Horkheimer, 121.70 Ibid., 126–27. 71 Ibid., 137. 72 Boyd, Vladimir Nabokov, 101.73 Adorno, The Culture Industry, 58.66 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109time. Unlike modernist (or, using his terminology, ‘‘bourgeois ’’) art, massculture ‘‘must pay tribute to time in every one of its products. ’’74 WhatAdorno means by time, however, is quite specifically that which excludespast and future, for the homogeneity which characterizes all contemporarymass culture products is present in the dimension of time too:A constant sameness governs the relationship to the past as well. What is new aboutthe phase of mass culture compared with the late liberal stage is the exclusion of thenew. The machine rotates on the same spot. While determining consumption itexcludes the untried as a risk. The movie-makers distrust any manuscript which isnot reassuringly backed by a bestseller. Yet for this very reason there is never-endingtalk of ideas, novelty, and surprise, of what is taken for granted but has never existed.Tempo and dynamics serve this trend. Nothing remains as of old ; everything has torun incessantly, to keep moving. For only the universal triumph of the rhythm ofmechanical production and reproduction promises that nothing changes, andnothing unsuitable will appear.75The similarities between Adorno’s description of the temporality of massculture and Nabokov’s totalitarian time as it is manifested in ‘‘TyrantsDestroyed ’’ and Bend Sinister are found in the limitless extension of thepresent which permanently defers the possibility of a dynamic shift into thefuture, and which effaces all traces of the past. Nabokov describes the timeof Paduk’s regime as a ‘‘gap in history ’’ – a hiatus during which the devel-opment of time is suspended. Adorno, one suspects, is more pessimistic, fora potential end to the culture industry is never articulated. Nevertheless, thestagnation in which ‘‘ the machine rotates on the same spot ’’ recalls not onlythe numerous references to empty, homogeneous, mechanical time in BendSinister, but also episodes in which Krug seems trapped within static events,such as his repeated traversing of the bridge or the torturously protractedwait to discover the fate of his son. It may seem that the drawing of parallelsbetween Adorno’s cultural temporality and the narrative temporality ofNabokov’s novel is misleading, but this is only the case as long as we view(as we have been taught to) his novel as existing in a self-sufficient, isolatedbubble. Bend Sinister is self-reflexive in some surprising ways, for Krug’simprisonment is twofold. In addition to his oppression by a totalitariandictatorship, he is also persecuted by the hegemonic forces of mass culture.Both of these are historically specific to the 1940s, and both are characterizedprimarily by their effect on temporality. As Adorno makes clear, thechief result of the relationship between mass culture and time is the stuntingof innovation – the exclusion of the ‘‘untried as a risk. ’’ Nabokov was74 Ibid., 65. 75 Adorno and Horkheimer, The Dialectic of Enlightenment, 134.Nabokov’s Dystopia 67http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109dedicated to an ideal of literary evolution and innovation, somethingoften overlooked as apparently incompatible with his public ahistoricism.Bend Sinister is no exception, a conscious attempt at overcoming andevolving beyond the uniform homogeneity of American mass culture.‘‘American_ literatures are in a very poor way, ’’ he wrote to the presidentof Wellesley College in 1946, suggesting that the literary malaise which hesaw in Europe and which he articulated in his essay ‘‘Pouchkine, ou le vrai etle vraisemblable ’’ was also present in America.76 Alongside this remark, wemight place his 1944 synopsis for Bend Sinister, which publicized ‘‘a devicenever yet attempted in literature, ’’ as stark a statement as any to indicateNabokov’s self-conscious intent to break clear of contemporary literaryconvention.77Having asserted several points of contact between Nabokov and Adornoin the course of this discussion, I also wish to stress the historical specificityof this unexpecting meeting of two intellectuals in the cultural territoryof 1940s America. Adorno and Nabokov came from two very different in-tellectual traditions. Adorno’s engagement with Marx, which informed thedevelopment of his negative dialectics, distances him from Nabokov’s poli-tics, which emerged from his father’s radical Russian liberalism, andeventually found itself at home in the context of American liberal–conservatism during the Cold War. Nabokov apparently never waiveredfrom his absolute faith in his own aesthetic autonomy, in the ability of his artto trascend mass culture and, by extention, the historical. For Adorno thiswas a false position, for ‘‘ light art has been the shadow of autonomous art. Itis the social bad conscience of serious art. ’’78 These ideological differencesshould not prevent us from placing Nabokov and Adorno together. Rather,they provide the best reason for attempting a reading that does exactly that, areading which dissents from Nabokov’s ‘‘ strong opinions ’’ and uses Adornoto bring his fraught repsonse to the cultural–historical conditions of theintellectual immigration into relief.76 Nabokov, ‘‘Pushkin, or the Real and the Plausible ’’ (Pouchkine, ou le vrai et le vrai-semblable, 1937), trans. Dimitri Nabokov,New York Review of Books, 31 March 1988, 38–42.In this essay, for Nouvelle revue franc¸aise, Nabokov voices concerns over the state of theliterary scene in France – ‘‘we are floundering so far as literature is concerned’’ (42). Boyd,Vladimir Nabokov, 91.77 Nabokov, Selected Letters 1940–1977, ed. Dmitri Nabokov and Matthew J. Bruccoli(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1989), 50.78 Adorno and Horkheimer, The Dialectic of Enlightenment, 135.68 Will Normanhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 04 Nov 2013 IP address: 130.132.173.109By way of conclusion, I wish finally to draw attention to another unpub-lished passage from Nabokov’s teaching notes, written during the SecondWorld War, when he taught at Wellesley College :With the fall of France, the free intellectual life of the Russian e´migre´s has practicallyceased and there is no place in Europe left for them to go on with their work. Theironly hope is, I know, to leave the old world for a country beyond the seas, for thiscountry, where freedom of thought and speech is still as necessary to men as it wasand is to Russian writers worthy of that appellation.79It would be too easy, in reading this passage, to be caught up in the lexicon ofAmerican myth, in the evocations of ‘‘a land beyond the sea, ’’ and ‘‘ freedomof thought and speech. ’’ This is obviously more optimistic than Adorno’sassertion that the new immigrant must ‘‘ eradicate himself as an autonomousbeing in order to achieve anything. ’’80 The key word, though, is ‘‘hope, ’’which is predicated on the possibility of failure. That freedom of thoughtand speech is ‘‘necessary ’’ does not, in the context of American culturalconsumerism, guarantee its continued existence.79 Nabokov, ‘‘Expatriates, ’’ underlining in the manuscript.80 Adorno, Prisms, 97–98.Nabokov’s Dystopia 69