ABSTRACT: 
A substantial body of literature has been produced in the twentieth century by religious and philosophical writers on the ethics of belief. Discussion of this topic has generally focused on the processes leading up to belief within the individual, so that it would not be inaccurate to say that for most of these writers \u27the ethics of belief\u27 means \u27the ethics of coming-to-believe\u27. There has been little attention among these writers, however, to the moral questions which surround the production or inducement of beliefs in others, to the ethics of persuasion. An extension of the ethics of belief to cover moral issues which arise in connection with persuasion seems reasonable; the ethics of belief, widely construed, might be said to encompass questions about both the production of beliefs within oneself and the inducement of beliefs in others. 
 
PREDICTION: 
A substantial body of literature has been produced in the twentieth century by religious and philosophical writers on the ethics of belief. Discussion of this topic has generally focused on the processes leading up to belief within the individual, so that it would not be inaccurate to say that for most of these writers 'the ethics of belief means 'the ethics of coming-to-believe'. There has been little attention among these writers, however, to the moral questions which surround the production or inducement of beliefs in others, to the ethics of persuasion. An extension of the ethics of belief to cover moral issues which arise in connection with persuasion seems reasonable; the ethics of belief, widely construed, might be said to encompass questions about both the production of beliefs within oneself and the inducement of beliefs in others. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Rel. Stud. 19, pp. 437-450ALAN BRINTONAssociate Professor of Philosophy, Boise State University, IdahoST AUGUSTINE AND THE PROBLEM OFDECEPTION IN RELIGIOUS PERSUASIONA substantial body of literature has been produced in the twentieth centuryby religious and philosophical writers on the ethics of belief. Discussion ofthis topic has generally focused on the processes leading up to belief withinthe individual, so that it would not be inaccurate to say that for most of thesewriters 'the ethics of belief means 'the ethics of coming-to-believe'.1 Therehas been little attention among these writers, however, to the moral questionswhich surround the production or inducement of beliefs in others, to theethics of persuasion. An extension of the ethics of belief to cover moral issueswhich arise in connection with persuasion seems reasonable; the ethics ofbelief, widely construed, might be said to encompass questions about boththe production of beliefs within oneself and the inducement of beliefs inothers.While the subject of persuasion has been neglected by twentieth centuryreligious and philosophical writers concerned with the ethics of belief, therehas been a long history of interest in the ethics of persuasion among rhetoricaltheorists, an interest first expressed by Socrates and Plato and culminatingin the twentieth century in a large number of articles appearing inspeech-communication journals on the ethics of rhetoric.21 The point of departure for most of the twentieth-century literature on the ethics of belief is WilliamJames' essay, 'The Will to Believe', in 'The Will to Believe' and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (1897;rpt. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979). Important recent treatments include RobertR. Ammerman, 'Ethics and Belief, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, N.S. LXV (1969), 41-58; RichardM. Gale, 'William James and the Ethics of Belief, American Philosophical Quarterly, xvu (1980), 1-14; VanA. Harvey, 'Is There an Ethics of Belief?', Journal of Religion, XLIX (1969), 41-58, and 'The Ethics ofBelief Reconsidered', Journal of Religion, u x (1979), 406-20; Jack W. Meiland, 'What Ought We toBelieve? or The Ethics of Belief Revisited', American Philosophical Quarterly, xvn (1980), I5-24;H. H. Price,' Belief and Will', Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. xxvm (1954), 1-26; and Bernard Williams,'Deciding to Believe', in Language, Belief, and Metaphysics, eds. H. E. Kiefer and Milton Munitz (Albany:SUNY Press, 1970).2 Among the more significant contributions to the recent literature are B. J. Diggs, 'Persuasion andEthics', Quarterly Journal of Speech, L (1964), 359-73; Richard L. Johannesen, 'Richard M. Weaver onStandards for Ethical Rhetoric', Central States Speech Journal, xxix (1978), 127-37; ChristopherL. Johnstone, 'An Aristotelian Trilogy: Ethics, Rhetoric, Politics, and the Search for Moral Truth',Philosophy and Rhetoric, XIII (1980), 1-24; Richard Murphy, 'Preface to an Ethic of Rhetoric', in TheRhetorical Idiom: Essays in Rhetoric, Oratory, Language and Drama, ed. Donald C. Bryant (NY: Russell andRussell, 1966); William Schrier, 'The Ethics of Persuasion', Quarterly Journal of Speech, xvi (1930), 476-86;and Richard M. Weaver, 'A Responsible Rhetoric', Intercollegiate Review, xn (1976-7), 81-7. For furtherreferences, see F. J . Antczak and A. Brinton, 'The Ethics of Rhetoric: A Bibliography', Rhetoric SocietyQuarterly, xi (1981), 187-90.16 RES 19available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,438 ALAN BRINTONThe ethics of belief, whether construed narrowly or taken in the wider sensesuggested above, is of special interest with respect to religious beliefs. In thisessay, I would like to deal with one of the central problems for the ethicsof religious persuasion, primarily through an examination of views expressedby St Augustine. Augustine's formal education was in rhetorical theory, andhe was himself a teacher of rhetoric. Book iv of his De Doctrina Christiana ishis own formal written treatment of the subject. There are four ethicalproblems for religious persuaders which are either explicitly addressed orsuggested by what is said in De Doctrina. (1) Are techniques of persuasion(for example, the devices of classical rhetoric) appropriate at all in communi-cating religious truth and attempting to bring others to religious belief? (2)Do appeals to emotion have a legitimate role to play in religious persuasion?If so, what is that role? (3) Is it wrong for the religious persuader to aim toplease or entertain hearers? (In other words, what role if any should pleasureplay in religious persuasion?) and (4) Is 'personal salvation' or the eternalgood of the soul an end of such transcending importance as to justify the useof deceptive means in religious persuasion?It is the fourth of these problems, a problem about means and ends, whichis the subject of the present essay; so I will report only briefly what Augustinehas to say on the other three. There might be some doubt about whetherthe first of these four problems is really an ethical problem. But for Augustine,and within the context of classical rhetorical theory, it must be so regarded,since it has to do with the duties of the religious speaker or communicator:What efforts is it the responsibility of the religious speaker to exert? Withinthe framework of Augustine's Christianity, religious belief is from the humanpoint of view a matter of individual choice and from the divine point of viewa matter of the action of the Holy Spirit. Should religious speaking, then,aim to persuade at all? Or should it simply involve a presentation of religioustruth? In other words, should religious speaking just be a matter ofproclamation? Early in Book iv of De Doctrina, Augustine defends the use ofrhetorical skills and devices by the Christian orator on the grounds that thereis nothing inherently objectionable about the tools of rhetoric, since they maybe used for either good or evil. Indeed, his view seems to be that their naturaland highest use is to promote belief in the highest truths. 'Since by meansof the art of rhetoric both truth and falsehood are urged,' he asks, 'who woulddare to say that truth should stand in the person of its defenders unarmedagainst lying?... While the faculty of eloquence, which is of great value inurging either evil or justice, is in itself indifferent, why should it not beobtained for the uses of the good in the service of truth if the evil usurp itfor the winning of perverse and vain causes in defence of iniquity and error? nIn Book iv of De Doctrina, it has been argued, Augustine is coming to terms1 On Christian Doctrine, trans. D. W. Robertson, J r (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1958); all referenceshere are to this edition.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,ST AUGUSTINE AND DECEPTION IN PERSUASION 439with his own classical education in rhetoric. An analogous problem, aboutthe use of principles and precepts in the interpretation of religious doctrine(which is the subject of the other three books of De Doctrina), is dealt within the Prologue.1The problems of emotion and pleasure are really, at least in part, morespecific elaborations of the first problem, since pleasure and emotion areamong the intended effects in the use of rhetorical devices. Augustine raisesthese two issues in connection with Cicero's three 'ends' of rhetoric: to teach(docere), to delight (delectare), and to move (Jlectere).2 Speaking of the secondand third of these ends, Augustine says 'Just as [the hearer] is delighted ifyou speak sweetly, so is he persuaded (flectitur) if he loves what you promise,fears what you threaten, hates what you condemn, embraces what youcommend, sorrows at what you maintain to be sorrowful; rejoices when youannounce something delightful, places pity on those whom you place beforehim in speaking as being pitiful, flees those whom you, moving fear, warnare to be avoided; and is moved by whatever else may be done through grandeloquence toward moving the minds of listeners' (pp. 136—7). Emotion hasoften been regarded as a problem in the ethics of belief and in the ethics ofrhetoric because it seems often, as Plato complained, to interfere withreasoning. There is no indication in De Doctrina that Augustine thinks thatemotion has any legitimate role to play in the formation of belief. Theultimate end of rhetoric for Augustine, however, is to change hearers andmove them to action. Sometimes belief by itself will be enough to effect thesechanges; but when it will not, eloquent appeals to the emotions may berequired: 'When it is necessary, it is to be done, and it is necessary whenthey know what should be done but do not do it ' (p. 137).Pleasure has sometimes been regarded as problematic in rhetoric when theaim is to entertain or flatter hearers rather than to improve them or movethem to necessary courses of action. It presents a special problem forAugustine, since he holds that one ought not to take pleasure in anythingfor its own sake, except those things which are eternal and immutable.3 Buthe justifies the pleasing of hearers in Chapters 12-14 of Book iv on thegrounds that it is needed by religious speakers to get and keep the attentionof their hearers.There is a conception of rhetoric which has its origins in Socrates and Plato;which threads its way through the writings of a number of important classical1 For an insightful discussion of Augustine's intentions in writing Bk. iv of De Doctrina, see JamesJ. Murphy, 'St. Augustine and the Debate about a Christian Rhetoric', Quarterly Journal of Speech, XLVI(i960), 400-10.2 For the Latin text of Bk. rv, with commentary, see A. Aurelii Augustini, De Doctrina Cristiana liberquartus, trans. Sister Therese Sullivan, Catholic Univ. Patristic Studies, vol. xxm (Washington, D.C.:193°)-3 Book 1, Ch. xxii. For an even more austere account of the role of pleasure in rhetoric, see FrancoisFenelon, Dialogues on Eloquence, trans. Wilbur S. Howell (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951),which originally appeared in 1717.16-2available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,440 ALAN BRINTONrhetoricians; and which seems particularly suited to religious persuasion, atleast within the Christian tradition. This conception arose partly out ofethical concerns, and it gives rise to at least two fundamental principles ofethical persuasion. It will be worth our while to take a brief but careful lookat it before dealing with Augustine's fourth problem, since some attentionto it will help us to appreciate more fully the nature of that problem, andsince Augustine seems to be influenced by this conception.Plato has often been regarded as an enemy of rhetoric on account of hisattacks on the Sophists, especially for his criticisms in the two dialogues whichare explicitly about rhetoric, the Gorgias and the Phaedrus. A central questionin the Gorgias is whether rhetoric is truly an art {techne) as Gorgias claims it tobe. When Gorgias and Socrates speak of rhetoric, they are both concernedwith the persuasive use of discourse (as is Augustine). Gorgias, like mostGreek and Roman rhetoricians, is thinking more exclusively than Socratesin terms of public speaking. But they agree that rhetoric has to do with verbalpersuasion. Socrates seems in the Gorgias and elsewhere to have two mainreasons, in addition to the inability of rhetoricians to explain the nature oftheir activity, for thinking that rhetoric as he knows it to have been practicedis not an art. One reason is that its proponents do not know or emphasizetheir subject-matter and are concerned with appearances rather than reality.The other reason is that in practicing rhetoric Gorgias and others do not aimto benefit and improve their hearers; they aim instead at their own benefit.It is Plato's view that a genuine techne has by definition a telos, an end at whichit aims, which is the improvement and well-being of that on which itoperates; the Sophistic rhetoricians, however, aim at their own enrichment,and only flatter and entertain their hearers.These criticisms - that rhetoricians fail to take their subject-matterseriously and that they show little concern for the well-being of their hearers- emerge at two stages in the Gorgias: in the initial exchange between Socratesand Gorgias, and in the well-known comparison between rhetoric andcookery in Socrates' discussion with Polus. The problem about subject-matterarises when Gorgias claims at 452 that the skilled orator will be morepersuasive, even on a subject on which he is relatively ignorant, than theexpert, and that rhetoric is the greatest of goods since it gives its practitionersfreedom to do as they please and power over others. All the orator has todo is manage appearances, so that real knowledge is unnecessary. Gorgiasanticipates moral objections about the uses of rhetoric by arguing that it issimply a set of skills, a neutral tool which may be used for either good orevil ends. The view expressed here by Gorgias, which we may refer to as ' theinstrumental view of rhetoric', is characteristic of Sophistic rhetoric andpervades much of classical rhetorical theory. Plato not only regards theinstrumental view as morally objectionable; he also refuses to dignify themere mastery of skills by regarding it as a techne.Both of Plato's criticisms of Sophistic rhetoric are made strongly in theavailable at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,ST AUGUSTINE AND DECEPTION IN PERSUASION 44Icomparison between rhetoric and cookery at 462 D ff. Cookery simulateswhat medicine does. One of the concerns of the art of medicine is to determinewhich foods are good for the human body and under what circumstances— in other words, medicine is concerned with nutrition. So the physician takesan interest in various kinds of foods and the effects they have on the body;and, by definition, medicine aims at making and keeping the body healthy.Cookery, on the other hand, is concerned with making food seem good. Itis a form of'flattery' (of the food); it adorns food, makes it attractive. Andit aims to delight the eater, producing pleasure in the body rather thanimproving and maintaining it. As cookery is to the body, so Sophistic rhetoricis to the soul. It is concerned with the appearance of its subject-matter ratherthan with its true nature, and its only concern with hearers is that they bepersuaded, usually for the benefit of the persuader.Had Plato gone no further than these criticisms, he might truly be saidto be an enemy of rhetoric, although there are already in his criticisms hintsof what a true techne of rhetoric would be. In the Gorgias, Socrates eventuallysuggests the possibility of a 'right sort of rhetorician', one who is really 'justand well-informed of the ways of justice', and the context indicates that sucha rhetorician would be concerned with improving souls.1 But Plato goes muchfurther in the Phaedrus. After criticizing sample speeches, Socrates says thatthere is no shame in writing or delivering speeches: 'The disgrace', he says,'consists in speaking or writing not well, but disgracefully and badly' (258D).'Speaking well,' as the notion is developed in the Phaedrus, will qualify as atechne, since it is based upon the appropriate sorts of knowledge and since itaims at the improvement of souls. Two sorts of knowledge essential tospeaking well are emphasized in the Phaedrus: knowledge of the ' truth of thematters' about which the orator is to speak (259E), and knowledge of thenature of the soul. The true orator will understand the nature of souls partlyfrom a desire to improve them through the practice of the true art of rhetoric.As Richard Weavers points out in his analysis of the Phaedrus, it is no accidentthat the sample speeches are about eros; since, according to the conceptionof eros developed by Plato in the Phaedrus and the Symposium, the true loveraims at improving the soul of the beloved.2In his defence of the use of rhetorical skills by religious persuaders,Augustine appears perhaps to endorse an intrumental view of rhetoric, sincehe says that it is in itself'indifferent' (in medio posita). But this is, I think,only an appearance.3 However, even if Augustine does view rhetoric in1 508c, trans. W. R. M. Lamb in the Loeb Classical Library (1925; rpt. Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press, 1975). Further references to Plato, as here, will be by Stephanus page numbers.References to the Phaedrus are to the H. N. Fowler translation, also in the Loeb Classical Library (1914;rpt. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1966).* Richard M. Weaver, The Ethics of Rhetoric (South Bend, Indiana: Regnery/Gateway, 1953), chap,i.3 While Augustine does hold that rhetorical skills may be turned to either good or evil purposes, thereare good reasons for thinking that his commitment to the instrumental view is only apparent. The passageavailable at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,442 ALAN BRINTONgeneral as neutral, it is clear that he views religious rhetoric in teleologicalterms, as aiming by its very nature to benefit hearers. So, at the very least,religious rhetoric is for Augustine what the true art of rhetoric is for Plato.Plato's conception of rhetoric is motivated by ethical considerations as wellas by his view of the true nature oitechne, and it suggests two norms for ethicalpersuasion which are particularly applicable in religious contexts: (i) thatresponsible persuasion involves a genuine concern for subject-matter, for the'message' in persuasion, and (2) that responsible persuasion involves agenuine concern for the character and well-being of the person beingpersuaded. Both of these principles will be important in our discussion of theproblem of deception in religious persuasion. Religious rhetoric for Augustineaims to influence hearers toward a commitment to religious truth in orderto secure the eternal well-being of their souls. The emphasis on the eternalgood of hearers as a teleos is, of course, the source of the difficulty about meansand ends. And we may anticipate that the emphasis on a commitment tosubject-matter will be for Augustine part of the solution to that difficulty.The question of ends and means is perhaps the thorniest of ethical problemsin religious persuasion. Let us begin by putting the difficulty in the barestand crudest of terms. Suppose that one small deception will make thedifference: that without it a soul will go down in unbelief into eternaltorments, while with it that same soul will go off into eternal bliss. Supposeeven that the deception is a sin, a punishable offence. Are not littledeceptions, thoughtless little deceptions, common enough already in ourdaily lives, and for much less noble purposes? Could the consequences, forthe persuader, of some small well-intended sin possibly outweigh the prospectof eternal punishment for the potential convert? Or, even supposing theharshest of penalties for the deceiver, would not the deception in questionbe the noblest of personal sacrifices?Many religious people still have, as Augustine had, such conceptions ofthe consequences of belief and nonbelief. For them the problem at hand ismost intense. But for those who reject such conceptions but maintain thatreligious belief is the means to achieving the highest good for human beings,there is an essentially similar problem. If the highest of goods is to be attainedthrough belief, and if belief will come only through deception, is it not atleast excusable for the religious persuader to set aside scruples about accuracyand full truthfulness on appropriate occasions?So baldly stated, the case for deception in religious persuasion seemsobviously perverse. At the same time, many actual religious persuaders .itself suggests that he believes that the natural use of rhetoric is to promote truth, and that its use topromote false belief is a perversion, a usurpation. As is well known, Augustine holds that evil is a privation,involving the absence of something which ought to be present or the distortion of things which are inthemselves good. In De Magistro, he expresses the view that the natural end of human language andcommunication is to communicate the truth. The highest end of rhetoric, then, will be to promote thehighest of truths.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,ST AUGUSTINE AND DECEPTION IN PERSUASION 443apparently find its logic irresistible. This is not to say that deceptive religiouspersuaders typically run consciously through such a line of reasoning beforebending the truth; but at least while they are in the process of persuading,many religious persuaders are in fact moved to compromise the truth, andoccasionally to tell lies, by the importance of the end which they have in view,the eternal (or even the temporal) well-being of the persons they aim topersuade.The problem of the legitimacy or the usefulness of deception in religiouspersuasion is not explicitly raised in De Doctrina, although that book doesinclude some comments on lying. The issue is raised, however, in De Mendacioand in Contra Mendacium.1 These two books deal with the general question,'Ought one ever to tell a lie?' Our concern is in one respect wider thanAugustine's and in another respect narrower. It is wider in that we areinterested here in distortions of the truth in general, and not just in lies. Itis narrower in that it is just in the context of religious persuasion that wewill be concerned about deception. It will be an advantage to argumentsagainst the use of deception in religious persuasion if they are independentof the answer to Augustine's general question. He himself ends up arguingthat one ought never to lie. On the other hand, Augustine takes this positionwith some hesitation; but then he argues that even if there are some casesin which a lie is excusable one must never lie on matters of Christian doctrine.In his two books on lying, Augustine identifies a variety of kinds of casesin which a lie might be thought to be morally acceptable. The kind of casewhich concerns us is one in which the eternal well-being of a soul is at stake.He considers three such cases as examples. Two of these cases are broughtup in Chapter 11 of De Mendacio, when Augustine suggests that some maythink it right to lie on behalf of another person ' that he may live the while,or not be offended in those things which he much loveth, to the end thathe may attain unto eternal truth by being taught' (p. 463). The third caseis raised in Contra Mendacium:But sometimes a peril to eternal salvation is put forth against us; which peril, theycry out, we by telling a lie, if otherwise it cannot be, must ward off. As, for instance,if a person who is to be baptized be in the power of impious and infidel men, andcannot be got at that he may be washed with the laver of regeneration, but bydeceiving his keepers with a lie. From this most invidious cry, by which we arecompelled, not for a man's wealth or honors in this world which are fleeting by, notfor the life itself of this present time, but for the eternal salvation of a human being,to tell a lie, whither shall I betake me for refuge but unto thee, O truth? (p. 499)There is a fourth case which provided the occasion for the writing of ContraMendacium. The book was written by Augustine in order to dissuade his friend1 Both works are translated by the Rev. H. Browne in The Niceru and Post-Niceru Fathers of the ChristianChurch, ed. Philip Schaff (1887; rpt. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1976), vol. m. The commentson lying in De Doctrina are in chapter xxxvi of Bk. i; Augustine admits there, as elsewhere in his writings,that a person may benefit from being deceived.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,444 ALAN BRINTONConsentius from using deception to infiltrate the Priscillianist heresy. Amongthe doctrines of the Priscillianists, ironically, was the view that religious liesare sometimes not only acceptable, but commendable. Consentius and someother Catholics were pretending to accept Priscillianist teachings which theyactually rejected, in order to infiltrate and expose the heretics. One gathersfrom Augustine's discussion that one of the justifications for using this tacticmust have been that some of the exposed heretics would eventually come tosaving belief.So we have four cases: (i) lying to preserve someone's life, in the hope oflater conversion; (2) lying to keep a potential convert from being offendedand thus turned away from the saving truth; (3) lying to free a man fromcaptors, so that he may receive saving baptism; and (4) lying in order toinfiltrate the camp of heretics, in the hope that they will eventually beconverted.In dealing with the first two cases, in Chapter 11 of De Mendacio, Augustinegives two arguments against lying. I will call these 'the adultery argument'and 'the authority argument'. The adultery argument is an example of whatis sometimes called 'an argument by logical analogy'. The advocate of suchlies does not understand, says Augustine, 'that there is no flagitious thingwhich he may not upon the same grounds be compelled to commit' (p. 463).This is a favourite argument of Augustine's in both of his books on lying;I call it 'the adultery argument' because his favourite analogy with lyingas a means is adultery or lewdness as a means. It is the sole argument whichhe gives in discussing case (3) in Contra Mendacium: 'For why, if those keepersmay be enticed to admit us to baptize the man, by our committing lewdness,do we refuse to do things contrary to chastity, and yet, if by a lie they maybe deceived, consent to do things contrary to truth ?' (p. 499). If the salvationof an eternal soul as an end will justify lying as a means, Augustine argues,then it will justify adultery or anything else that might conceivably serve thesame end. That adultery or lewdness could be justifiable under anycircumstances seems to Augustine to be utterly out of the question.The essence of the authority argument is expressed in Augustine'sobjection that by lying in cases (1) or (2) 'the authority of the doctrine itselfis cut off and altogether undone' (p. 463). There are, however, two differentsenses in which this might be taken, and so two different versions of theauthority argument. We shall return to it and them shortly.Notice that the first and third of our four examples involve lying tosomeone other than the potential convert, and that neither is likely to involvethe deceptive manipulation of religious subject-matter (although eithermight). Lying to save someone's life or to free someone from captors is notlikely to either involve or be a part of religious persuasion. These two casesare essentially like the case of lying to save someone's life under more ordinarycircumstances (which Augustine discusses in some detail in both books onavailable at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,ST AUGUSTINE AND DECEPTION IN PERSUASION 445lying). It is as if the Devil came steaming up to us in pursuit of some souland asked 'Which way did it go?' The objection to lying in such cases willbe a general objection to lying as a means. The adultery argument is justsuch a general objection. It is not an objection which applies especially tothe context of religious persuasion. It is an objection to ever using lying asa means to any end, no matter how important. And it is an objection whichis unlikely to convince those who can imagine circumstances in which theywould feel justified in lying to save a human life. Their instincts aboutcommitting adultery to save an eternal soul are likely to be the same, if theycan really conceive of circumstances in which such an option would arise.The authority argument, unlike the adultery argument, is more specificallyan objection to deception in persuasion, especially to deception in religiouspersuasion. Cases (2) and (4), the lie to avoid offending potential convertsand the lie to infiltrate the camp of heretics, are more typical instances ofdeception as a part of religious persuasion. Case (4), as it arises for Augustinein connection with attempts by Consentius to expose the Priscillianistheretics, is peculiar. But it is an instance of a common phenomenon inreligious persuasion: the persuader feigns common interests or associationsor beliefs with nonbelievers, or otherwise approaches them by means ofdeception, in order to get among them and obtain a favourable hearing. Forexample, a religious worker on a campus pretends to be a student, or a churchmember on door to door visitation claims to be merely taking an opinionpoll, or a religious speaker pretends to share religious or other beliefs withan audience. Case (4), then, may be taken as a peculiar representative ofa more common tactic: making use of deception in order to get a hearing.So taken, it is essentially like case (2), which involves the use of deceptionin order to avoid losing a favourable hearing. It is characteristic of the ancientrhetoric handbooks, with which Augustine was no doubt familiar, that theyrecommend the use of various techniques, some involving deception, to makeaudiences receptive.1 It is likely that in discussing case (2) Augustine has suchrecommendations in mind. The discussion of the role of delighting in DeDoctrina makes it clear that Augustine does not object to efforts to makeaudiences receptive; but he does object to the use of deception for thatpurpose.Cases (2) and (4) are instances of what we may call 'external' deception;they are preparatory or attendant to the presentation of the religiousmessage. They may or may not involve misrepresentation of religioussubject-matter or doctrine. Their aim is to create and maintain a favourablecontext for persuasive argumentation. 'Internal' deception in religious1 See, for instance, the Rhetorica ad Alexandrum, trans. H. Rackham, in the Loeb Classical Library (1937;rpt. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965), chs. 29-34; a n ^ the Rhetorica adHerennium, trans.Harry Caplan, also in the Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1954),Bk. 1, ch. vi. There is also some discussion of such techniques in Aristotle's Art of Rhetoric, trans. J. H. Freese,Loeb Classical Library (1926; rpt. Cambridge, 1975), Bk. in, chs. 14 ff.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,446 ALAN BRINTONpersuasion, on the other hand, will be a matter of what goes on within theprocess of persuasive argumentation itself; and it will involve distortion ormisrepresentation of the religious subject-matter itself, either in its contentor in its supports. Since the distinction between the context of argumentationand argumentation itself is relative, the distinction between external andinternal deception will not be absolute. The two will tend to merge into oneanother, and there will be borderline cases. But the main difference is thatexternal deception need not involve deceptive handling of religious subject-matter; and, when it does, the misrepresentations are more superficial.Internal deception, on the other hand, essentially operates with the subject-matter, and it involves the deceptive manipulation of the very processes bywhich the persuaded will come to belief. The typical devices of internaldeception are the familiar 'tricks of dishonest argument', such as theintentional use of equivocations, various forms of begging the question, theuse of ridicule or other diversionary tactics to evade serious objections,outright falsification or misrepresentation of evidence, ad hominem attacks onopponents, and distortion of opposing points of view (for example, fasteningon and magnifying some trivial aspect of the opponent's position). These sortsof tactics are employed in essentially the same ways in religious persuasionas they are elsewhere; they have been widely discussed in logic books andneed no special treatment in connection with the religious context.Let us return now to the authority argument. There are, as I mentionedearlier, two senses in which the 'authority of doctrine' might be 'cut off andundone', and thus there are two different versions or levels of the authorityargument. It is the first of these two senses which seems to be most directlyapplicable to external cases such as case (2), and which is emphasized inAugustine's formulation of the argument in Chapter 11 of De Mendacio: thecredibility of the messenger will be undermined by lying. ' How can therebe any believing one who thinks it is sometimes right to lie?' Augustine asks.The credibility argument, while mainly pragmatic rather than moral, is notto be taken lightly and is not without moral import. Augustine appeals toit on several occasions in both De Mendacio and Contra Mendacium. Althoughwe are looking for arguments which will not depend upon or entail the claimthat every lie is wrong, it must at least be allowed that there is a moralpresumption against lying. Any moral justification for deception in religiouspersuasion in terms of the importance of ends will have to overcome thatpresumption and is likely to depend upon pragmatic considerations, uponthe potential effectiveness of deception as a means. The religious persuader,like the secular orator dealing with questions of morality, must have a specialconcern with credibility and with appearances. Such a persuader is not likelyto be effective without at least the appearance of a deep commitment to truthand truthfulness. According to several of Augustine's important predecessorsin rhetorical theory (especially Isocrates and Quintilian), such an appearanceavailable at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,ST AUGUSTINE AND DECEPTION IN PERSUASION 447is unlikely if not impossible unless the commitment is actual. Augustinehimself stresses the character and reputation of the Christian orator in thelast few chapters of De Doctrina; and it seems clear that moral uprightnessand truthfulness, are, for Augustine, not only important for effectiveness, butare also fitting for the bearer of such a message.The second and more important sense in which Augustine thinks that theauthority of the doctrine might be ' undone' is that the religious message itselfmight be corrupted by deception. Let us call the second version of theauthority argument' the integrity argument'. It is the integrity of the subject-matter, rather than that of the persuader, which is the issue in the integrityargument. The message itself is corrupted when the religious subject-matteris manipulated deceptively. Falsifications or distortions involving religiousdoctrine are, for Augustine, the most deplorable of deceptions. While thereis room for discussion about other sorts of lies, under no circumstanceswhatever are lies to be told on matters of religious doctrine. In Chapter 25of De Mendacio, Augustine says ' first to be eschewed is that capital lie andfar to be fled from, which is done in the doctrine of religion; to which liea man ought by no consideration to be induced'. He says the same in Chapter37 and then in Chapter 42 says 'There must therefore be no lying in thedoctrine of piety: it is a heinous wickedness, and the first sort of detestablelie.' Even 'unto eternal salvation', he adds, 'none is to be led by aid of alie'.The argument in support of these condemnations is given most explicitlyin Chapter 40 of De Mendacium, in which Augustine is making a comparisonbetween 'pudicity of body, and chastity of soul, and verity of doctrine', thelast of which he judges to be most important. 'Verity of doctrine, of religionand piety', he argues, 'is not violated unless by a lie.' Piety in this life hesees as grounded in doctrine and truth, 'which by lying is possible to becorrupted' and ' is most of all to be kept incorrupt'. There is the unmistakableimplication in Augustine's pronouncements that doctrinal truth is moreimportant than the eternal destiny of particular human souls. So hiscommitment to the first of Plato's emphases (subject-matter) is deeper thanhis commitment to the second (well-being of hearers).There is another brief but interesting line of argument in Contra Mendaciowhich involves the emphasis on subject-matter and which is related toAugustine's view of the nature and function of language. At the beginningof that book, Augustine suggests that there is a sort of inconsistency in usinglies to expose the false doctrines of heretics and to promote the truth. Then,near the end of the book there is an attempt to develop this suggestion intoan argument:How does lying take into itself truth as its patroness? Or, is it for her own adversarythat she conquers, that by herself she may be conquered? Who can bear thisabsurdity? In no wise therefore may we say, that they who assert that it is sometimesavailable at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,448 ALAN BRINTONright to lie, in asserting that are truthful; lest, what is most absurd and foolish tobelieve, truth should teach us to be liars But then if this thing truth teaches not,it is not true; if not true, it is not meet to be learned; if not meet to be learned, nevertherefore is it meet to tell a lie. (Chap. 38)Augustine holds, then, that there is an incoherence of some kind in thinkingthat lies can serve the truth or that the truth can commend lying. The precisenature of this incoherence is not explained; and, in fact, it is not clear thatthere is any logical difficulty in the notion that a lie might do more tomaximize the number of true instances of believing in the world than wouldany alternative true utterance. On the other hand, there does seem to behypocrisy on the part of the religious persuader who uses lies in the nameof truth; and we shall see shortly that this provides the basis for a moredefinite argument against the use of lies, an argument which appliesespecially to the context of religious persuasion.Classical rhetorical theory, especially after the time of Aristotle, typicallythought of rhetorical situations in terms of a division into three elements: (1)the speaker, (2) the speech or message, and (3) the audience. Plato's idealrhetoric, as we saw earlier, places emphasis on the second and third of theseelements, and gives rise to two general obligations for the persuader: acommitment to the subject-matter and a commitment to the well-being ofhearers. The difficulty about ends and means, as it has been raised here, arisesout of a disproportionate and restricted emphasis on the third of the threeelements and on the second of Plato's two principles. Of the two versions ofthe authority argument, we might say that the credibility argument emphasizesthe speaker, mostly in practical term, but with ethical overtones. The role ofthe speaker in persuasion is discussed in classical rhetorical theory in termsof the notion of ethos, which has two senses which correspond to the pragmaticand moral aspects of the credibility argument: ethos may refer to thereputation of the speaker, or it may refer to the actual character of thespeaker.1 On the other hand, the integrity argument emphasizes the message.These are the two main objections which Augustine offers against deceptionin religious persuasion. A third main objection, however, one which involvesan emphasis on audience, may be developed within the context of Augustine'spoint of view.Let us call the third main objection to deception in religious persuasion' the autonomy argument'.2 It has reference to hearers, but with an emphasis1 See William M. Sattler, 'Conceptions of Ethos in Ancient Rhetoric', Speech Monographs, XII (1947),55-65. There are, however, complications, some of which arise from the fact that the ancients were lessinclined than we are to distinguish sharply actual character from reputation, and others of which arisefrom etymological considerations. See Thomas E. Corts, 'The Derivation of Ethos', CommunicationMonographs, xxxv (1968), 201-2.2 The issue of autonomy has been addressed in a more general way by a number of writers on theethics of rhetoric. See, for example, Diggs, p. 372; Franklyn S. Haiman, 'A Re-Examination of the Ethicsof Persuasion', Central States Speech Journal, in (1952), 1-9; and Douglas H. Parker, 'Rhetoric, Ethics andManipulation', Philosophy and Rhetoric, v (1972), 69-87.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,ST AUGUSTINE AND DECEPTION IN PERSUASION 449on their status as autonomous moral and spiritual beings who are entitledto make their own decisions, rather than an emphasis on their eternal destiny.This emphasis is analogous to that which the integrity argument places onthe message: just as there ought to be a respect for subject-matter, so thereshould be a respect for persons being persuaded. This principle of respect forthe autonomy of hearers has a special significance in religious persuasion, andparticularly within the context of Augustinian Christianity. The nature ofreligious faith for Augustine is such that it essentially involves a consciousdecision which is really the individual's own decision. In fact, for Augustineit is part of the message itself that the individual must consciously make sucha decision, at least this is so from the human point of view.Now we can see why there is after all a kind of incoherence or inconsistencyin using deception to bring about saving faith. It is not really saving faithin so far as it is not a matter of the believer's own decision; and it is not thebeliever's own decision in so far as it is the work of deception. The ethicaldimension of this for the religious persuader is also clear: the persuader cannotethically intend anything less than that the decision for religious faith iswholly (from the human point of view) the hearer's own autonomousdecision; to intend anything less is inconsistent with a full commitment to thecontent of the message itself. The problem of deception in religious persuasionis, like the appropriateness problem which was discussed earlier, a difficultyabout the role of the persuader. I mentioned earlier that, within the contextof Augustinian Christianity, religious faith is from the divine point of viewa matter of the action of the Holy Spirit and from the human point of viewa matter of individual choice. Augustine argues in De Doctrina that a totalrejection of the use of persuasive devices unduly minimizes the role of thereligious persuader as an instrument in bringing others to belief. The use ofdeception, on the other hand, unduly magnifies the role of the persuader:from the divine point of view it has the persuader usurping the role of theHoly Spirit, while from the human point of view it has the persuader usurpingthe role of the convert. But, since this latter usurpation involves a meddlingin and corrupting of the very processes which are the determiners of belief,it makes the production of religious faith by deception logically incoherent.1The centrepiece of an Augustinian ethics of religious persuasion is themessage itself. There are obligations which have to do with the speaker'scharacter; these arise in part out of pragmatic considerations, but the centralpoint for Augustine seems to be that there should be a kind of consistencybetween the character of the speaker and the content of the message.1 This same line of argument will apply within the context of Plato's view of the true art of rhetoric,in which the 'lover' aims to improve the soul of the 'beloved', since this improvement is to be understoodin terms of the education of the reasoning part of the soul and in terms of the soul's acquiring noesis. Thecontrast between deceptive seduction of the soul and its genuine improvement is nicely drawn in the earlypages of Plato's Lysis, in the playful banter between Socrates and Hippothales, who has his sights set onLysis.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,45° ALAN BRINTONSecondly, there are obligations which arise out of the importance of thesubject-matter; it ought not to be corrupted with falsehoods or distortions.And, thirdly, there are obligations to the person being persuaded; these arepartly a matter of concern for the eternal well-being, but also partly a matterof the autonomy of the person. We have been concerned chiefly with theproblem of deception; but a good deal of what has been said ought to beapplicable to other ethical problems in religious persuasion.available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S003441250001547XDownloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Open University Library, on 11 Feb 2017 at 04:59:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,