ABSTRACT: 
This is a pre-copyedited, author-produced version of an article accepted for publication in American Literary History following peer review. The version of record: "Patterson, Anita. "T. S. Eliot and Transpacific Modernism." American Literary History, vol. 27 no. 4, 2015, pp. 665-682." is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1093/alh/ajv042.Japonisme is a term often used to describe the shaping effects of Japanese culture and aesthetics on European art, but by the 1880s a similar trend emerged in the US, influencing popular culture as well as fine arts and poetry. This essay examines how Japonisme figured T. S. Eliot's development as a poet, focusing on Boston as a world city that was rapidly becoming global. It shows how Kakuzo Okakura, an art historian and curator of Asian art at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts during the time when Eliot was a Harvard undergraduate, and Masaharu Anesaki, a pioneer in the study of comparative religion who lectured on Mahayana Buddhism there when Eliot was a graduate student, inspired transpacific intercultural dialogue that would last the poet a lifetime. Eliot's formative encounter with Okakura and Anesaki raised his awareness of his family history in a region with longstanding ties to Asia; it nurtured his ambivalent engagement with such Boston-area writers as Emerson, whose prior interest in Confucianism laid a foundation for Eliot's modernism; and the encounter taught Eliot valuable lessons about moral action and impersonality, culminating in poems such as Four Quartets. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article explores how T. S. Eliot’s most formative transpacific encounters occurred in Boston as a world city where universities and other institutions fostered a commitment to higher learning, a commitment that helped people to open their hearts and minds, and to bridge cultural divides. Eliot’s most formative transpacific encounters occurred in Boston as a world city where universities and other institutions fostered a commitment to higher learning, a commitment that helped people to open their hearts and minds, and to bridge cultural divides. We need to revisit poets like Eliot, and the vast, valuable archive of criticism in modernist and American studies, to better grasp their enduring relevance to globalization. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Boston at the turn of the twentieth century had not yet fully developed into what Saskia Sassen calls a contemporary “global city.” But it was already, in Peter Hall’s sense, a “world city,” and was well on its way to becoming global. As a center of political power, finance, and national and international trade, Boston was a city whose sea-faring tradition made it one of the world's wealthiest ports and whose maritime trade connections to Asia were familiar to Eliot well before his years as a student. Eliot’s great-grandfather, William Greenleaf Eliot, Sr., had been a New Bedford ship-owner, and Eliot and his brother were taught to sail, according to his cousin Samuel Eliot Morison, by an “ancient mariner of Gloucester” (234). At Harvard, in a 1909 article written for the Advocate, Eliot recalls a glorious bygone era, during the late eighteenth century, when Salem merchants and mariners worked to open a passage to Asia, transforming the region into a prosperous center for international trade. “Go to Salem and see a town that flourished a hundred years ago in the 3    hightide of New England’s naval energy,” Eliot writes, recalling the heroism of explorer- entrepreneurs who played such a pivotal role in the emergence of a great nation: Where is the China fleet now? The clumsy barks that sailed to every part of the world? . . . Of the freights which the boats carried in are left only the shawls, the ginger-jars, the carved ivory which the captains brought back from the Orient, the gifts which their descendants are proud to display. . . . The sea trade of the Yankees is gone. (“Gentleman and Seaman” 22) Eliot’s interest in Asia began early in life. Tatsuo Murata and Tatsushi Narita have shown that even as a young boy, when he first learned about Buddhism from Edwin Arnold’s Light of Asia (1879), Eliot was precocious in his concern with transpacific cross-culturality, even at a time when serious hostilities were breaking out between the US and the Philippines. Narita argues that much of Eliot’s later work defining poetry in its relationship to savagery and civilization—remarks informed by his readings in social science by James Frazer, Jane Harrison, Émile Durkheim, Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, and others— derives in part from his active interest in the Philippines and his encounter with Igorot performers from the Bontoc Province when, in May 1904, Eliot attended the World’s Fair in St. Louis (Murata “Buddhism” 22-23; Narita 30-32). In his Advocate essay, Eliot’s reference to imported curios and artifacts, so common in the domestic decor of well-to-do townhouses in Boston, indicates his awareness that the first stirrings of US interest in East Asian art, which would result in the flourishing of Japonisme during the latter half of the nineteenth century, centered on the old clipper ports of New England. There, as in Europe, interest in Japanese art was at first restricted to a few artists and specialist collectors. This would change, however, in 1876 when the Japanese exhibit at the 4    Philadelphia Centennial Exposition helped to set off what Edward Sylvester Morse would call a “Japan craze” (xxvii). William Hosley has shown how, by the 1880s, Japonisme had become a popular trend that shaped US decor, architecture, and popular culture as much as it did aesthetic debates and the development of fine arts.3 The shallow trendiness of this enthusiasm in Boston was not lost on Eliot, who considered it a symptom of a more serious and widespread problem, namely, the inability of US elites to achieve a true appreciation for art instead of mere “refinement,” a blind capitulation to popular conceptions of good taste. In a 1919 letter, Eliot described “culture” and “cultivation” as wholly distinct from the “mass of chaotic erudition” and habitual, thoughtless “assimilation of other people’s personal tastes” that is wrongly considered the mark of “civilization” in American life (“Letter to Mary Hutchinson” 377). The problem with prevailing attitudes towards Asian artworks, he said, is that people “have not the training to know what these have in common with our traditional art” (377). Eliot’s dawning comprehension of Asia’s shaping cultural presence in New England, and in his own maturation as a person and a poet is evident in “Mandarins,” a lyric sequence composed in August 1910, a little over a year after Eliot graduated from college, and the summer before he received his M.A. in philosophy from Harvard. As Frances Dickey has demonstrated, the sequence alludes to the characteristic use of color titles in paintings by Japonistes such as James McNeill Whistler, whose exhibits in Boston Eliot attended as an undergraduate (93-4).4 The opening poem portrays a mandarin, a Confucian scholar- bureaucrat, who is distinctly yet ambiguously East Asian: Stands there, complete, 5    Stiffly addressed with sword and fan: What of the crowds that ran, Pushed, stared, and huddled, at his feet, Keen to appropriate the man? Indifferent to all these baits Of popular benignity He merely stands and waits Upon his own intrepid dignity; With fixed regardless eyes— Looking neither out nor in— The centre of formalities. A hero! and how much it means; How much— The rest is merely shifting scenes. (“Mandarins” 19) Eliot’s portrait of this scholar-bureaucrat explores what T. J. Jackson Lears has called the “antimodern impulse” in the US, when the “rationalization of economic life . . . was moving into high gear” (9). In addition, the transformation of work into a “new bureaucratic world” (60) prompted members of the educated, affluent elites in New England to “recoil from an ‘overcivilized’ modern existence” as they sought moral and spiritual regeneration in Asian cultures (xv). It bears mentioning as well that Max Weber lectured at the same 1904 World’s Fair, that Eliot also attended, as part of the philosopher’s three-month US tour in that would 6    centrally inform his theories about capitalism, bureaucracy, and rational modes of social action in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905) (Scaff 6,15).5 The sword and fan in Eliot’s poem indicate that it is set, not in China, but in Japan under the Tokugawa shogunate, during the Edo period extending from 1603 to 1868, when the all-embracing ideology of the shogunate was founded on Neo-Confucian principles. Situated within the cultural logic of the Tokugawa era, they recall what Eiko Ikegami describes as the historic transformation of suicide into a symbolic public ritual designed to restrain the glamorization of violence, where the sword provided “was not the genuine article”; “sometimes the symbolic item presented on the tray was just a fan” (257, 255). The teachings of Neo-Confucianism, which reaffirmed the human and social morality of Confucianism, emerged in Song-dynasty China (960-1279) as an alternative to Buddhism and Taoism, which were perceived by a rising class of bureaucrats as promoting idleness and devaluing familial and social obligations. During the early Tokugawa period, Neo-Confucianism promised to form the basis for an orderly society and enlightened rule that had not existed in Japan for centuries. A number of fundamental concepts in Neo-Confucianism owed much to Buddhism, a syncretic dialogue that continued during incubation in medieval Japanese Zen monasteries and subsequent developments in Tokugawa culture. However, Neo-Confucians distinguished their philosophy by emphasizing the existence of the self, rejecting relativism, maintaining permanent values essential to the proper working of society, and affirming a rationally comprehensible order in the universe.6 Eliot’s own introduction to Confucius probably occurred during the fall of 1909, in a course with Irving Babbitt only a year before the composition of “Mandarins.” Many years later, Eliot criticized Babbitt’s “addiction to the philosophy of Confucius,” even as he also 7    averred that he himself began “as a disciple of Mr. Babbitt,” who introduced the young Eliot to East Asian religions by putting “Confucius behind Aristotle, and Buddha behind Christ” (“Second Thoughts” 429; Babbit Democracy 273). A possible source for Eliot’s information about Tokugawa-era Neo-Confucianism is the Japanese critic and art historian Kakuzo Okakura, who travelled to Boston in 1903 at the invitation of Morse, and worked at the MFA during Eliot’s sophomore year. Eliot may have met Okakura through their mutual acquaintance, Isabella Stewart Gardner, because Okakura is mentioned in Eliot’s 1915 letter to her; and, according to Eliot’s second wife, Valerie, in 1910, just months after “Mandarins” was written, Okakura took Eliot to meet the Japoniste Matisse, while Eliot was visiting Paris (“Letter to Isabella Stewart Gardner” 101n.1). Eliot would very likely have already heard about Okakura, however, who had given a highly publicized lecture, “Modern Problems in Painting,” at the 1904 St. Louis World’s Fair, where he was introduced as advisor for the Chinese-Japanese Department of the MFA and author of The Ideals of the East (1903) (Horioka 55).7 In this book, which was enthusiastically reviewed in The Times Literary Supplement by Laurence Binyon in 1903, Okakura describes the influence of Neo-Confucianism and Zen Buddhism on Tokugawa cultural practices, including suicide; and, in The Awakening of Japan, published the same year he lectured in St. Louis, Okakura presents a startling critique of Neo-Confucianism in Tokugawa society. He explains how “Confucianism had in its later developments become . . . indifferent to politics through its absorption of . . . Buddhist ideals,” because academicians “wasted their energy on…abstract rules of morality and terminology,” depriving Confucianism “of its very essence—practical ethics” (Awakening 64, 67). Eliot’s poetic allusion to ritual suicide dramatizes his speaker’s ambivalence toward 8    Neo-Confucian doctrine about the relationship between the self and the efficacy of rites established in the Analects. According to the influential twelfth-century Neo-Confucian philosopher Zhu Xi, private desires undermine our ability to attain perfect virtue, and his commentary calls for elimination of the “private self” (Lan 87). Okakura claims that this interpretation was endorsed, in a lamentably abstract and distorted ideological form, by the Tokugawa regime and academies. Viewed in these terms, “Mandarins” contains the seeds of what became Eliot’s harsh criticism, in 1928, of Pound’s Confucianism as a “steam-roller of . . . rationalism” requiring the poet’s unacceptable stance of “isolated superiority” (“Isolated” 7). At the same time, the ironic ambivalence of Eliot’s portrait of the mandarin figuratively implies a fraught, ambivalent identification with his New England antecedents, especially Emerson, who, as Fredric I. Carpenter, Arthur Christy, Carl T. Jackson, Beongcheon Yu, Shoji Goto, and David Weir have shown, represented a generation of New Englanders drawing widely on Confucian and Buddhist tenets for inspiration and guidance, to criticize the increasingly commercial and materialist realities of US society.8 Having studied the Analects with Buddhist priests, and first reading Emerson’s writings in a philosophy class he took with Ernest Fenollosa at Tokyo University in the mid-1870s, Okakura would have been aware that the perceived affinity of Emerson’s philosophy with Neo-Confucianism was one reason Emerson’s works had been translated into Japanese in the 1880s (Horioka 6-7; Takanashi 7- 8).9 The mandarin’s posture of standing upon his dignity amidst the crowds recalls Emerson’s “Self-Reliance” where, as in Eliot’s poem, taking a stand is associated with individuality and non-conformity to public opinion (Patterson 60-64). Equally important, 9    however, is the fact that Eliot’s ambivalent phrasing, “A hero! and how much it means,” reminds us that Emerson’s hero is marked by a fundamental contradiction articulated in “The Over-Soul” and throughout his writings, that “In youth we are mad for persons. . . . But the larger experience of man discovers the identical nature appearing through them all. Persons themselves acquaint us with the impersonal” (390). In Emerson, heroes “fan the flame of human love, and raise the standard of civil virtue among mankind” (“Heroism” 376), but this also could be construed as a tacit sanctioning of hero worship among the masses, as in “The Uses of Great Men” where he concludes that the truly self-reliant hero is representative and thus, paradoxically, “abolishes himself and all heroes, . . . destroying individualism” (625). In view of the devout Unitarianism of Eliot’s mother, along with the many prominent Unitarians in his family, Eliot would likely have been reluctantly drawn to Emerson, who, in 1852, had gone out of his way to attend and praise a sermon by Eliot’s grandfather, William Greenleaf Eliot, founder of the first Unitarian Church in St. Louis, as “really good” (“Letter to Lidian” 339). In an 1918 essay on Henry James titled “The Hawthorne Aspect,” Eliot praised Emerson for cultivating the necessary conditions for self-reliance, a “halo of dignity” (48) that is the mark of leisure and distinction in a relentlessly busy, money-making society. “One distinguishing mark of this distinguished world was very certainly leisure,” Eliot writes, and importantly not in all cases a leisure given by money, but insisted upon. There seems no easy reason why Emerson or Thoreau or Hawthorne should have been men of leisure; it seems odd that the New England conscience should have allowed them leisure; yet they would have it, sooner or later. That is really one of the finest things about them, and sets a bold frontier between them and the world which will at any price avoid leisure, a world in which Theodore Roosevelt is a 10    patron of the arts. (736-37) Almost two decades after Thorstein Veblen’s 1899 Theory of the Leisure Class, and over a decade after James’s The American Scene (1904), Eliot calls attention to Emerson and other nineteenth-century New England authors who, unlike the conspicuously consuming turn- of-the-century US leisure class condemned by James and Veblen, insisted on leisure in order to create art that would fully examine and critique the central cultural pathology of their era, a time when an alarming number of people in American society were caught up in increasingly mechanized and bureaucratized processes of work. Eliot contends that the loss of an opportunity, and even the inward capacity for leisure, endangered the existence of not just literature, but human dignity. Many years later, in Leisure: The Basis of Culture (1952), which was published by Faber with an introduction by Eliot, Josef Pieper quoted a remark by an early socialist thinker, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who affirmed the necessity of leisure for the renewal of cherished spiritual values on Sunday as “one day in the week [when] servants regained the dignity of human beings, and stood again on as level with their masters” (qtd. in Pieper 54). Seen in retrospect, then, Eliot’s Emersonian emphasis on the dignity of leisure in 1918 marks a significant departure in his effort to accept his ancestral ties to the region. Eliot’s recollection of “dignity” in his poem’s setting is also apt, given that Emerson first discovered Chinese philosophy and ethics in 1830, and, as numerous scholars have shown, was influenced by his reading of classic Confucian texts translated by Joshua Marshman, David Collie, and most significant of all, James Legge, who included Neo- Confucian commentaries by Zhu Xi (Carpenter 233; Takanashi 1-2, 161n9). Indeed, in an 1868 speech at a banquet in honor of the Chinese Embassy held in Boston, Emerson emphatically affirmed the traditional Confucian ideal of the scholar-bureaucrat, praising the 11    assumption that a humanities education should be required of all candidates for public office: China interests us at this moment in a point of politics. I am sure that gentlemen around me bear in mind the bill . . . requiring that candidates for public offices shall first pass examinations on their literary qualifications for the same. Well, China has preceded us . . . in this essential correction of a reckless usage; and the like high esteem of education in China in social life, to whose distinctions it is made an indispensible passport. (Works 473) Echoing Emerson’s defense of the humanities this speech, Eliot’s teacher Babbitt also stressed in Literature and the American College (1908) the value of leisure to revive the art of reading as a humanistic ideal, where leisure is defined as a meditative “activity in repose” that blended Oriental and Occidental tendencies (“Academic Leisure” 262). Beyond Eliot’s ambivalent acknowledgment of nineteenth-century Boston-area Orientalists such as Emerson, we should also consider the influence of Buddhism in his work. Christian Kloeckner has explored how Eliot’s thinking about impersonality in poetry emerged in the context of scholarly debates in Boston about the Buddhist doctrine of the nonego, and the emptying of the personality that is necessary to grasp the nonexistence or nonego of all apparently stable, real objects of thought (166).10 Lawrence Buell and Sharon Cameron have explained why Zen Buddhists such as D. T. Suzuki greatly admired Emersonian impersonality; and, contesting Cleo Kearns’s influential view that Eliot’s exposure to Mahayana Buddhism was not reflected in Eliot’s writings until his later years, Cameron and Murata have called attention to the influence of Masaharu Anesaki, whose course lectures on “Buddhist Ethics and Morality” Eliot attended as a graduate student, during the 1913-1914 academic year.11 We also know Eliot read an article by Anesaki about Buddhist ethics in Japan and China, because Eliot received it as a 12    lecture handout, and kept it with his papers now held at Houghton Library. That Eliot could have read and even have met Okakura and Anesaki attests to the significance of Boston as a world city that was rapidly becoming global. Okakura’s presence there fulfills a key criterion in Sassen’s definition of a global city, where, she says, there are “greater cross-border networks for cultural purposes, as in the growth of international markets for art and a transnational class of curators” (37). Moreover, as an international focal point for professional activity associated with higher learning, and information gathering and diffusion, Boston was, as Hall stipulates, a world city, where a branch of Eliot’s family had flourished for almost two centuries. This burgeoning international center for culture, education, and scholarship offered a dense social and intellectual network that helped to ensure that Eliot’s transpacific dialogue during this time would be formative and far-reaching. Not only were Eliot and Okakura connected through their mutual friendship with Isabella Stewart Gardner, but Anesaki was also acquainted with Gardner. Furthermore, Anesaki and Eliot’s professor James Woods, who invited Anesaki to lecture at Harvard, were friends (Crawford 175) and both had been students of Paul Deussen. Anesaki and Harvard president Charles W. Eliot, the poet’s relative, were members of the “Association Concordia,” an international group devoted to cooperation among nations, races, and religions, and, it was Charles Eliot who, at the suggestion of Woods, arranged to have Anesaki teach at Harvard.12 In Eliot’s “Mandarins,” the term “indifference” reflects a common negative stereotype for Buddhist self-extinction in Boston-area scholarly debates while Eliot was a student, including a 1909 translation of The Lotus of the True Law excerpted in Anesaki’s lecture and that Eliot could have read, where the translators, F. Max Muller and H. Kern, question the mistaken view of the Buddha of the Mahayana as “the same cold, indifferent 13    egoist, absorbed in Nothingness” (Kern xxxiii). Eliot’s “Mandarins,” as we have seen, expresses fearful ambivalence towards suicide as a Neo-Confucian, Buddhist-inspired ritual calling for the total extinction of human desires and indifference to politics. By contrast, the fundamental lesson Eliot learned from Anesaki is that such “indifference” is considered a “cardinal vice” of human nature in Buddhism (451). In his lecture handout on morality and ethics, Anesaki elucidates how Buddhism mandates the realization of abstract ethical truths through moral action, which perfects the “personality.” “Mere knowledge of or a solitary immersion in mystic contemplation, without practical, moral actions, is not perfection,” he writes, “and so ethics should never be a mere system of theoretical discussions or speculations in ethical problems; it must be associated with enlightenment in metaphysical truths and their realization in one’s own life.” (448) Furthermore, this perfection of personality is a fundamental Buddhist tenet, even though it seems to contradict the doctrine of the nonego: “Thus the moral and intellectual perfection of a personality, in spite of the doctrine of the nonego, is the highest aim of Buddhist morality” (451). Anesaki’s remarks on Buddhist “personality” would have addressed Eliot’s anxieties about Emersonian Neo-Confucianism and hero worship, insofar as this term, by 1913, also connoted the transformation of “character” into the media-driven cult of “personality” that, according to historian Warren Susman, occurred during the first half of the twentieth century (279-83).14 What is more, Anesaki’s cogent rejoinder to Okakura’s criticisms concerning the indifference of Neo-Confucians in the Tokugawa academies and especially their lack of concern for “practical ethics” would have been profoundly interesting to Eliot, not least because the dual and contradictory affirmation of personality and nonego would help him to conceive what Jewel Spears Brooker describes as his dialectical conception of 14    impersonality (132; Kloeckner 168). Whereas, in 1910, Eliot ironically portrayed the mandarin as an Emersonian hero-bureaucrat situated at the “centre of formalities” in Tokugawa-era Neo- Confucian Japan, by 1919 his ambivalence would be resolved, at least in part, through his revisiting of Emerson’s work in light of Anesaki’s understanding of Buddhist personality and impersonality. “The progress of an artist is a continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality,” Eliot writes; “But of course, only those who have personality know . . . what it means to escape” (“Tradition” 108, 111). This dialectic guards against the potential dangers of self-extinction Eliot explicitly referred to in a 1927 review where he discussed the surrender of the personal to the divine will in F. H. Bradley. “There is one direction in which . . . Bradley’s philosophy as a whole . . . might be pushed, which would be dangerous; the direction of diminishing the value and dignity of the individual, of sacrificing him to a Church or State” (“Francis” 402). The influence of Anesaki’s reflections on indifference is evident in Eliot’s portrait of a conquering hero in “Triumphal March,” the first section of the unfinished poem Coriolan, published in 1931— a difficult, experimental work written when Eliot was becoming increasingly concerned with how his poetry could be brought more closely and immediately to bear on the world in the form of dramatic performance. Although the allusion to Shakespeare’s Coriolanus, which Eliot regarded as “Shakespeare’s most assured artistic success,” suggests a setting in ancient Rome after the recent exile of kings, the procession in Eliot’s poem also evokes London or France after the First World War (“Hamlet” 124). In Shakespeare’s play, moreover, the hero does not “[waver] indifferently” at the prospect of doing good or harm to his people (2.2.16-23). Rather, Shakespeare’s tragedy consists in his hero’s fervent “hatred” for them, a hatred, by his own account, that should be regarded as an uncommon form of love, 15    requiring a similarly profound emotional attachment (2.3.94-95). Whereas, in Shakespeare, this condition renders the hero unable to carry honors won on the battlefield into the political arena (Kermode 1394), Eliot’s Coriolan, as we see in this key passage, is an indifferent, hollow man: There he is now, look: There is no interrogation in his eyes Or in the hands, quiet over the horse’s neck, And the eyes watchful, waiting, perceiving, indifferent. (“Triumphal March” 86). There is profound distrust of the mob in Eliot’s poem, as in Shakespeare’s play, and in “Mandarins” where, as we have seen, Eliot dramatized anxiety about Emerson’s ambiguous, paradoxical endorsement of heroism as both an affirmation and abolition of individuality. Like Shakespeare in Coriolanus, in “The American Scholar,” the 1837 Phi Beta Kappa address delivered at Harvard College, Emerson invoked Plutarch’s analogy of the body politic and the human body to diagnose the diseased, divided state of US society, concluding that the best and only cure is to be found in education. And where Shakespeare’s tragedy teaches that the hero would have been a more effective governor if he had spent more time with his schoolmaster, Emerson advocates education that combines action and self-reliant scholarship, anticipating his banquet speech in praise of the Chinese Confucian system and humanities education required by all candidates for public office. The reward of such an education is precious and essential, Emerson says, to the survival of a people “too busy to give to letters any more,” namely, that the American scholar discovers a profound and enduring community with all mankind: “He is the world’s eye. He is the world’s heart. . . .Whatever oracles the human heart, in all emergencies, in all solemn hours, has uttered as its commentary on the world of actions, — these he shall receive and impart” (63). 16    By contrast, in Eliot’s Coriolan, as in his ironical 1910 portrait of a Tokugawa-era scholar-bureaucrat, the hero is the public center of power, but his indifference to his people renders him incapable of moral action. This theme explains the enduring significance of Eliot’s coursework with Anesaki; it would be further developed, as Murata has argued, in Eliot’s rendering of St. Thomas à Becket’s struggle against monstrous egotism of “indifference to the fate of his country” (218) in his first full-length verse drama, Murder in the Cathedral, written for the Canterbury Festival of June, 1935 (Murata “Buddhism” 28). In Little Gidding, the last of the Four Quartets published in 1942, Eliot offers a clarifying distinction between indifference and detachment on the fundamental failure of his Coriolan as a statesman: There are three conditions which often look alike Yet differ completely, flourish in the same hedgerow: Attachment to self and to things and to persons, detachment From self and from things and from persons; and, growing between them, indifference Which resembles the others as death resembles life, Being between two lives—unflowering, between The live and the dead nettle. This is the use of memory: For liberation—not less of love but expanding Of love beyond desire, and so liberation From the future as well as the past. Thus, love of a country Begins as attachment to our own field of action And comes to find that action of little importance Though never indifferent. (142) 17    Just as, decades earlier, Eliot had learned from his familiarity with Anesaki’s teachings that indifference is considered a cardinal vice of human nature in Buddhism, so Little Gidding affirms that personal attachments, including our love for community and country, are necessary for us to take our first steps toward perfecting our personality through moral action. Only then will it be possible for our love to expand, as the poet says, beyond desire through detachment, which is not the same as indifference, so that we arrive at impersonality, liberated from time. Eliot’s Coriolan marks a compelling departure from “Mandarins” as well as from Shakespeare and Emerson insofar as the poem addresses the consequential decline of ritual and spiritual values in Europe, implicitly cautioning against the resurgence of opposed racial nationalisms that caused the terrible cataclysm of world war. At one point, a sanctus bell is mistakenly identified as the handbell of a crumpet man; and, shortly before the arrival of Coriolan, we are presented with a list of military weapons and supplies surrendered or destroyed by the Germans after Versailles, taken, as Grover Smith informs us, from General Erich F. W. Ludendorff’s The Coming War, also published in 1931, the same year as Eliot’s poem (162). Given these concerns, the passage immediately following the description of Coriolan’s indifference comes as a welcome surprise. In it, Eliot presents a moment of visionary awareness, what Babbitt might call meditative activity in repose, not attributed to any particular observer: O hidden under the dove’s wing, hidden in the turtle’s breast, Under the palmtree at noon, under the running water At the still point of the turning world. […] (“Triumphal March” 86) Somehow, even or especially amidst the terrifying pressures of chaotic social dissolution and coming war, a new way of seeing the world is born, where collocated cultural 18    perspectives drawn from Buddhism and Judeo-Christianity are used to render spiritual stability. Biblical symbols of peace and divinity—the dove, water, the tree at noon—are conjoined with imagery recalling Anesaki’s affirmation of two dialectically configured Buddhist aims on the Eightfold Right Way: the “still point” of mystic contemplation, on the one hand, and on the other, moral action in a turning world. Eliot revisits this passage and imagery in Burnt Norton, the first of the Four Quartets, published in 1935, where we discover for the first time the relative simplicity and clarity of what Kearns calls the “wisdom mode” (13) of his mature style. Significantly, Eliot’s transpacific dialogue in this work is much more overt, as when the “lotos” of Buddhist scripture is conjoined with references to an Edenic garden setting, simultaneously affirming the reality of mystical vision and submitting it to reasonable analysis as illusion or self-deception. Building upon his revelation of spiritual vision in Coriolan, Eliot writes, At the still point of the turning world. Neither flesh nor fleshless; Neither from nor towards; at the still point, there the dance is, But neither arrest nor movement. [. . .] [. . .] Except for the point, the still point, There would be no dance, and there is only the dance. (Burnt Norton 119) Coriolan warned against the cataclysmic violence resulting from the absence of spiritual ideals and the failure of transnational dialogue and understanding. By contrast, Eliot’s reflections on Anesaki’s description of Buddhist morality and ethics, brought to fullest fruition in Burnt Norton, bring to life a poetic voice of wisdom that is universal, affirming community with all mankind. I have tried to show how cultural crossings with Asia in Eliot’s life and poetry helped 19    him to come to terms with his family history in New England, roots that he knew had already been abundantly fertilized by transpacific cultural exchange for generations, and with Emerson as a literary forebear, whose interest in Asia would lay a foundation for Eliot’s modernism. In light of questions raised by Gilroy and Gikandi about how racist bias figured in the development of modernist aesthetics, it is significant that Eliot’s most formative transpacific encounters occurred in Boston as a world city where universities and other institutions fostered a commitment to higher learning, a commitment that helped people to open their hearts and minds, and to bridge cultural divides. We need to revisit poets like Eliot, and the vast, valuable archive of criticism in modernist and American studies, to better grasp their enduring relevance to globalization. In a late essay called “Goethe as the Sage,” Eliot explains how he learned to read great works of literature, including Buddhist scripture. “It seems to me that what I do . . . is [first] not only . . . to suspend my disbelief, but to try to put myself in the position of the believer. But this is only one of the two movements of my critical activity; the second is to detach myself again and to regard the poem from outside the belief” (224-25). According to Eliot, this initial act of surrendering to the text opens the possibility of detachment, where, recovering from identification with cultural perspectives or beliefs he does not share, Eliot’s own sensibility has been forever transformed by this experience. The “systole and diastole” (225) of identification and detachment, this dialectical movement of approach towards and withdrawal from the Other’s point of view, is the mark, in Eliot’s view, not of just a good critic or reader, but of any great writer who is universal or “representative” (217), a term Eliot borrows from Emerson to describe a writer possessed of wisdom. “Whether the ‘philosophy’ or the religious faith of . . . Shakespeare or Goethe is acceptable to us or not,” Eliot 20    concludes, there is the Wisdom that we can all accept. . . . Wisdom is . . . the same for all men everywhere. If it were not so, what profit could a European gain from . . . the Buddhist Nikayas? Only some intellectual exercise, the satisfaction of a curiosity, or an interesting sensation like that of tasting some exotic oriental dish. (226) Like the dance at the still point of the turning world in Eliot’s poetry, this wisdom is, as he says, “communicated on a deeper level than that of logical propositions” (226). It makes sense that the full flowering of Eliot’s wisdom mode grew from transpacific dialogue at a moment of vision in Coriolan, given that poem’s warning against the threat of cataclysmic violence resulting from decline of ritual and spiritual values and the resurgence of opposed racial nationalisms in Europe. Wisdom, according to Eliot, can only be brought about through such dialogue. It is a “co-operative activity” at the frontier of national cultures, which brings a third meeting point of correspondence into view, a truth “outside ourselves” (“Function” 22). This, I take it, is Eliot’s definition of transpacific intercultural dialogue in the best and truest sense. The fact that Anesaki and Okakura brought him to a fundamentally new perspective on his New England literary legacy, and opened a path towards his life’s work as a great and representative poet, attests to the significance of Boston as a cosmopolitan center where his modernism could flourish. 21    Works Cited Anesaki, Masaharu. “Ethics and Morality (Buddhist).” Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 12 vols. Ed. James Hastings. New York: Charles Scribner, 1912. 447-54. Babbitt, Irving. Democracy and Leadership. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1924. ———. “Academic Leisure.” Literature and the American College: Essays in Defense of the Humanities. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1908. 246-63. Brooker, Jewel Spears. “Dialectic and Impersonality in T. S. Eliot.” Partial Answers: Journal of Literature and the History of Ideas 3.2 (June 2005): 129-51. Carpenter, Frederic Ives. Emerson and Asia. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1930. Crawford, Robert. Young Eliot: From St. Louis to The Waste Land. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2015. Dickey, Frances. The Modern Portrait Poem: From Dante Gabriel Rossetti to Ezra Pound. Charlottesville: U of Virginia P, 2012. Eliot, T. S. The Complete Poems and Plays, 1909-1950. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1952. ———. “Burnt Norton” Complete Poems and Plays 117-22 ———. “Little Gidding” Complete Poems and Plays 138-45 ———. Murder in the Cathedral. Complete Poems and Plays 175-221 ———. “Triumphal March” Complete Poems and Plays 85-87 ———. The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot: The Critical Edition: Volume 1: Apprentice Years, 1905-1918. Ed. J. S. Brooker and R. Schuchard. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2014. Project Muse. Web. 21 April 2015. ———. “Gentleman and Seaman.” Brooker and Schuchard 21-23. ———. “The Hawthorne Aspect.” Brooker and Schuchard 736-44. 22    ———. The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot: The Critical Edition: Volume 2: The Perfect Critic, 1919-1926. Ed. A. Cuda and R. Schuchard. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2014. Project Muse. Web. 4 August 2015. ———. “Hamlet.” Cuda and Schuchard 122-128. ———. “Tradition and the Individual Talent.” Cuda and Schuchard 105-114. ———. “Goethe as the Sage.” On Poetry and Poets. London: Faber, 1957. 207-227 ———. “Isolated Superiority.” Dial 84 (January 1928): 4-7. ———. The Letters of T. S. Eliot: Volume 1: 1898-1992. Rev. ed. Ed. V. Eliot, H. Haughton, and J. Haffenden. New Haven: Yale UP, 2011. ———. “Letter to Isabella Stewart Gardner.” 4 April 1915. Eliot, Haughton, and Haffenden 100- 03. ———. “Letter to Mary Hutchinson.” 11 July 1919. Eliot, Haughton, and Haffenden 377-79. ———. “Mandarins.” Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917. Ed. C. Ricks. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1996. 19-22. ———. Selected Essays of T. S. Eliot. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1950. ———. “Francis Herbert Bradley.” Selected Essays 394-404. Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Essays and Lectures. Ed. J. Porte. New York: Library of America, 1983. ———. “Heroism.” Porte 369-82. ———. “The Over-Soul.” Porte 383-400. ———. “The Uses of Great Men.” Porte 615-32. ———. “Letter to Lidian Emerson.” 1852. The Letters of Ralph Waldo Emerson. Ed. Ralph L. Rusk. Vol. 4. New York: Columbia UP, 1939. 338-39. ———. “Speech at Banquet in Honor of the Chinese Embassy.” 1860. The Complete Works of 23    Ralph Waldo Emerson. Centenary Edition. Vol. XI. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Co., 1903. 469-474. Gikandi, Simon. “Picasso, Africa, and the Schemata of Difference.” Modernism/modernity 10.3 (2003): 455-80. Gilroy, Paul. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1993. Gordon, Lyndall. T. S. Eliot: An Imperfect Life. New York: Norton, 1998. Hall, Peter. The World Cities. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966. Horioka, Yasuko. The Life of Kakuzo: Author of the Book of Tea. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press, 1963. Hosley, William. The Japan Idea: Art and Life in Victorian America. Hartford: Wadsworth Atheneum, 1990. Ikegami, Eiko. The Taming of the Samurai: Honorific Individualism and the Making of Modern Japan. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1995. Jackson, Carl T. The Oriental Religions and American Thought. Westport: Greenwood P, 1981. Kearns, Cleo McNelly. T. S. Eliot and Indic Traditions: A Study in Poetry and Belief. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1987. Kermode, Frank. “Coriolanus.” Evans et al. 1392-1395. Kern, H. and F. Max Müller, trans. Saddharma Pundarika Or The Lotus of the True Law. Oxford: Clarendon P, 1884. The Sacred Books of the East 21. Kern, H. “Introduction.” Kern and Müller ix-xlii. Kloeckner, Christian. “Re-Orienting Impersonality: T. S. Eliot and the Self of the Far East.” Modernism and the Orient. Ed. Z. Qian. New Orleans: U of New Orleans P, 2012. 163- 24    184. Lambourne, Lionel. Japonisme: Cultural Crossings between Japan and the West. London: Phaidon Press, 2005. Lan, Feng. Ezra Pound and Confucianism: Remaking Humanism in the Face of Modernity. Toronto: U of Toronto P, 2005. Lears, T. J. Jackson. No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of American Culture, 1880-1920. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1981. Miller, James. T. S. Eliot: The Making of anAmerican Poet. University Park: Pennsylvania State UP, 2004. Morison, Samuel Eliot. “The Dry Salvages and the Thacher Shipwreck.” The American Neptune: A Quarterly of Maritime History 25.4 (October 1965): 233-47. Morse, Edward Sylvester. Japanese Homes and Their Surroundings. Boston: Ticknor, 1886. Murata, Tatsuo. “Buddhism in T. S. Eliot,” The Modern Schoolman 73 (1995): 17-46. ———. “Buddhist Epistemology in T. S. Eliot’s Theory of Poetry.” T. S. Eliot and Our Turning World. Ed. J. S. Brooker. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2001. 80-88. Narita, Tatsushi. T. S. Eliot and His Youth as a “Literary Columbus.” Nagoya: Kougaku Shuppan, 2011. Okakura, Kakuzo. The Awakening of Japan. New York: The Century Co., 1904. ———. Ideals of the East: The Spirit of Japanese Art. 2nd ed. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1904. Patterson, Anita. From Emerson to King. New York: Oxford UP, 1997. Pieper, Josef. Leisure: The Basis of Culture. Trans. A. Dru. New York: Pantheon, 1952. Pratt, Mary Louise. Imperial Eyes: Travel and Transculturation. London: Routledge, 1992. Sassen, Saskia. “The Global City: Introducing a Concept.” Brown Journal of World Affairs 11.2 25    (2005): 27-43. Scaff, Lawrence. Max Weber in America. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2011. Shakespeare, William. “The Tragedy of Coriolanus.” The Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G. B. Evans et al. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974. 1396-1440.. Smith, Grover. T. S. Eliot’s Poetry and Plays: A Study in Sources and Meaning. 2nd ed. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1974. Susman, Warren. Culture as History: The Transformation of American Society in the Twentieth Century. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. Takanashi, Yoshio. Emerson and Neo-Confucianism: Crossing Paths Over the Pacific. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.                                                                                                                                                                                        1 See Melba Cuddy-Keane, “Modernism, Geopolitics, Globalization,” Modernism/modernity 10.3 (2003), 549-550; Susan Stanford Friedman, Mappings: Feminism and the Cultural Geographies of Encounter (1998), 91; and Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation (2007). 2 See Lionel Lambourne, Japonisme: Cultural Crossings Between Japan and the West (2005): 11. 3 See William Hosley, The Japan Idea: Art and Life in Victorian America (1990): 29-79. For a discussion of how idealized perceptions of "Old Japan" as an escape from materialism associated with the rise of consumer culture in the US, see Christopher Benfey, The Great Wave: Gilded Age Misfits, Japanese Eccentrics and the Opening of Old Japan (2003): xii-xiv, and Christine Guth, Longfellow's Tattoos: Tourism, Collecting, and Japan (2004): 199. 26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4 See Frances Dickey, The Modern Portrait Poem: From Dante Gabriel Rossetti to Ezra Pound (2012): 93-94 5 See Lawrence Scaff, Max Weber in America (2011): 6, 15. 6 See Paul Watt, “Jiun Sonja (1718-1804): A Response to Confucianism Within the Context of Buddhist Reform,” Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture, ed. P. Nosco (1997): 197-98; Peter Nosco, “Introduction,” Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture (1997), ed. Nosco 3-26; and Richard J. Bowring, “Fujiwara Seika and the Great Learning,” Monumenta Nipponica 61.4 (Winter 2006), 440. 7 See Yasuko Horioka, The Life of Kakuzo, Author of The Book of Tea (1963), 55. 8 See Carpenter 232-46; Arthur Christy, The Orient in American Transcendentalism: A Study of Emerson, Thoreau and Alcott (1932): ix, 29-34; Carl T. Jackson, The Oriental Religions and American Thought: Nineteenth-Century Explorations (1981): 45-62; Beongcheon Yu, The Great Circle: American Writers and the Orient (1983): 25-39; Shoji Goto, The Philosophy of Emerson and Thoreau: Orientals Meet Occidentals (2007): 45-82; and David Weir, American Orient: Imagining the East from the Colonial Era through the Twentieth Century (2011): 47-82. 9 Yoshio Takanashi, Emerson and Neo-Confucianism: Crossing Paths Over the Pacific (2014): 7-8; Yasuko Horioka, The Life of Kakuzo: 6-7. 10 See Christian Kloeckner, “Re-Orienting Impersonality: T. S. Eliot and the Self of the Far East,” Modernism and the Orient (2012), ed. Z. Qian 166-67, 171. 11 See Lawrence Buell, Emerson (2003): 196-97; Sharon Cameron, Impersonality (2007): vii, 79- 107, viii; Murata, “Buddhist Epistemology in T. S. Eliot’s Theory of Poetry,” T. S. Eliot and Our Turning World (2001), ed. J. S. Brooker 81, 87; and Cleo McNelly Kearns, T. S. Eliot and Indic Traditions: A Study in Poetry and Belief (1987): 69. 27                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12 See Narita, “Masaharu Anesaki: A Life Chronology.” Web blog post. tatsushinarita.wordpress.com. Web. 21 May 2015. Narita cites Jun’ichi Isomae et al., Kindai Nihon ni okeru Chishikijin to Shukyo: Anesaki Masaharu no Kiseki [Intellectuals and Religion in Modern Japan: The Trajectory of Masaharu Anesaki] (2002): 349, 262.. 14 See Warren Susman, Culture as History: The Transformation of American Society in the Twentieth Centuiry (1984): 271-85. 