ABSTRACT: 
With the proliferation of Indigenous texts currently published by specialist and mainstream publishers, non-Indigenous editors increasingly find themselves negotiating the uncomfortable territories of race, politics and power for which current training (in an Australian context) leaves them poorly prepared. Indigenous writer Anita Heiss advocates the employment of Indigenous editors as an \u27ideal\u27 solution, though few are currently working in the Australian industry. Margaret McDonell, an experienced non-Indigenous editor of Indigenous texts, suggests non-Indigenous editors need to \u27undertake a journey of learning\u27 during which \u27assumptions, biases, tastes and preconceptions\u27 are examined. Yet this presents a difficult task within a postcolonial society, when, as identified by Clare Bradford, even the classification of texts into genres such as fiction and the short story represents an entirely Eurocentric construct, \u27not readily correspond[ing] with Aboriginal schemata\u27. The Australian Society of Authors\u27 discussion paper \u27Writing about Indigenous Australia: Some Issues to Consider and Protocols to Follow\u27 provides practical guidelines that may be adapted for editorial use. This article canvasses these and other ideas with a focus on establishing an ethical and appropriately sensitive cross-cultural approach to editing Indigenous writing.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
With the proliferation of Indigenous texts currently published by specialist and mainstream publishers, non-Indigenous editors increasingly find themselves negotiating the uncomfortable territories of race, politics and power for which current training (in an Australian context) leaves them poorly prepared. Indigenous writer Anita Heiss advocates the employment of Indigenous editors as an ‘ideal’ solution, though few are currently working in the Australian industry. Margaret McDonell, an experienced non-Indigenous editor of Indigenous texts, suggests non-Indigenous editors need to ‘undertake a journey of learning’ during which ‘assumptions, biases, tastes and preconceptions’ are examined. Yet this presents a difficult task within a postcolonial society, when, as identified by Clare Bradford, even the classification of texts into genres such as fiction and the short story represents an entirely Eurocentric construct, ‘not readily correspond[ing] with Aboriginal schemata’. The Australian Society of Authors’ discussion paper ‘Writing about Indigenous Australia: Some Issues to Consider and Protocols to Follow’ provides practical guidelines that may be adapted for editorial use. This article canvasses these and other ideas with a focus on establishing an ethical and appropriately sensitive cross-cultural approach to editing Indigenous writing. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  This is the published version Freeman, Robin 2009, We must become gatekeepers : editing indigenous writing, New writing : the international journal for the practice and theory of creative writing, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 133-149. Available from Deakin Research Online http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30021625 Reproduced with the kind permission of the copyright owner Copyright: 2009, Taylor and Francis PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE This article was downloaded by: [Deakin University] On: 21 January 2010 Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 904080266] Publisher Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37- 41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK New Writing Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t794020040 'We Must Become Gatekeepers': Editing Indigenous Writing Robin Freeman a a Deakin University, School of Communication and Creative Arts, Faculty of Arts and Education, Burwood, Australia To cite this Article Freeman, Robin(2009) ''We Must Become Gatekeepers': Editing Indigenous Writing', New Writing, 6: 2, 133 — 149 To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/14790720903216685 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14790720903216685 Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material. ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing Robin Freeman Deakin University, School of Communication and Creative Arts, Faculty of Arts and Education, 221 Burwod Highway, Burwood, 3125 Australia With the proliferation of Indigenous texts currently published by specialist and mainstream publishers, non-Indigenous editors increasingly find themselves nego- tiating the uncomfortable territories of race, politics and power for which current training (in an Australian context) leaves them poorly prepared. Indigenous writer Anita Heiss advocates the employment of Indigenous editors as an ‘ideal’ solution, though few are currently working in the Australian industry. Margaret McDonell, an experienced non-Indigenous editor of Indigenous texts, suggests non-Indigenous editors need to ‘undertake a journey of learning’ during which ‘assumptions, biases, tastes and preconceptions’ are examined. Yet this presents a difficult task within a postcolonial society, when, as identified by Clare Bradford, even the classification of texts into genres such as fiction and the short story represents an entirely Eurocentric construct, ‘not readily correspond[ing] with Aboriginal schemata’. The Australian Society of Authors’ discussion paper ‘Writing about Indigenous Australia: Some Issues to Consider and Protocols to Follow’ provides practical guidelines that may be adapted for editorial use. This article canvasses these and other ideas with a focus on establishing an ethical and appropriately sensitive cross-cultural approach to editing Indigenous writing. doi: 10.1080/14790720903216685 Keywords: authors, collaboration, editing, identity, publishing, teaching . . . if we are to be able to heal ourselves of the colonial past and the failure of government policies, or free ourselves from being the fierce protectors of the small gains we have made in terms of our rights, we must become the gatekeepers of what is flowing in and out of our communities. (Alexis Wright, 2002) Introduction This article considers the responsibility assumed by non-Indigenous editors in the publication of Indigenous literature, seeking an ethical and appro- priately sensitive cross-cultural approach to ways in which editors may employ a craft learned within the constraints of a Western education system and industry grounded in the Enlightenment. How are we (as non-Indigenous editors) to accommodate in practice the cultural differences, the language tropes and rhythms as well as non-linear chronology of Indigenous writers, which Maori academic Linda Tuhiwai Smith (1999: 55) argues are considered 1479-0726/09/02 133-17 $20.00/0 – 2009 Taylor & Francis INT. J. FOR THE PRACTICE AND THEORY OF CREATIVE WRITING Vol. 6, No. 2, 2009 133 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 ‘prehistoric’ in Enlightenment terms? How are we to appreciate, respond to and participate as editorial collaborators with the written perspectives of a people who, despite some significant, recent, though largely symbolic gestures,1 are still the most disadvantaged group in Australian society in terms of health, education and agency?2 To Edward Said’s (in Tuhiwai Smith, 1999) questions: ‘Who writes? For whom is the writing being done? In what circumstances?’ (37), I add: How, indeed, may we provide editorial advice that will genuinely assist our Indigenous countrywomen and men to ‘become the gatekeepers’ of their own stories, identities and histories? What constitutes an ethical approach to editing Indigenous writing within the current context of the Australian publishing industry? Ways of Seeing and Responding Publishers and their editors occupy powerful positions within the public sphere as arbiters of public taste and determiners of those voices that will be publicly uttered and find a readership and those voices that will remain silenced. Thus, Alexis Wright’s statement (above) provides an apt metaphor for the attitudes of Indigenous writers to the Australian publishing industry. This is pursued in more detail below, but I suggest Wright’s comment foreshadows the contested and very political and politicised territory of Indigenous literature into which an editor must become immersed if she3 is to work with Indigenous texts and writers. Indigenous writers, I argue, are political and have agency. Many pursue the as yet unrealised ideal of an exclusive Indigenous publishing industry. The plight of Australia’s Indigenous people as revealed in the popular media on a daily basis evokes emotion. An editor who is member of the dominant (white) culture under such circum- stances may, not surprisingly, suffer a loss of confidence in her ability to actively resist what Margaret McDonell (2004a: 40)4 calls being ‘blind to her own race privilege’. It is beyond the scope of this article to engage to any substantial degree in the colonial discourse that encapsulates the invisibility of Australian Indigen- ous peoples in Australian history. It is acknowledged here, however, as the important context within which any discussion about the editing of Indigen- ous writing by non-Indigenous editors must be undertaken. The West, Tuhiwai Smith (1999: 1) asserts, happily exploits and profits from Indigenous forms of knowledge, images and creative arts, while concurrently denying opportunities to the independent pursuit of their own culture and agency to the people who have provided both expertise and artefacts. Although the primary audience for Linda Tuhiwai Smith’s (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples is indigenous academics and social researchers, her book also provides a context within which non-Indigenous academics, writers and editors may consider the editing of Indigenous texts. Using Said’s notion of ‘positional superiority’ to conceptualise ways in which ‘knowledge and culture’ have been misappropriated by the West (Said, in Tuhiwai Smith, 1999: 58) Tuhiwai Smith (1999) argues that: 134 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 The nexus between cultural ways of knowing, scientific discoveries, economic impulses and imperial power enabled the West to make ideological claims to having a superior civilisation. The ‘idea’ of the West became a reality when it was re-presented back to indigenous nations through colonialism. By the nineteenth century colonialism not only meant the imposition of Western authority over indigenous lands, indigenous modes of production and indigenous law and government, but the imposition of Western authority over all aspects of indigenous knowledges, languages and cultures. This authority incorporated what Said refers to as alliances between the ideologies, ‘cliche´s’, general beliefs and understandings held about the Orient and the views of ‘science’ and philosophical theories. (64) Changes wrought by the Enlightenment under which the modern state, amongst other things, established the superiority of Western knowledge systems has left indigenous peoples positioned as passive ‘objects’ of scrutiny rather than contributors to research and knowledge. As a result, Tuhiwai Smith (1999: 4, 60) asserts, indigenous peoples have become victims of the systematic dehumanisation process enacted by the colonising society. She also reminds us that conceptualising indigenous issues as involving ‘problems’ contributes to the alienation of indigenous peoples because such ideas originate ‘within the wider discourses of racism, sexism and other forms of positioning the Other’ (91). In Reading Race: Aboriginality in Australian Children’s Literature, Clare Bradford (2001) questions Western assumptions that ‘originary Aboriginal culture exists only in ‘‘traditional’’ communities, and that only such a culture is ‘‘authentic’’’ (129). She alerts us to the dangers of succumbing to ‘Aboriginalism’: of becoming ‘knowledgeable and sympathetic experts, who speak about and for Aborigines’ (110). Bradford’s (2001) discussion of ‘Aboriginalism’ and its subtle effects on positioning and power within her critique of stories by non-Indigenous writers John Marsden and Shaun Tan (The Rabbits) and Kerri Hashmi and Felicity Marshall (You and Me, Murrawee) should be required reading for all non-Indigenous editors engaging with Indigenous texts (113142). (See also her commentary on the use of Aboriginal English in The Fat and Juicy Place, which commences on page 142). Editors work within an ambiguous space, balancing the needs of the writer, the publishing house and the reader against each other, though always supportive of the text to which they owe their professional expertise to ensure that it becomes the best book it can be. It is against a background of some uncertainty, where they must be open to challenging the basis of their education and self-belief and their Eurocentric view of ‘history’, that for non-Indigenous editors, engagement with Indigenous texts may appear to be a daunting and intimidating task. Indigenous Writers and Agency The framework within which cross-cultural editing in Australia has been situated is the discourse of Indigenous women’s collaborative autobiographical ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 135 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 narratives (see Hughes, 1998; Jones, 2005; McDonell, 2004a,b). This is not surprising given the prominence of this form of Indigenous literary output within the lists of specialist Indigenous as well as mainstream publishers. This discourse generally focuses upon the inequitable power relationships between the Indigenous storyteller and the white collaborator who records the story, as well as the interventions and compromises that the text undergoes during the publication process. For example, Jennifer Jones (2005) provides substantive evidence of changes to Margaret Tucker’s original text that subordinate Tucker’s language and version of events ‘to the interest of the publisher’s projected white reader’. While criticisms such as Jones’s present a legitimate view of the publication of Indigenous collaborative life writing, the proliferation of such examples has tended to distract from arguments that would suggest the agency of Indigenous writers. In his thesis ‘Cross Talk: Collaborative Indigenous Writing in Australia and Canada’, Michael Jacklin (2004) reveals his opposition to theories of ‘discursive constraint’ that necessitate the subjugation of the Indigenous narrator by the dominant collaborator (4). Jacklin suggests that the ‘production of collabora- tive voice is a far more complex phenomenon than the binary figure of the ventriloquist and his dummy can accommodate’ (252). Jacklin argues for a new form of literary research that favours the critic ‘moving beyond the confines of the library and archive and requesting engagement with those clearly involved in collaborative textual production’ (225). He considers that there are lessons to be learned from the disciplines of anthropology and sociology and the struggles of recent theories to establish approaches to research that ‘address the inherent ethical dilemmas involved in research which utilises the know- ledge systems and cultural assets of other peoples’ (252). Furthermore, Jacklin (after Couser) points to the need for his discipline to: . . . be prepared to acknowledge its own potential to generate harm in its analysis of and commentary upon the cultural representations of others . . . analysis [that is] intent on demonstrating the harm resulting from cross-cultural collaboration would do well to begin by consulting with those supposedly injured. (252) In his study focused on Australian and Canadian cross-cultural collabora- tive texts, Jacklin (2004) has undertaken interviews with the collaborators of cross-cultural life narratives and teases out the perceptions and intentions (where possible) of both parties. He stresses that despite the fact that power relationships are integral to the writing and publication of collaborative texts, this does not ‘preclude their utilisation by Indigenous communities, families, or individuals in ways which honour the narratives, the narrators and their collaborators’ (252). Such ideas, I suggest, are useful when considering the editing of Indigenous texts by non-Indigenous editors. Jacklin’s ideas about the self-agency of Indigenous writers resonate also with those of Anita Heiss and Peter Minter (2008), who remind us in the Introduction to their Macquarie Pen Anthology of Aboriginal Literature of the nexus between literature and politics for Indigenous writers. They suggest that: 136 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 For Aboriginal people, the use of English became a necessity within the broader struggle to survive colonisation. From the early days, writing became a tool of negotiation in which Aboriginal voices could be heard in a form recognisable to British authority. Aboriginal men and women were highly motivated by the duress under which they and their communities lived, and it is in their transactions with colonial admin- istrations that the principal characteristics of the early literature were forged. Aboriginal authorship, as a practice and a literary category, first appears in genres that are common to political discourse: letters by individuals to local authorities and newspapers, petitions by commu- nities in fear of further forms of dispossession or incarceration, and the chronicles of those dispossessed. (2) Heiss’s (2003) polemic Dhuuluu-Yala: To Talk Straight promotes as ideal the editing of Indigenous writing by Indigenous editors who understand ‘experimentalism in language and who [are likely to be] much more open to new ways’ (Sandra Phillips in Heiss 2003: 67). Heiss mounts an emotionally compelling appeal to white Australians who see a ‘redressing of balances’ argument as a positive step towards reconciliation. Her call, however, is not unique; nor is it new. At the first National Conference of Aboriginal Writers in Perth in 1983, Aboriginal activist Bruce McGuinness demanded ‘community control’, which he asserts is and has always been important to Aboriginal people, over Indigenous literary production. Genuine Aboriginal literature, he argues, is initiated in and controlled by Indigenous communities and is not what ‘white publishing companies, what governments, what government agencies decree they ought to write’ (45). McGuinness and Walker (1985) assert: . . . unless Aboriginal people control the funding, unless Aboriginal people control the content, the publishing, the ultimate presentation of the article, then it is not Aboriginal . . . it ceases to be Aboriginal when it is interfered with, when it is tampered with by non-Aboriginal people . . . who exist outside the spectrum of Aboriginal life, of Aboriginal culture within Australia. (44) Indigenous historian and biographer Jackie Huggins (1998) makes clear the nature of her own writing, describing herself as the ‘most public and outspoken member’ of her family (51). Committed to political activism from an early age, she collaborated with her mother Rita to write the (auto) biographical Auntie Rita, published in 1994 by Aboriginal Studies Press. The preface of alternating mother and daughter voices attempts to contextualise the work for non-Indigenous readers. Although writing her story for her children, grandchildren and family members, Rita Huggins (Huggins & Huggins, 1994) expresses her hope that ‘it will speak to other people, too, including those white people who want to know what the story looks like from the Aboriginal side’ (1). Jackie explains their decision to include ‘Pitjara, Wakka Wakka and Aboriginal English ways of talking’ as well as pointing towards the glossary for ‘those unfamiliar with our languages’ (3). Finally, ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 137 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 despite her initial cynicism, Jackie (Huggins & Huggins, 1994) is able to praise her non-Indigenous editor, Alison Ravenscroft. ‘The editing,’ she writes: was unimposing and enabling, and there soon developed a trust between Rita, Alison and I. Our relationship has been a crucial factor in a mutually satisfying outcome. (34) From the views of the above-mentioned writers and academics (see also case studies of Alexis Wright and Alex Kruger, below), it would seem reasonable to assume that the politics of self-determination has strongly motivated and shaped the form and content of Australian Indigenous writing. Books though, as Stephen Muecke (2005) notes: are not produced out of oppression, because or in spite of power inflicted from above. There are, rather, multiple determinations that tend to trigger certain sorts of texts. . . . The sorts of books published are ones whose passage is facilitated by adjacent discursive formations: a market enthusiastic about autobiography, the development of courses in ‘postcolonial literature’, multiculturalism, a bicentennial year, and so on. (118) By reminding us of the ways in which the industry filters and re-presents ideas aired in the public sphere, and the practical imperatives of marketing, Muecke (2005) resists the ‘liberationist’ arguments of writers such as McGuinness as a singular cause of the ‘rise of the institution of Aboriginal literature’ (104). Indigenous publishing is not as simple and one-dimensional as the political positioning of many writers might suggest. In arguing this case, Muecke relates the publication of Sally Walker’s My Place and Glenys Ward’s Wandering Girl in 1987 to the earlier success of AB Facey’s A Fortunate Life.5 All three titles, Muecke suggests, have emerged ‘from the ‘‘authentic’’ and populist rubric of the ‘‘ordinary Australian’s life told in his/her own words’’’ (112). Similarly, the publication of works by authors reviewed in the following case studies has been influenced by ‘multiple determinations’ originating in the public sphere (Muecke, 2005: 118). Issues of Indigenous land rights as a result of the Mabo and Wik High Court decisions and their consequent legislative imperatives, the directing of public agitation for an apology to the Stolen Generations towards former Prime Minister John Howard and even arguments aired in the mass media about the teaching of Australian history in schools that became known as ‘The History Wars’ have all contributed to a public consciousness of Indigenous issues, which has translated into publica- tion of Indigenous writing.6 Indigenous Writers: Two Examples Indigenous writers may be educated within the Western education system or in isolated communities. They may be urban dwellers or people from isolated communities. They include people exhibiting a range of literacies with English or with Indigenous languages. While acknowledging this diversity, I briefly focus upon two recently published authors who arguably represent 138 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 the extremes of Indigenous writing. I suggest, however, that just as the conditions that supported their publications are similar, the appropriate editorial attitude to each writer should also be similar, despite their apparent differences in genre and literacy. Alexis Wright, arguably the most successful of current Australian Indigen- ous novelists,7 describes herself as a long-time activist for the human rights of her people. In an autobiographical essay entitled ‘Politics of Writing’ published in the literary journal Southerly in 2002, Wright (2002) also reveals that her grandmother, with whom she had spent ‘a lot of time’ during her childhood, heavily influenced both her activist and writing vocations and particularly fostered her love of words and storytelling. Her grandmother, she declares, ‘had stories to explain everything  who we are, who each of us were, and the place on our traditional country that was very deep and special to her. She was our memory’ (10). Wright describes how she ‘learnt to imagine the facts about our family’ in the absence of explanations about the time when ‘white cattle men came to our traditional lands’ (Wright, 2002: 10). She learned to use research and her creative imagination to reveal the ‘voices of loved ones’ silenced by past incidents they considered too shameful to repeat. Indigenous writers, she observes, often feel constrained from revealing the details of what really happened by family and community concerns and by cultural taboos. Out of her own family’s silences she wrote Plains of Promise, her first novel, in order to tell the story for ‘people who don’t talk and are treated like they don’t exist’ (13). She wanted, she writes: other people to see this. I felt literature, the work of fiction, was the best way of presenting a truth  not the real truth, but more of a truth than non-fiction, which is not really the truth either. (Wright, 2003: 13) Writing literature, for Wright, is a deeply personal way of demonstrating her humanity. She chooses to use her words to convey to readers as explicitly as possible the lives of Indigenous people, ‘the living hell  in a way that is real’ (2002: 13). While working she seeks assistance from her ‘own people to protect their interests’ (1314) in her writing. Although she writes for the wider (white) audience, it is the concerns of her own people and how they will receive the stories that influence her during the writing process (2002: 14). Largely self-educated, Wright’s literacy was honed by her need to communicate ideas in pursuit of her political ideals. When she realised she was becoming committed to a writing career, she studied media and creative writing at RMIT in Melbourne. She was a prolific reader, citing among her many literary influences the writers Salmon Rushdie and Gabriel Garcı´a Ma´rquez. The characteristics of magical realism appear evident in her work and the facility with the English language demonstrated in Wright’s published novels and non-fiction writings make it appear unlikely that she could be edited in ways that did not meet with her acceptance and approval. In an interview with Seekbooks.com.au, Giramondo’s publisher, Ivor Indyk (2007), confirms her prowess when he discusses the difficulties associated with the editing of Alexis Wright’s Carpentaria, which he describes as a manuscript of: ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 139 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 extraordinary power . . . so great that it threatened to overwhelm the syntactical structure of English . . . It was probably the most exacting task I have ever had to perform as an editor  not because there was a lot to do, the book took care of itself to a remarkable degree  but because of the importance of knowing when not to do anything, of allowing the language to bend and expand before this power it had summoned into words. (seekbook.com) At what one might consider the other end of the ‘agency’ scale, storyteller Alex Kruger had little choice but to enlist the assistance of a non-Indigenous collaborator to write his story. Kruger is a member of the Stolen Generations,8 and having spent his formative years being shuttled between institutions and early work, had minimal formal education. His collaboration with Gerard Waterford, published by IAD Press, won the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Human Rights Arts Non-Fiction Award in 2007. A third-person preface reveals that Kruger, too, pursued a political agenda through the telling of his story: an attempt to create a better future, ‘perhaps through a Truth and Reconciliation Commission like in South Africa’ (Kruger & Waterford, 2007: ix). To the question of what the Human Rights Award means to him, Kruger responds: I’m really glad I wrote that book. If that book wasn’t written, people wouldn’t know about my story and what I went through in life. I had a hard life. I had a rough life. No mother to hold me. . . . Writing this book, it brings up all the things about my family life, like my mother, and my family, tribe, and all that. (Gadigal Information Service, 2007) Wright and Kruger exemplify two very different journeys to publication. Both writers know the power that resides in language and storytelling and use it to enlighten the wider (white) Australian readership. While Wright learned her craft through contact with her grandmother and imaginative engagement with her grandmother’s stories, the imperative of activism, and wide reading from the Western literary canon, Kruger engaged in a process of collaborative life writing (with social worker Waterford) initiated from his profound sense of isolation from family. Their collaboration extended over a period of five years. Their foreword acknowledges the generous patience of their publishers who allowed the authors in conjunction with editors to create ‘a much better book for the extra time everyone has spent on it’ (Kruger & Waterford, 2007: viii). Such accommodations to the needs of individual authors by individual editors and publishers demonstrate the directions in which the publication of Indigenous writing is moving. An Indigenous Industry In the latter part of the 20th century, specialist Indigenous publishing houses (notably in the context of this article IAD Press in 1972, and Magabala Books in 1987) were established with Indigenous governing boards but run by white managers with the intention of publishing Indigenous writers and training 140 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 Indigenous staff. By training Indigenous publishing professionals, they intended, as expressed by IAD’s Simon MacDonald, ‘to make [themselves] obsolete’ (in Heiss, 2003: 123). Four Indigenous editors (all women) were trained at Magabala Books and IAD Press during the 1990s. One of them, Sandra Phillips, later edited the University of Queensland Press (UQP) Black Writing Series which, having published more than 30 titles, has established the writing careers of a number of Indigenous writers. Wright’s first novel, Plains of Promise, was published at UQP. Despite these successes, the ideal of an Indigenous industry sector remains largely unfulfilled. Despite their commitment to training and mentoring editors and other publishing staff, the specialist publishers have had difficulty attracting and retaining Indigenous staff. The reasons for this are complex and undoubtedly linked with historical problems faced by the wider Indigenous community: of health, of education, of alienation towards and isolation from mainstream activities. Simon MacDonald suggests that IAD’s inability to pay competitive industry salaries is one problem (in Heiss, 2003: 123). Margaret McDonell (2004a) (IAD) suggests the ‘dearth of Indigenous editors’ is due not only to limited opportunities for training, but also to the diversity of the language and cultural groups within the Indigenous population (8788). Magabala’s publishing manager, Rachael Christensen (personal communica- tion, 5 November 2007), suggests that the shortage of suitable accommodation makes it difficult to attract trainees to Broome. Currently there are no Indigenous people heading up publishing companies in Australia, though Josie Douglas has held senior positions at both Magabala and IAD. She has since left the industry for an academic career. The ‘invisibility of whiteness’ (McDonell, 2004a: 40) is both a reason to publish Indigenous texts and a reason for publishers (especially those controlled by conglomerate and/or multinational interests whose focus is on the profits to be derived from ‘popular’ titles) to exhibit caution when considering such writers. The success of Sally Morgan’s My Place published in 1987 (by Fremantle Arts Centre Press), undeterred by challenges to her representation of Indigeneity,9 opened a niche for Indigenous life writing within Australian publishing (Muecke, 2005; 103120). Even so (and despite individual successes like Ruby Langford Ginibi who was published by both Penguin Books and Angus and Robertson during the 1980s and 1990s), for the larger multinational publishers, the trade book market does not appear to have been sufficiently developed to accommodate a sustained commitment to Indigenous literature. In the 21st century, the niche for black writing is largely supplied by small presses with limited resources but with a commitment to producing a variety of quality literature. Giramondo, a small press run from an academic office, for instance, published Alexis Wright’s award winning second novel Carpentaria. Despite the freedom of small presses to publish titles based on criteria other than ‘commercial success’, the proliferation of Indigenous writing is hampered by a number of issues. The location, for instance, of IAD Press in Alice Springs and Magabala Books in Broome limits both their distribution and publicity opportunities, though it does establish their commitment to communities of Indigenous writers. Specialist Indigenous publishers also tend to rely on ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 141 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 unsolicited manuscripts for their general trade lists, which means that many authors contribute only one title. With limited resources these publishers struggle to develop single book authors  sometimes over many years. They are not positioned to develop and encourage writers by assisting them to enhance their skills over several books, which might assist in repaying their initial editorial investment. A final difficulty is created when authors write for the dual purpose of telling their story for family, friends and community as well as to educate the white community. Increasingly even the specialist Indigenous publishers, whose works are generally subsidised by government and Australia Council grants, are being forced to answer difficult questions before undertaking the production of their books, such as: are these audiences mutually exclusive? Is it possible for an Indigenous writer’s story to engage both audiences? More importantly, from the publisher’s point of view, is it possible to do this cost effectively? Within this complex milieu of facts, fictions and unanswered (seemingly impossible) questions, how may non-Indigenous editors chart an appropriate and ethical course when required to support the publication and editing of the work of Indigenous writers? Margaret McDonell (2004b), currently coordinat- ing editor with IAD Press in Alice Springs, suggests a pragmatic solution to this complex and, in the short term, seemingly irreconcilable situation. In the absence of appropriate numbers of Indigenous editors, their non-Indigenous colleagues may be encouraged to ‘undertake a journey of learning’ during which their ‘assumptions, biases, tastes and preconceptions are examined’ (86). Such an undertaking, she suggests, confronts the privilege conveyed by (the invisibility of) whiteness that ‘colours the observer’s view of the world’ (40), tainting not only the editor’s practice but the publishing processes and the book’s positioning and reception in the marketplace (McDonell, 2004a). A Model for Ethical Cross-Cultural Author-Editor Relationships A skilled editor manages to mediate between the provider of the work and the provider of the means of publication. While the craft of editing is often likened to that of ‘invisible mending’, the role of the editor has equally been considered ‘gate keeping’. Editors take great care with the writer’s words, endeavouring to assist in the production of a manuscript that is as good as it can be for a defined readership, demonstrating their understanding of the sanctity with which they must regard the author’s voice. Concurrently, editors decide what is published and whose voice is heard and they negotiate the form of words that will appear in the finished book. The editor is thus elevated to a position of power relative to any writer whose text they are involved with. The editor’s position of power is particularly evident if the cultural underpinnings of editor and writer are very different, as is the case with non-Indigenous editors editing Indigenous work. This is especially so if the writers are individuals or groups living in remote communities. Margaret McDonell’s (2004a) thesis ‘The invisible hand: Cross-cultural influence on editorial practice’ considers the ‘mediating impact of the editorial process’ (2) on Indigenous literature, with a focus on issues of power in cross-cultural 142 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 collaborative relationships. When the text is Indigenous women’s life writing, she suggests, it is positioned as ‘cultural artefact, political tool, and commercial product’ (v). When its editor is non-Indigenous, she continues, her purpose comes under exceptional scrutiny and self-assessment. An editor questions how she might appropriately perform her editorial functions in a cross- cultural environment when she is only too aware of the issues pertaining to the privilege of the dominant culture as well as the cultural appropriation that inevitably occurs during the publishing process. McDonell writes: In any editorial relationship issues of class, gender, age and educational background are involved in a multitude of possible configurations. When the writer-editor nexus is cross-cultural the potential for mis- understanding, appropriation, paternalism or censorship is magnified a hundred-fold. (2) McDonell takes an issues-based approach to her discussion about editing Indigenous writing rather than the evidence-based approaches exemplified by Jennifer Jones, in which the process of editing is traced from manuscript to published book. Jones’s process, McDonell (2004a) concludes, cannot ‘fully demonstrate the constant negotiation that takes place through the editing process’ (8). Though she would, I believe, have sympathy with Jacklin’s position regarding the agency of Indigenous writers, McDonell articulates concerns about the effect of being the Indigenous cross-cultural collaborator in an unequal partnership. As an editor McDonell (2004a) confronts the conflicting aims in the writer’s purpose: the telling of stories for family in conjunction with their educative function to the wider (white) community (6), as well as the publisher’s commercial imperatives. She must negotiate issues of audience reception and language: the efficacy of the use of Aboriginal Englishes and the difficulties encountered by an editor seeking clarifications to the text for the benefit of broadening an audience beyond that, perhaps, envisaged by the writer. McDonell also teases out the very real insecurities of a non-Indigenous editor endeavouring to confront subliminal racism, which may unconsciously affect her endeavours on the author’s behalf. The politicisation of Indigenous writing (see McGuinness & Walker, 1985) has the potential to undermine the confidence of the non-Indigenous editor in the collaborative partnership, making her more tentative, more hesitant in her approach than she might otherwise be. Ivor Indyk’s comments on Alexis Wright’s style, quoted above, and his belief that the work required little editing arguably indicate a self- conscious cross-cultural sensitivity. Faith Sale’s description of editing as ‘assisting ‘‘the author to realise the author’s intentions’’’, McDonell (2004a) suggests, is a particularly useful definition of the editor’s role in the context of Indigenous writing, which subjugates the editor’s other roles as an employee of the writer or publisher (17). It is important for McDonell that the editor’s presence in the published work be ‘self-consciously acknowledged’ even while the work she has done remains invisible: ‘the trope of invisible mending . . . needs to be replaced by transparent negotiation’ (17). The editorial role is one of alerting the writer to the ‘impact’ their words may have on their intended reader and eliciting ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 143 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 whether that effect is what the writer intended. The editorial role, McDonnel continues, in the case of Indigenous texts must be: . . . transformed from that of ideal and first reader, and gatekeeper, to witness, while practice is transformed from a (supposedly) culturally- neutral exercise to a sometimes uneasy undertaking of constant cross- cultural negotiation and reassessment. It involves the transformation of the editor from guardian of the language to student of life and language. (18) Importantly, McDonell (2004a) asks editors to consider their position as members of the dominant culture: to understand the position in which this places them. Witnessing the story of the Indigenous writer, she asserts (her context being life writing) the editor becomes implicated in the ‘racialised power imbalance’ (87) of which the writer has a lifetime experience. McDonell’s transparent process may be established, she writes, by acknowl- edging the collaboration between writer and editor in the published book in a way that makes the presence of the editor in a text clear to the reader. ‘The use of marginalia’ (in the sense of preliminary and end matter in the form of prefaces, glossaries, foot- or endnotes and other explanatory devices) McDonell (2004a) suggests: can subvert and deconstruct notions of authorship and unmask both editor and the collaborative process . . . [They] can privilege or authorise a text or its author; they may explain matters that are considered unclear, put the writing into a political, geographical, temporal or social context, or attempt to give the writing or author some authority or credibility. (42) She warns, however, that marginalia may also become a site of contention, their positioning in itself being problematic: if situated at the beginning of the work, too much prominence may be given to the white editor; if placed at the end, the editor may appear to command the ‘last word’ (2004a: 32). In Kruger’s story, marginalia take the form of front and end matter. The book commences with a joint set of acknowledgements, followed by a third- person preface explaining Kruger’s intentions in telling the story, information about decision making and the collaborative process, as well as providing some extra mural details of Kruger’s life; the book also contains a family tree followed by references in the end matter. The repetitive use of the first person pronoun in the preface ‘Alec and I . . . ’ throws into sharp focus the role of the non-Indigenous collaborator. Wright’s novels contain minimal and standard marginalia, such as dedication and acknowledgements. Auntie Rita contains a glossary, which, as mentioned earlier, was an acceptable form of marginalia to both Rita and Jackie Huggins. From Rosamund Dalziell, McDonell accepts the idea of the importance of establishing a relationship more akin to ‘personal friendship’ than the objective, distanced relationship that she describes as the ‘professional cooperation’ exhibited in more traditional editorial relationships. In describing her ideal cross-cultural collaborative relationship, McDonell (2004a) evokes the particularly cosy and ‘domestic’ vision of ‘women sitting and yarning’ together (3233). 144 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 Conversely, Jennifer Jones discusses the collaborative relationship between Anne Ross and Margaret Tucker (during the writing of If Everyone Cared) and suggests that the idea of basing collaboration ‘upon an active mutual friendship’ may be flawed. Jones asserts that ‘combining the roles of editor and friend did not prevent the prioritisation of a Eurocentric world view in the editorial choices’ (Jones, 2005). Ultimately, experienced editor McDonell takes a very editor-like approach to the problem. She borrows from the previously published Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Literature from the Australia Council (Janke, 2002) and Writing about Indigenous Australia from the Australian Society of Authors (Heiss, n.d.) and suggests ways these may be adapted to accom- modate the editing of Indigenous life writing by non-Indigenous editors. McDonell (2004a) teases a number of applicable themes from the documents, which form a ‘conditional map across this contested territory’ (90). Apart from being ‘basically good editorial practice’ (91), the protocols, she suggests, enshrine a moral imperative of respect for Indigenous culture in a ‘society where whiteness bestows privilege’ (91). They highlight legal imperatives, against a background of significant differences between Western notions of copyright and Indigenous practices of community custodianship. There are professional aspects also to the use of protocols. McDonell argues a case for editorial responsibility towards developing the potential of an individual writer’s work (91). Important for the growing market in Indigenous writing are the historical and educational functions of the protocols. Indigenous writers are enabled to write their own history, free from the dominant perspective of the colonising culture, beginning an educative process for readers that will redress past imbalances and serve ‘as antidote to less informed writing’ (91). McDonell (2004a) rejects arguments like those of McGuinness and Walker (1985) and Heiss (2003) that call for the indigenisation of the industry, stating that ‘a more desirable outcome might be a more culturally aware and diverse publishing industry’ (89). To this I would add that a culturally aware and developed market for Indigenous writing is also required. Conclusion Successful cross-cultural collaborations are, I believe, imperative if Indi- genous writers across a variety of genres are to be facilitated towards publication. The difficulties presented by the small number of professional Indigenous editors engaged in the Australian publishing industry, and the parlous state of Indigenous education, challenge industry professionals and educators (black and white) to consider ways in which Indigenous writers may indeed become the gatekeepers of what is ‘flowing in and out of their communities’. If, as non-Indigenous editors, we acknowledge the gulf between the framing concepts of the two cultures (Tuhiwai Smith, 1999) and attempt to make our consciousness of this position integral to our own editorial practice; if, as non-Indigenous editors, we heed Bradford’s (2001) warning against the patronisation inherent in ‘Aboriginalism’ (110), non-Indigenous editors can, ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 145 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 indeed must under current circumstances, participate in the editorial process of Indigenous publication. The concept itself, at least on a case-by-case basis, is not without support from Indigenous writers themselves. Jackie Huggins, for instance, was surprised to find the editing of Auntie Rita ‘unimposing and enabling’ (Huggins & Huggins, 1994: 4). Alex Kruger (2007) concedes the editing of Alone on the Soaks, initiated by Indigenous editor Josie Douglas, but completed under the purview of non-Indigenous editors Marg Bowman and Jill Walsh, ‘was a much better book for the extra time everyone has spent on it’ (viii). Alexis Wright (2006), also, has expressed great satisfaction with the non- Indigenous editors of Carpentaria, writing: I am also blessed to have worked with two of the finest editors in Australia  Bruce Sims and Ivor Indyk  who at different stages in the development of the book contributed their insight, understanding and impeccable judgement. (520) Despite the range of educational, life and writing experience of Indigenous writers, their needs in terms of editorial support, I suggest, are remarkably similar. Indigenous writers demonstrate agency in articulating their purpose in writing and by participation in the publication process. Furthermore, Indigenous writers, whether living in remote communities or urban environ- ments, may participate equally in ‘authentic’ Indigenous culture (derived from Bradford, 2001:129). As a result I wish to advocate the usefulness, regardless of the genre into which an Indigenous writer may be classified during the publication process, of McDonell’s ‘journey of learning’ for non-Indigenous editors approaching Indigenous texts. Correspondence Any correspondence should be directed to Robin Freeman, Deakin University, School of Communication and Creative Arts, Faculty of Arts and Education, 221 Burwod Highway, Burwood, 3125 Australia, (robin@deakin. edu.au). Notes 1. Here I refer to events such as former Prime Minister Paul Keating’s ‘Redfern Speech’ of 1992, in which he asserted that ‘ . . . in truth, we cannot confidently say that we have succeeded as we would like to have succeeded if we have not managed to extend opportunity and care, dignity and hope to the indigenous people of Australia  the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island people’. (See full text at http://www.apology.west.net.au/redfern.html). Also, to the High Court deci- sion in ‘Mabo versus the State of Queensland’, in which the ‘doctrine’ of terra nullius was rejected (for a summary see: http://antarqld.org.au/03_news/ mabo.html); and the current Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s apology to the Stolen Generations on 13 February 2008 (see http://www.dfat.gov.au/indigenous_back- ground/rudd_speech.html). The important issue of compensation, however, has yet (as at February 2009) to be addressed and this continues to be a cause for disillusionment of many Australians white and black. 2. In a report on Government services 2008 it was revealed that in Australia the average life expectancy of Indigenous peoples is 15 years shorter than for other races. In the Northern Territory a majority of Indigenous children fail almost every 146 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 literacy and numeracy benchmark tests (Colbatch, 2008). See also ‘Another Country’, published in Good Weekend on 15 March 2008 by John van Tiggelen, in which an Aurukun Shire Councillor reveals ‘our kids end up with a grade 2 education in grade 6, so they cannot compete’ (van Tiggelen, 2008: 30). 3. In Australia the majority of editors (who undertake copyediting and structural editing as well as project management) are female: 87% in 2007 (see ‘Fourth national survey of editors’ at http://www.socedvic.org). 4. McDonell is an experienced non-Indigenous editor with IAD Press in Alice Springs. These ideas are taken from her MA thesis, which focuses on the editing of Indigenous women’s life writing. McDonell distinguishes between autobiographi- cal narratives and fiction (which is outside the parameters of her study). I make no such distinction here because I argue that the issues she deals with in her thesis are (almost) equally applicable to the Indigenous writers of fiction. Alexis Wright (2002), for instance, believes that literary fiction is a vehicle for truth that shields family and community from the shame associated with past events (10, 13). 5. My Place was published in 1987 by Fremantle Arts Centre Press, selling 25,000 copies in the year of release; Wandering Girl was published in the same year by Magabala Books and sold 20,000 copies (Muecke 2005: 109). Muecke links the reception of these works by their publishers (especially Morgan’s My Place) with the publication in 1981 of (non-Indigenous writer) A.B. Facey’s A Fortunate Life (112.) ‘What I would argue’, Muecke writes, ‘ is that the appearance of an Aboriginal literature over the past two decades is not only in response to historical conditions of repression and struggle but is also a consequence of the publishing industry being in a state of readiness, even eagerness, to publish work by Aboriginal writers’ (2005: 113). 6. For further details of the Mabo case see National Archives of Australia site http:// www.foundingdocs.gov.au/item.asp?dID33. Details of the History Wars as they pertain to Indigenous people can be found in Macintyre, Stuart and Anna Clark’s The History Wars (Melbourne University Press Carlton, 2003) (particularly Chapter 8 ‘Frontier Conflict’). For further details about the ‘Bringing Them Home Report’, and ‘The Stolen Generations’ see note 8. 7. Alexis Wright’s second novel Carpentaria attracted extensive media coverage (for example Cassidy, 2007, Davidson, 2006, O’Brien, 2007, Ravenscroft, 2006) despite its publication by small independent publisher Giramondo under the auspices of the Writing and Society Research Group at the University of Western Sydney. It won the Miles Franklin Literary Award (for a novel of ‘the highest literary merit’ that presents ‘Australian life in any of its phases’ [http://www.trust.com.au/ awards/miles_franklin/]) in 2007 as well as the Australian Literature Society Gold Medal, the Victorian Premier’s Literary Award’s Vance Palmer Prize for Fiction, the Queensland Premier’s Literary Award for Best Fiction Book and the Australian Book Industry Award’s Literary Fiction Book of the Year. Additionally, the novel was shortlisted for numerous prizes both in Australia and internation- ally: the Christina Stead Prize for Fiction, the New South Wales Premier’s Literary Awards, the Best Book in The Age Book of the Year Award, and the Commonwealth Writers Prize in South East Asia and South Pacific Region in the same year. In addition, Wright’s first novel Plains of Promise (University of Queensland Press Black Australian Writers Series, 1997) was shortlisted for the Best First Book Award, South-East Asia and Pacific Region; the New South Wales Premier’s Literary Awards, and The Age Book of the Year Award in 1998 (Austlit Database, 2008). 8. From Stolen Generations Alliance website: ‘The Stolen Generations is the name generally given to Aboriginal people  mainly those with some non-Aboriginal ancestry  who were removed from their families as children and sent to institutions or adopted into non-Aboriginal families as a result of government policies now recognised as misguided and destructive’ (at http://www.sgallian- ce.org.au/qna1.htm). Alex Kruger was a member of the Stolen Generations. His was one of many stories collected for Sir Ronald Wilson’s ‘Bringing Them Home ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 147 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 Report’, published in 1997 (see http://www.humanrights.gov.au/Social_Justice/ bth_report/report/index.html) and he was a claimant in the (unsuccessful) High Court challenge to claim compensation as a result. For a summary of this case see Buti (1998). 9. Following publication, Morgan’s work was criticised as an untypical experience of Aboriginality. It was suggested that she presented a ‘sanitised’ version of the common Indigenous experience. Jackie Huggins described the writing as portray- ing ‘the life of a middle-class Anglo woman’; Marcia Langton suggested that Morgan’s story ‘assuages the guilt of the whites’ (See Heiss, 2003: 102 ff). Nevertheless, My Place was, according to Heiss (2003), ‘the most popular book ever published by an Aboriginal author’ (101). It is reputed to have sold in excess of 500,000 copies and has been studied in Australian schools. In 2008, Fremantle Arts Centre Press released a hard cover 21st Anniversary Edition of Morgan’s book. References Austlit Database (2008) Alexis Wright biographical details. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http://www.austlit.edu.au/run?exShowAgent&agentIdA%23(- Bradford, C. (2001) Reading race: Aboriginality in Australian children’s literature. Carlton South: Melbourne University Press. Buti, T. (1998) Kruger and Bray and the Common Law. University of New South Wales Law Journal 21 (1) 232239. Cassidy, K. (2007) Wright’s Carpentaria wins Miles Franklin. Articulate: ABC News, Arts and Entertainment 21 June 2007. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http:// www.abc.net.au/news/arts/articulate/200706/s1958613.htm Colbatch, T. (2008) Stark figures ram home plight of Aborigines and islanders. The Age, 31 January (p. 3). Davidson, L. (2006) Review of Carpentaria. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http:// www.smh.com.au/news/book-reviews/carpentaria/2006/09/18/ 1158431619821.html?page2 Gadigal Information Service (2007) Winner of 2007 HREOC Human Rights Arts Non- Fiction Award, 10 December. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http://www. gadigal.org.au/Arts/Winner%20of%202007%20HREOC%20Human%20Rights%20 Arts%20Non-Fiction.aspx?Id122 Heiss, A. (2003) Dhuuluu-Yala (to talk straight): Publishing Indigenous literature. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. Heiss, A. (n.d.) Writing about indigenous Australia: Some issues to consider and protocols to follow. Strawberry Hills: Australian Society of Authors. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: www.asauthors.org/lib/pdf/Heiss_Writing_About_Indigenou- s_Australia.pdf Heiss, A. and Minter P. (eds) (2008) Macquarie Pen anthology of Aboriginal literature. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin. Huggins, J. (1998) Sister girl: The writings of Aboriginal activist and historian Jackie Huggins. St Lucia: University of Queensland Press. Huggins, R. and Huggins, J. (1994) Auntie Rita. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. Hughes, M-A. (1998) An issue of authenticity: Editing texts by Aboriginal writers’. Southerly 58 (2), 4858. Indyk, I. (2007) Interview with ‘Shearer’s on Norton’. Retrieved 31 January, 2008, from: http://www.seekbooks.com.au/book/Carpentaria/isbn/9781920882174 Jacklin, M. (2004) Cross talk: Collaborative indigenous life writing in Australia and Canada. PhD thesis, Deakin University. Janke, T. (2002) Writing cultures: Protocols for producing indigenous Australian literature. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Arts Board. Strawberry Hills: Australia Council. Jones, J. (2005) As long as she got her voice: How cross-cultural collaboration shapes Aboriginal textuality. Altitude Vol 5 Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http:// www.api-network.com/scgi-bin/altitude21c/fly.cgi?page Issue5&n2 148 International Journal for the Practice and Theory of Creative Writing D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 Kruger, A. and Waterford, G. (2007) Alone on the soaks: The life and times of Alec Kruger. Alice Springs: IAD Press. McDonell, M. (2004a) The invisible hand: Cross-cultural influence on editorial practice. M Phil thesis, University of Queensland. McDonell, M. (2004b) Protocols, political correctness and discomfort zones: Indigenous life writing and non-Indigenous editing. Hecate 30 (1), 8395. McGuinness, B. and Walker D. (1985) The politics of Aboriginal literature. In: Davis J. and B. Hodge (eds) Aboriginal writing today: Papers from the First National Conference of Aboriginal Writers held in Perth, Western Australia, in 1983. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies. Muecke, S. (2005) Textual spaces: Aboriginality and cultural studies (rev. ed.). Perth: Curtin University of Technology. O’Brien, K. (2007) Wright wins Miles Franklin for story of homeland. Transcript 7.30 Report. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/ 2007/s1958594.htm Ravenscroft, A. (2006) Review of Carpentaria. Retrieved 11 January, 2009, from: http:// www.theage.com.au/news/book-reviews/carpentaria/2006/08/18/ 1155408003154.html Tuhiwai Smith, L. (1999) Decolonizing methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples. London & New York: Zed Books and Dunedin: University of Otago Press. van Tiggelen, J. (2008) Another country. Good Weekend 15 March (pp. 2230). Wright, A. (2002) Politics of writing. Southerly 62 (2), 1020. Wright, A. (2006) Carpentaria. Artarmon: Giramondo. ‘We Must Become Gatekeepers’: Editing Indigenous Writing 149 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 2 3: 45 2 1 Ja nu ar y 20 10 