ABSTRACT: 
peer-reviewedOpen Access funded by Economic and Social Research CouncilPerceiving one's causal control is important for adaptive behavior. Studying depression and other individual differences has provided insight into typical as well as pathological causal processing. We set out to study factors that have been shown to distinguish those with and without signs of depression and affect perceptions of causal control: levels of behavior, the availability of outcomes and learning about the environment or context. Two experiments were carried out in which participants, scoring low and high on the Beck Depression Inventory using established cutoffs, completed a causal control task, in which outcomes occurred with a low (.25) or high probability (.75). Behavior levels were either constrained (N-1 = 73) or unconstrained (N-2 = 74). Overall, findings showed that levels of behavior influenced people's experiences of the context in which events occurred. For all participants, very high behavior levels eliminated sensitivity to levels of outcomes occurring in the environment and lead to judgments that were consistent with conditional probabilities as opposed to the experimenter programmed contingency. Thus increased behavior increased perceived control via influence on context experience. This effect was also evident for those scoring high on the BDI. Overall conclusions are that behavior and context provide two important interlinked psychological pathways to perceived control. However, situations that constrain people's ability to respond freely can prevent people with signs of depression from taking control of a situation that would otherwise be uncontrollable. (C) 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).PUBLISHEDpeer-reviewe. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Perceiving one's causal control is important for adaptive behavior. Studying depression and other individual differences has provided insight into typical as well as pathological causal processing. We set out to study factors that have been shown to distinguish those with and without signs of depression and affect perceptions of causal control: levels of behavior, the availability of outcomes and learning about the environment or context. Two experiments were carried out in which participants, scoring low and high on the Beck Depression Inventory using established cutoffs, completed a causal control task, in which outcomes occurred with a low (.25) or high probability (.75). Behavior levels were either constrained (N1 = 73) or unconstrained (N2 = 74). Overall, findings showed that levels of behavior influenced people's experiences of the context in which events occurred. For all participants, very high behavior levels eliminated sensitivity to levels of outcomes occurring in the environment and lead to judgments that were consistent with conditional probabilities as opposed to the experimenter programmed contingency. Thus increased behavior increased perceived control via influence on context experience. This effect was also evident for those scoring high on the BDI. Overall conclusions are that behavior and context provide two important interlinked psychological pathways to perceived control. However, situations that constrain people's ability to respond freely can prevent people with signs of depression from taking control of a situation that would otherwise be uncontrollable. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12Contents lists available at ScienceDirectActa Psychologicaj ourna l homepage: www.e lsev ie r .com/ locate /actpsyTwo pathways to causal control: Use and availability of information inthe environment in people with and without signs of depressionN.C. Byrom a, R.M. Msetfi b,⁎, R.A. Murphy aa Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UKb Centre for Social Issues Research, Department of Psychology, University of Limerick, Republic of Ireland⁎ Corresponding author.E-mail address: rachel.msetfi@ul.ie (R.M. Msetfi).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2015.02.0040001-6918/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.Va b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 10 October 2014Received in revised form 7 January 2015Accepted 4 February 2015Available online xxxxPsycINFO classification:234324203211Keywords:Causal controlContingency judgmentAssociative learningDepressionContextPerceiving one's causal control is important for adaptive behavior. Studying depression and other individual dif-ferences has provided insight into typical as well as pathological causal processing. We set out to study factorsthat have been shown to distinguish those with and without signs of depression and affect perceptions of causalcontrol: levels of behavior, the availability of outcomes and learning about the environment or context. Two ex-periments were carried out in which participants, scoring low and high on the Beck Depression Inventory usingestablished cutoffs, completed a causal control task, in which outcomes occurred with a low (.25) or high prob-ability (.75). Behavior levels were either constrained (N1 = 73) or unconstrained (N2 = 74). Overall, findingsshowed that levels of behavior influenced people's experiences of the context in which events occurred. For allparticipants, very high behavior levels eliminated sensitivity to levels of outcomes occurring in the environmentand lead to judgments that were consistent with conditional probabilities as opposed to the experimenter pro-grammed contingency. Thus increased behavior increased perceived control via influence on context experience.This effect was also evident for those scoring high on the BDI. Overall conclusions are that behavior and contextprovide two important interlinked psychological pathways to perceived control. However, situations thatconstrain people's ability to respond freely can prevent people with signs of depression from taking control ofa situation that would otherwise be uncontrollable.© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Perception of control over actions and their consequences is a hall-mark of adaptive behavior and good mental health (Taylor & Brown,1988). Studies have shown that people in general can discriminatebetween experimentally controlled situations in which they do and donot have control over events (Allan & Jenkins, 1983; Dickinson,Shanks, & Evenden, 1984). In addition, comparisons between distinctgroups of people based on pre-existing individual differences, such aslevels of depression, have been used as a tool to inform our understand-ing of the psychological processes involved in causal control for peoplein general (e.g., Msetfi, Murphy, Simpson, & Kornbrot, 2005). This previ-ous work shares the implicit assumption that the participant's causaltask is simply to learn the experimenter-presented relation and thatthey may do so accurately or in a biased fashion (for a detailed back-ground, see Allan, 1993).However, causal information is dynamic andmuch as the uncertain-ty principle (Heisenberg, 1927) states that themere action ofmeasuringthe velocity of quantum particles changes their velocity, human (oranimal) action has an impact on the environment in which the actiontakes place; the explorer not only catalogs and measures the newterritory but by her very presence changes the subject of enquiry. In. This is an open access article underthe case of causal control, the participant can come to define both herexperience of and perception of the contingency. Thus causal controljudgments do not measure the ability to perceive a particular action-outcome contingency, like one would measure the perception of theweight of a held object, but rather the perception is a reflection ofboth the action-outcome relation and the environmental impact ofactions over time.Along these lines, behavioral approaches to depression (e.g.,Lewinsohn, 1974) and studies looking at causal control in depression(e.g., Blanco, Matute, & Vadillo, 2012) have suggested that the extentto which people ‘do’ potentially controlling behaviors, in combinationwith the relative availability of events that they might wish to control,influences the control they experience and the relation between de-pression and perceptions of control. For example, Alloy and Abramson(1979) showed that people with mild symptoms of depression judgedthat they had little control over frequently occurring events in contrastto people with no signs of depression who thought that they did havesome control. In fact, the experimenters had programmed the experi-mental task such that neither group had control and suggested thatpeople with depression were more realistic in their perceptions ofcontrol. Both groups accurately judged their lack of controlwhen eventsoccurred infrequently suggesting that the availability of events isimportant. Further, Blanco et al., (2012) showed that the ‘depressivethe CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).2 N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12realism’ effect occurs because people with a higher levels of depressionsymptoms produce lower levels of behavior which directly predict alow perception of control. Thus sensitivity to outcome availability andlevels of behavior would seem to be critical to a healthy assessment ofcausal control. In order to further our understanding of these behavioraldynamics of causal control, we report two experiments, which test howlevels of behavior and the availability of events influence judgments ofcontrol in mildly depressed and non-depressed participants. First weprovide a brief background to this work.Systematic efforts to understand the psychological processes under-lying perceived causal control were informed byHume's (1789) key ob-servation that cause cannot be observed directly but must be inferredfrom information available in the environment, such as the temporal,spatial and statistical relations between actions and outcomes. In partic-ular, measuring sensitivity to causal control has involved manipulatingthe statistical contingency between an action and outcome and evaluat-ing accuracy and/or bias in judgments (Shanks & Dickinson, 1987;Wasserman, Elek, Chatlosh, & Baker, 1993). One metric termed ΔP, ordelta P (Allan, 1980), defines the one-way contingency between actionsand outcomes as the difference between the probability of the outcomeoccurring following the participant's action, p(O|A), and the probabilitywhen no action has taken place, p(O| ~ A). When the two probabilitiesare equal there is no contingency and when the difference≠ 0, then apositive or negative contingency is present. Thus the value of ΔP canvary from−1 through 0 to +1, like a correlation coefficient, which isconsistent with a continuum of preventative control, through no con-trol, to complete generative control over the outcome. As illustrated inthe contingency table in Fig. 1, there are four possible action-outcomeconjunctions that are all equally relevant to this calculation (describedAction PresentPresentAbsentΔP = 0Action Present AbsentPresentAbsentΔP = 0Action Present AbsentPresentAbsentLowp(A)Highp(A)Low p(O)5 15 P(O|~A) =.25Outcome20 60 P(O|A) =.255 15 P(O|~A) =.255 15 P(O|A) =.25OutcomeOutACFig. 1.Contingency tables showing four possible combinations of action-outcome information. Thto the frequencies of action-outcome conjunctions. ΔP = A/(A + B)− C/(C + D). All examplesas cells A, B, C and D). After being exposed to a series of such conjunc-tions, participants could be asked to rate their own causal control overoutcome occurrence using a judgment scale which maps onto theupper and lower bounds of ΔP. Thus the determination of relative andabsolute accuracy should be straightforward.If causal control in conceptualized in terms of this contingencymatrix, then key components of the ΔP calculation can change withoutinfluencing overall causal control, allowing assessment of systematicbias. For example, levels of behavior are conceptualized as the probabil-ity of action, p(A), whereas the availability of events that people mightwish to control is measured as the probability of the outcome, p(O).Fig. 1 demonstrates how p(A) and p(O) can vary while ΔP remains con-stant. The four exemplar conditions shown in Fig. 1 are identical in rela-tion toΔP, though p(A) and p(O) are varied systematically with low andhigh levels of both displayed. This suggests that perceived causal controlshould not vary between these conditions. To the contrary, however,participants appear to be sensitive to these shifts, showing elevatedjudgments of control with increasing p(A) and p(O) (Blanco, Matute,& Vadillo, 2011; Msetfi et al., 2005; Murphy, Vallee-Tourangeau, Msetfi,& Baker, 2005). These patterns of effects have been interpreted as asystematic and non-normative bias towards illusory control.However, considering causal control only in relation to the contin-gency programmed by the experimenter alonemay under estimate fac-tors influencing the experience and perception of causal control (Msetfi,Murphy, & Kornbrot, 2012). Firstly, it is possible that the constant con-tingency assumption is incorrect; changing p(O) or p(A) may produceunintentional changes in the contingency that participants experienceΔPEXP (Msetfi et al., 2012). So, as an example, increasing either p(A) orp(O) over a fixed time frame may restrict participants' experiences toAbsentΔP = 0Action Present AbsentPresentAbsentΔP = 0Action Present AbsentPresentAbsentHigh p(O)P(O|A) = 0.7515 5 P(O|~A) = 0.75Outcome 60 2015 5 P(O|~A) = 0.75 15 5 P(O|A) = 0.75OutcomecomeBDe top panel shows generic information fromwhichΔP is calculated,where A, B, C andD referinvolve conditions in which ΔP = 0, yet the p(O) and the p (A) is either low or high.3N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12p(O|A) only, meaning thatΔP is actually equal to p(O|A) (Matute, 1996).Thus, participants' judgments may be consistent with the contingencythey actually experience ΔPEXP, as opposed to the contingency pro-grammed by the experimenter and therefore not evidence of a specificbias in judgment. Moreover, Herrnstein's (1961) matching law, alongwith evidence from contingency learning studies (Msetfi et al., 2012),tells us that with increases in p(O), behavior levels are also likely toincrease in order to ‘match’ that level of outcomes. This suggests thatin many studies, manipulations of p(O) and variation in p(A) may beconfounded.Second, more events will occur within the same time period thanotherwise would be the case when there are increases of p(A) andp(O), like those displayed in Fig. 1. Changes to temporal presentationare important (Buehner & McGregor, 2006; Shanks, Pearson, &Dickinson, 1989). For instance, an increase in the temporal spacingdelay between action-outcome conjunctions is conceptually equivalentincreasing exposure to the context or Cell D of the contingency matrix(Msetfi, Murphy, & Simpson, 2007; Msetfi et al., 2005). Decreasing thetemporal space has the opposite effect. This is because the temporalspace between action-outcome conjunctions is a periods of time duringwhich no actions and no outcomes occur. Thus, cell D, due to itsunmarked status, is particularly vulnerable to changes in the temporaldistribution of contingency events, especially in conditions in whichp(O| ~ A) is greater than 0. Thus, increases in the temporal spacewould lead to ΔPEXP N experimentally programmed ΔPPROG (Msetfiet al., 2005) whereas decreases in the temporal space would lead tothe opposite pattern,ΔPEXP b ΔPPROG. It is also important to note that in-cluding only experimental events (spaces + cell D) into the contingen-cy calculation could be thought of as controversial, as any periods oftime [in an individual's life] during which no actions or outcomesoccur could be potential candidates to be cell D experience (Baker,Murphy, & Vallee-Tourangeau, 1996). It is clear, therefore, that thevalue of cell D itself is ambiguous and that changes to levels of behavioror the availability of outcomes over time, in conditions in whichp(O| ~ A) N 0 will exacerbate this ambiguity and render p(O| ~ A) un-known and therefore ΔPEXP as well (Msetfi et al., 2012). Thus whilethe information type (cell D) to be included in the equation is known,the extent and frequency is unknown.Importantly studies have suggested that sensitivity to such ambigu-ity is a key area of causal control that distinguishes depressed and non-depressed people's perceptions of causal control. This is because peoplewho are mildly depressed do not tend to produce judgments of controlthat are sensitive to the availability of outcomes, p(O) (Alloy &Abramson, 1979), unlike healthy people who generally judge thatthey have more control when there are more outcomes available(e.g., Dickinson et al., 1984). In addition, factors which increase thesize of such p(O) effects and increase the perception of control in thenon-depressed, including increasing the duration of the empty tempo-ral spaces in the procedure - cell D instances - do not seem to affectdepressed participants similarly (Msetfi et al., 2007; Msetfi et al.,2005). Furthermore, low levels of behavioral activity in depression(Lewinsohn, Sullivan, & Grosscup, 1980), have been shown to mediatelowperceptions of causal control (Blanco et al., 2011). Given that behav-ior has the potential to fill empty temporal spaces with control enhanc-ing information, i.e., action outcomepairings or cell A instances (Matute,1996), low levels of behavior would exacerbate this problem (Blanco,Matute, & Vadillo, 2009). Thus it seems that two potential pathwaysto an increased perception of control - levels of behavior p(A) and sen-sitivity to the availability of outcomes p(O) - are compromised indepression. Understanding mood related differences in the pathwaysto causal control will also be informative in explicating the processesunderlying healthy processing.Thus far we have discussed how changes to p(A) or p(O) mayinfluence each other, change p(O| ~ A) and renderΔP unknown and am-biguous. Though the availability of outcomes, p(O), levels of behaviorp(A), as well as exposure to the temporal space that is the environmentor context in the absence of actions or outcomes, p(~O| ~ A), all influ-ence judgments of control, the effects of one on the other have not sofar been studied. In addition, we have described how when people aredepressed, they tend to perceive less control than healthy people, andare less likely to produce control enhancing behavior or be sensitive tocontrol enhancing information. Thus far, these effects have not beenstudied together only separately. Therefore the experiments reportedhere were designed to explore how all three of these factors interactby manipulating levels of p(O), observing behavioral variabilityp(A) while comparingmildly depressed and non-depressed participantgroups. Thus our goalswere two-fold. First,wewanted to test the extenttowhich peoples' levels of depression predicted their levels of behavior,and the effect of behavior on ΔPEXP and thus their perception of control.Second, we aimed to explore dynamic changes in behavior, sensitivityto p(O) and perceptions of casual control during the learning process.In order to achieve these goals, it was necessary to use a contingencyjudgment procedurewhich allowedus tomanipulate p(O) butwhich alsoallowed observation of people's naturally occurring activity levels, p(A).Many studies have used discrete trial designs (Alloy & Abramson, 1979;Dickinson et al., 1984; Msetfi et al., 2005) in which participant behavioris constrained to fixed time windows and, as such, is not self-instigated or self-regulated. The discrete trialsmethod is often preferredas it allows the experimenter to control and define participants' experi-ences of contingency information (although see Msetfi et al., 2005 forparticular areas of ambiguity in this procedure). However, discrete trialslimit the extent to which the influences of temporal spacing and theavailability of outcomes can be studied in relation to naturally occurringlevels of behavioral activity. Thus for these particular studies we choseto use a free-operant procedure in which there are no discriminable tri-als, responses may be repeatedly performed at any time and naturallyoccurring behavioral activity may be studied (see also: Wasserman,Chatlosh, & Neunaber, 1983; Wasserman et al., 1993). There are ofcourse disadvantages to use of the free-operant procedure that wewill address fully in the general discussion.1. Experiment 1In Experiment 1, we used a free-operant procedure in order to testour hypotheses. Free-operant procedures differ from discrete trials pro-cedures in two important respects. They allow participants to chooseboth when and how frequently to respond. Therefore any differencesbetween our findings and previous studies showing depression andp(O) effects might be due to differences in levels of behavior or becauseparticipants have the opportunity to initiate and self regulate their ownbehavior. Thus, it was important that, in the first experiment, we repli-cate the depression and p(O) effects that have generally been reportedusing discrete trials designs with long intervals (approximately 15-s)in between each trial (e.g., Alloy & Abramson, 1979; Msetfi et al.,2005). We therefore introduced a novel task instruction in order toretain similar temporal constraints of previous work while allowingthe behavioral variability we wished to study.In addition, at regular intervals during the procedure, participantswere asked for ratings of their own control (action rating) over theoutcome and ratings of the context's control (context rating) over theoutcome. This last measure is important as it allows us to assess partic-ipants' sensitivity both to changes in the availability of environmentalinformation and their own perception of personal control against theoccurrence of events that occur randomly in the environment. All condi-tions had a programmed ΔPPROG = 0. We predicted that participantswithout signs of depression would rate their own control as higher inhigh p(O) than low p(O) conditions and higher than participantsreporting signs of mild depression.We further predicted that this effectwould be driven by higher levels of behavior and a greater tendencyto discriminate between their own control and that of the context bynon-depressed participants.4 N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–122. Method2.1. Participants73 university students, recruited via university email lists,volunteered to take part in this study. A priori power analysis indicatedthat a sample of 70 participants was required for a power of .8 to detectmedium effects using the experimental design described below. Thus allvolunteers were tested. However, four participants were excluded fromthedata set as they did not follow the task instructions, eithermakingnokey presses at all (n= 2) or engaging in a key press ratemore than 1 SDabove themean (M=19.80 key presses/block, SD=162.67). Thereforethe final sample comprised n= 69 participants.All participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI:Beck, Ward, Mendelson, Mock, & Erbaugh, 1961) before visiting thelab and again during their visit. On the basis of these BDI scores, non-depressed participants were categorized as a member of the low BDIgroup (scores of 8 or below, n= 38, with n= 23 females), and partici-pants who showed signs of mild depression were categorized as thehigh BDI group (scores of 9 or above, n = 31, with n = 21 females).These cutoffs for BDI classification have been used in many previousstudies (e.g., Alloy & Abramson, 1979). Table 1 shows that these groupswere matched on a range of demographic and cognitive variables, in-cluding age, short term memory span (Digit span test: Lezak, 1995) orestimated IQ (Barona et al., 1984). In addition, and as expected, thehigh BDI group scored significantly higher than the low BDI groupon the BDI and other measures of depression, anxiety and stress(Depression, Anxiety, Stress Scales DASS: Lovibond & Lovibond,1995).2.2. DesignThis study involved two design components, a quasi-experimentaldesign and a correlational design. In the experimental component, weused a mixed (2 × 2 × 3) × 2 fully factorial design. The within subjectfactors were control cue (action, context), p(O) (low .25, high .75),and time block with three levels (blocks 1, 2, 3). The between subjectsvariable was BDI group (low, high). In addition, the order ofp(O) exposurewas counterbalanced. Dependent variableswere the par-ticipants' judgments of control, the number of key presses performedand the ΔPEXP calculated by the programme on the basis of participantbehavior.The correlational component of the study explored the extent towhich levels of depression were predictive of judgments of controlin relation to (1) the size of p(O) effects, and (2) people's degree ofperceived personal control over and above that exerted by the con-text (see Fig. 2). The aim was to test whether this relationship wasmediated through two key outcome variables, the number of keyTable 1Demographic and depression relevant characteristics of each group for Experiment 1.Low BDI(n= 38)High BDI(n= 31)Independentgroups t-test*X SE X SE t pAge 21.34 .56 22.35 .76 1.09 .278IQ 111.44 .80 112.55 .99 .49 .626DS 7.87 .18 7.74 .19 .88 .388BDI 2.74 .40 14.87 .90 13.17 b .001DASS(A) 2.37 .37 6.00 .70 4.79 b .001(D) 3.18 .57 11.77 1.22 6.79 b .001(S) 5.29 .77 12.39 1.32 4.85 b .001Note: DS = Digit Span; BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; DASS = Depression, Anxietyand Stress Scales; (A) = Anxiety subscale; (D) = Depression subscale; (S) = Stresssubscale. *df= 67.presses made by each participant and the resulting ΔP calculatedby the programme. Therefore, the two outcome variables were‘p(O) effect’ (high - low p(O) action rating) and personal control(action – context rating).2.3. Materials2.3.1. Free-operant contingency taskThe presentation of experimental events was programmed using aMacintosh computer and REALbasic (2009, Release 2.1) software. Thetask was presented within a realistic scenario and cover story inwhich participants were asked to test their own control over the occur-rence of a 2-s music clip (outcome) by pressing the spacebar (action orkey press) on the computer keyboard. Participants were asked to leavearound 15-s between their responses. Every key press recorded at anytime would immediately generate an outcome at the scheduled proba-bility, p(O|A). In low p(O) conditions, p(O|A) and p(O| ~ A) were always.25, and .75 in high p(O) conditions. In addition, during the procedure,the computer programme would check the keyboard for a key pressevery 15 s. If, at that point, the key was not pressed, the programmewould record the occurrence of a ‘no press’ trial and the outcomewould occur at the scheduled probability [p(O| ~ A)]. Note that the15 s time bin was timed to ensure similarity between p(O| ~ A) andp(O|A) experience and the timing used with discrete trials procedures(e.g., Alloy & Abramson, 1979; Msetfi et al., 2005).Each p(O) condition was located within a distinct virtual context,represented by pictures of different rooms in a house. After each 5-minute block (3000 ms) of exposure to the context, participants wereasked to rate their own control (action rating), and that of the context(context rating), over the outcome. There were three 5-minute timeblocks of low p(O) conditions and 3 of high p(O) conditions. The ratingswere made on the computer screen using a slider on a judgment scale,which varied from−100 (labeled totally prevent) through 0 (labeledno influence) to +100 (labeled totally control), with increments of+/−1. Other dependent variables included activity levels, as measuredby the absolute number of key presses made in each 5-minute block. Inaddition, we also calculated ΔPEXP as p(O|A)CALC− p(O| ~ A)CALC, wherethe conditional probabilities were calculated (hence CALC) using the 15 stime bin created by instructing participants to count 15 s between eachkey press and the programming loop which checked for a key pressevery 15 s. Probabilities were then calculated such that if the participantmade 20 key presses of which 15were reinforced, p(O|A)CALC= .75, andif the programme logged 20 ‘no key press’ occasions of which 15 werereinforced, then p(O| ~ A)CALC = .75, and ΔPEXP = 0.2.3.2. Beck Depression Inventory (BDI: Beck et al., 1961)The BDI is a self-report measure of depression and has been usedwith clinical and student populations for many years. Participantswere asked to choose from 21 statements that best describe them.These ranged from neutral statements (e.g., I do not feel like a failure)scored as 0, to more extreme mood related statements (e.g., I feel I ama complete failure as a person) scored as up to a value of 3. Total scorescould range from 0 to 63 where higher scores indicate higher levels ofdepression. The BDI has been validated in student samples, correlationsof .77 being reported between BDI scores and a psychiatric rating ofseverity of depression (Bumberry, Oliver, & McClure, 1978).2.3.3. Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS: Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995)The DASS is a 42-item self-report questionnaire that yields threesubscales, measuring the severity of depression, anxiety and stresssymptoms. Participants rate each item (e.g., I found myself gettingupset by quite trivial things) on a scale of 0 to 3, indicating the extentto which this had applied to them in the past week. A score of 3would indicate that the statement had applied to the participant mostof the time. There are 14 items for each of the emotional states andeach subscale can yield a maximum possible score of 42.a1 a2 b2b1d21X DepressionM2ΔPEXPM1Key PressesY ControlcFig. 2.Hypotheses for testing the relationships between depression, activity levels,ΔPEXP and control usingmediation analyses. Y1= ‘p(O) effect’=high - low p(O) rating; Y2= ‘personalcontrol’ = action - context rating.5N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–122.4. ProcedureAfter giving written informed consent, participants provided theirdemographic details, completed the digit span task and then the batteryof questionnaires. Then instructions for the contingency task weredisplayed on the computer screen. The cover story required participantsto imagine that theywere in a house inwhich therewas a hidden stereosystem. Themusic could be controlled in each of the rooms of the house(distinct contexts) using a remote control. Participants were alsoinformed that the remote control had been working intermittentlyand that sometimes music switched on when no one was touchingthe remote. Their task was to test the remote control in each of therooms. In addition, participants were instructed to count to 15, andleave a minimum of 15 “elephant counts” in between subsequent keypresses. This instruction was included to retain a similar temporalconstraint to discrete trials procedures inwhich p(O) and depression ef-fects are observed (e.g., long ITIs and constrained number of presses:Msetfi et al., 2005). However, participants were actually able to pressthe button less and more frequently than this (i.e. leave b or N 15 s inbetween each key press). At the end of each 5-minute time block, ajudgment window was displayed and participants were required torate the causal relationship between their own action and the outcome,and between the context and the outcome. At the end of the final timeblock, participants were thanked, debriefed and received a smallfinancial compensation for their participation (€10).Fig. 3.Mean ratings of action (left) and context (right) control in Experiment 1 as a function of twith filled symbols and solid lines, high BDIs with open symbols and dashed lines). Error bars3. Results and discussionParticipants rated their own control and that of the context in a free-operant contingency learning task in low and high p(O) zero ΔP condi-tions. Thefirst set of analyses involved looking at relative differences be-tween conditions on control ratings and levels of activity using mixedfactorial analyses of variance, with the counterbalancing variable andgender included. An alpha level of .05 is used throughout unless statedotherwise.3.1. Judgments of controlParticipants rated their control higher with higher probabilities ofoutcome (.75 vs .25) and high BDI scores were related to lower ratingsof control. These control judgments for each time block are shown inFig. 3 as a function of control cue, p(O) and BDI group. For the low BDIgroup, there is clear evidence of large p(O) effects decreasing overtime block and actions were rated as more controlling than the contextin high p(O) conditions. Similar trends were evident for the high BDIgroup but with greater discrimination apparent between action andcontext ratings in the first time block. In addition, and as expected, inthe high p(O) condition the low BDI group gave higher action ratingsthan the high BDI group.The ANOVA revealed a significant four-way interaction betweencontrol cue, p(O), time block and BDI group, F(2, 122) = 3.57, p =ime block (1–3), p(O) (.25 squares, .75 circles), and BDI group (with low BDIs representedcorrespond to the standard error of the mean.Fig. 4. Mean key press frequency in Experiment 1 as a function of time block (1–3),p(O) (.25 squares, .75 circles), and BDI group (with low BDIs represented with filledsymbols and solid lines, high BDIs with open symbols and dashed lines). Error barscorrespond to the standard error of the mean.6 N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12.031,MSE= 625.04, η2 = .06, with no higher-level interactions involv-ing gender or the counterbalancing variable. In order to explore the 4-way interaction, we carried out further analyses, in the first of whichwe examined action and context ratings separately to provide a clearpicture of the precise location of the between groups differences. For ac-tion ratings, there was a significant main effect of p(O), F(1, 61) =120.47, p b .001, MSE= 1333.01, η2 = .66, qualified by a p(O) by BDIgroup interaction, F(1, 61) = 4.02, p= .04, MSE = 1333.01, η2 = .06,although the three way interaction with block was not reliable, F b 1,p = .45. The focus of the significant 2-way interaction was that thelow BDI group gave higher action ratings than the high BDI group inthe high p(O) condition, F(1, 61) = 5.00, p = .03, MSE = 1490.39,η2 = .08, with no significant difference in the low p(O) condition,F b 1, p = .69. Thus the p(O) effect was larger in the low BDI group,η2 = .72, than the high BDI group, η2 = .61.Looking at context ratings, there was also a significantmain effect ofp(O), F(1, 61) = 24.43, p b .001, MSE = 3426.77, η2 = .29, with highp(O) conditions rated higher than low p(O) conditions. The interactionbetween p(O) and BDI group was not reliable, F b 1, p= .57, however,the three-way interaction was significant: p(O) × BDI × block:F(2, 122) = 3.09, p= .04?, MSE= 857.01, η2 = .10. This was becauselow BDI participants' context ratings were strongly sensitive to p(O),F(1, 34) = 18.60, p b .001, MSE = 3414.84, η2 = .35, consistentlythrough all the time blocks, p(O) × block: F b 1, p= .82. On the otherhand low BDI participants' context ratings did change in sensitivity top(O) over time block, F(2, 54) = 3.63, p = .03, MSE = 978.14, η2 =.12. In fact, in the first time block, there was no difference betweenhigh BDI context ratings attributable to p(O), p=.44, but this sensitivitywas evident by blocks 2 (p= .02) and 3 (p = .02). Thus whereas lowBDI group's context ratings were strongly sensitive to p(O) from theoutset, this sensitivity took time to develop in high BDI participants.Secondly, it was important to explore the contrast between partici-pants' ratings of their own control versus their ratings of context controland how this differed for low and high BDI groups. This is because par-ticipants can potentially rate their own control over the outcome as lowor high but similar and indistinguishable from the control of the context.In some of our previous work, high BDI participants have shown littleevidence of such discrimination (Chase et al., 2011). In order to testfor this we compared action and context ratings for each level ofp(O) at each time block using single df contrasts and the alpha level ad-justed according to the Holm procedure in order to correct for multiplecomparisons (comparisons =12). We found that for all participants itwas only block 1, high p(O) conditions, in which there was any statisti-cal evidence of actions being rated as significantlymore controlling thancontext. For low BDI participants this difference was large and reliableat the adjusted alpha level (η2 = .26, p = .001 b αHOLM = .004).For high BDI participants, the difference was smaller, not significantand would only be reliable using a non-adjusted criterion (η2 = .18,p = .02 ns N αHOLM = .005). For all other conditions there wasno evidence difference between action and context ratings, range ofp values = .16–.94.3.2. Activity levelsAs instructed, participantsmade an average of 1 key press every 15 sduring the 5-minute blocks with 19.80 (SE = 2.72) key presses in ablock and this was not significantly different from the 20 presses we ex-pected that participants would make in the time frame, t(68) b 1, p=.94. However, as shown in Fig. 4, while the low BDI group maintaineda low activity rate across time blocks, the high BDI group respondedmore frequently early in the procedure, before settling on a similarrate by the end of the task, BDI group × block interaction: F(1, 61) =4.67, p= .01,MSE= 1425.95, η2 = .07. For low BDI participants, theirkey press rate remained constant over time (M = 15.67 key pressesper block, SE = 1.5, p = .65) and the block effect was not reliable,F b 1, p = .65. For high BDI participants, their key press rates weresignificantly higher than the low BDI group in block 1, F (1, 61) =5.98, p = .02, MSE = 2420.12, η2 = .09, and their key press rates de-creased over time blocks, F (2, 54) = 4.00, p = .02, MSE = 3112.52,η2= .13. There was no significant p(O) × block × BDI group interaction,F(2, 122) = 1.51, p= .22.3.3. Mediation analysisTwo sets of mediation analyses were carried out in order to test thehypotheses described in order to test whether levels of depressivesymptoms as measured by the BDI were predictive of activity levels(key presses),ΔPEXP, and (Analysis 1) the size of the p(O) effect as mea-sured by the difference between low and high p(O) action judgmentsand (Analyses 2) personal control as measured by the difference be-tween control ascribed to the action and context. These hypotheseswere described graphically in Fig. 2 and the results are shown inTable 2, with significance examined in relation to 95% confidence limitsfor the beta parameters (Analysis 1 upper, Analysis 2 lower). For analy-sis 1, as the outcome variable constituted the difference between twoconditions, the key press and ΔPEXP measure were also the differencebetween the same conditions. This showed that BDI group was theonly significant predictor of the size of the p(O) effect on action ratings,with the effect strongest in the low BDI group, c′ = −20.04, 95% CL[−37.13, −2.94], and this was not mediated individually or seriallyby either the difference in activity levels or ΔPEXP.Analysis 2 focused on personal control, where larger values indicatediscrimination between action and context ratings. In this analysis, asthe outcome variable was taken from one condition, key press andΔPEXP data from the same condition were used rather than differencedata. This analysis showed that the high BDI group produced higherkey press levels, a1 = 57.18, 95% CL [6.51, 108.24], which indirectlypredicted a greater level of discrimination between action and contextcontrol, a1b1 = 7.58, 95% CL [.51, 24.13]. None of the other direct orindirect effects were reliable at the 95% confidence level.Discrimination between action and context controlwas only presentin block 1, high p(O) conditions. This effect seemed to be evident for allparticipants but was only significant for the low BDI group. The media-tion analysis then provides some explanation for this effect showingthat high BDI participants produced higher levels of key pressingwhich in turn produced greater discrimination. This useful findingTable 3Demographic and depression relevant characteristics of each group for Experiment 2.Low BDI(n = 40)High BDI(n = 29)Independentgroups t-test*X SE X SE t pAge 21.33 .56 21.59 .79 .26 .793IQ 111.38 .72 111.70 1.04 .24 .813DS 7.23 .23 7.06 .22 .47 .638BDI 3.99 .41 18.14 1.61 9.78 b .001DASS(A) 2.75 .43 9.72 1.59 4.85 b .001(D) 2.80 .54 14.03 1.69 7.16 b .001(S) 6.25 .76 15.90 1.46 6.29 b .001Note. DS = Digit Span; BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; DASS = Depression, Anxietyand Stress Scales; (A) = Anxiety subscale; (D) = Depression subscale; (S) = Stresssubscale; *df= 67.7N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12further suggests that high BDI participants may require or at the veryleast can use, high behavior levels, if available, to counter over timethe differences in outcome sensitivity evidenced here in contextratings.Taken together, the results of Experiment 1 were consistent withprevious research and showed that p(O) effects were stronger in lowthan high BDI participants (Alloy & Abramson, 1979; Msetfi et al.,2005), and that low BDI participants rated their own actions as morestrongly controlling in high p(O) conditions than the high BDI partici-pants. However, therewas clear evidence that produced levels of behav-ior contributed to greater sensitivity to the effects of behavior overcontext. Low BDI participants were consistently sensitive to levels ofp(O) as demonstrated by a consistent p(O) effect on their context rat-ings. However, this sensitivity was not present initially for the highBDI group and, for them, developed later in the procedure. Note alsothat the BDI specific p(O) findingswere not related to activity or activitybased fluctuations in ΔPEXP.4. Experiment 2Experiment 1was designed to include a similar constraint on behav-ioral activity as found in discrete trials designs in order to ensurecomparability with previous research. While some variation in activitywas present, this was as expected and inline with the experimentalinstructions. The next experiment was designed to remove thatconstraint, and test the same hypotheses under conditions whererates of activity are determined by the participant's own inclination.In this experiment, the same procedure was used as in Experiment 1,but the instruction requiring 15 counts in between key presses wasremoved.5. MethodThe recruitment, design and procedure details were identical toExperiment 1, apart from one change in the instructions; participantswere not instructed to count between key presses. Only new detailsare reported here.5.1. Participants74 university students were recruited. Five participants were re-moved because of atypical behavior, either making no key presses(n = 2) or responding at an extremely high rate (N1 SD above themean;M= 230.18 key presses/block, SD= 407.27).Participants were categorized as low BDI (n = 40, with n= 32 fe-males) or high BDI (n=29, with n=24 females). Independent groupst-tests showed that there were no between group differences in age,Table 2Mediation analyses for Experiment 1 showing the relationships between BDI group, activity leDirect Path β LCL UCLAnalysis 1*, where Y = p(O) effect (Χ High p(O) - Χ Low p(O)), Key Presses= (Χ High p(O)a1 8.44 −7.67 24.56a2 − .010 − .10 .08b1 − .080 − .34 .18b2 42.06 −5.55 89.66d21 .001 − .001 .002c′ −20.04 −37.13 −2.94Analysis 2*, where Y = Control (Action1− Context1), Key Presses = Key Presses block 1, anda1 57.18 6.51 108.24a2 − .05 − .15 .05b1 .13 − .01 .28b2 40.45 −37.86 118.75d21 .00 − .001 .001c′ −20.67 −51.15 9.80Note. *N=69; Confidence limits refer to bias corrected bootstrap 95% confidence limits. Note ththese covariates does not influence the results. Bold indicates parameter values significant at tdigit span score or estimated IQ (see Table 3). As expected, the highBDI group produced significantly higher scores on the BDI and DASSthan the low BDI group.6. ResultsAnalyses were carried as in Experiment 1.6.1. Judgments of controlAs with Experiment 1, ratings of control were higher with higheroutcomeprobability although this effectwas not present for the contextas it had been for Experiment 1. Participants' ratings of action and con-text control are shown in Fig. 5. These ratings were analyzed using amixed factorial analysis of variance, including the same variables as inExperiment 1, except for the present analysis gender was removeddue to lower numbers of males in the sample (n= 13, of which n= 5high BDImales). Therewere no significant effects or interactions involv-ing BDI group, all ps N .13. There was a significant two-way interactionbetween cue and p(O), F (1, 64) = 24.31, p b .001, MSE = 2050.78,η2 = .28. Further simple effects tests showed that participants gavehigher action ratings in the high than low p(O) condition, F(1, 64) =92.12, p b .001, η2= .59. However, this effectwasmuch smaller for con-text ratings though it did reach the significance level, F(1, 64) = 6.75,p= .01, η2 = .10.6.2. Activity levelsThe instructions for this experiment imposed no constraint on activ-ity. Participants had a high rate of activity, with an average of one keyvels (key presses), ΔPEXP and (1) p(O) effects, and (2) control (action− context).Indirect path β LCL UCLKP - Χ Low p(O) KP), and ΔPEXP = (Χ High p(O) ΔPEXP - Χ Low p(O) ΔPEXP).a1b1 − .67 −6.05 1.31a1d21b2 .29 − .22 2.34a2b2 − .41 −6.43 3.40ΔPEXP = ΔPEXP block 1. Order of presentation is a covariate.a1b1 7.58 .51 24.13a1d21b2 .03 − .50 1.00a2b2 −1.93 −12.80 1.58at in both analyses, Gender and anxiety are included as covariates though the inclusion ofhe 95% confidence level.Fig. 5.Mean ratings of action (left) and context (right) control in Experiment 2 as a function of time block (1–3), p(O) (.25 squares, .75 circles), and BDI group (with low BDIs representedwith filled symbols and solid lines, high BDIs with open symbols and dashed lines). Error bars correspond to the standard error of the mean.8 N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12press every 1.89 seconds, that is 158.64 (SE= 18.23) key presses in ablock. These data are shown in Fig. 6 and suggest that key press behaviorin the lowBDI groupwas strongly responsive to levels of p(O), higher keypress rates in the low p(O) conditions. However, high BDI participants didnot show the same pattern. The result of the mixed ANOVA supportedthis observation, as there was a significant interaction between BDIgroup and p(O), F(1, 65) = 5.05, p= .028, MSE= 38825.01, η2 = .07.The simple effects tests showed that the low BDI group increased theirkey press levels significantly in low p(O) conditions, F(1, 65) = 14.63,p b .001, η2 = .18. Key pressing in the high BDI group remained staticwas not sensitive to p(O), F b 1, p= .80.6.3. Mediation analysisTwo sets of mediation analyses were carried out as described inExperiment 1 (see Table 4). The first analysis showed that therewas no direct relationship between BDI group and the size of theFig. 6. Mean key press frequency in Experiment 2 as a function of time block (1–3),p(O) (.25 squares, .75 circles), and BDI group (with low BDIs represented with filled sym-bols and solid lines, high BDIswith open symbols and dashed lines). Error bars correspondto the standard error of the mean.p(O) effect, c' =−2.04, 95% CL [−23.62, 19.53], but that the differencein key press activity between the two p(O) conditions mediated the re-lationship between BDI group and the p(O) effect, a1b1 = 9.74, 95% CL[2.72, 21.14]. In order to interpret this effect, recall that the mediatorvariable here is the difference between key presses in the high andlow p(O) conditions. For the low BDI group, this difference was largeand negative (see Fig. 5), because they key pressed most in lowp(O) conditions, whereas for the high BDI group the difference wascloser to zero and positive. Thus the mediation analysis shows thatdifference in the size of the p(O) effect is attributable to the BDI group'sinfluence on behavioral sensitivity to p(O), which then influences thesize of p(O) effects on ratings. For the high BDI group, low behavioralsensitivity produced a 9.74 point rating increase in the size ofp(O) effect (see also Fig. 4).Mediation analysis 2 showed that there were no reliable relation-ships, direct or indirect, between BDI group and personal control.Taken together, the results derived from the free-operant procedurewith no activity constraint yielded very different findings to the previ-ous experiment. Participants' action ratings were highly sensitive top(O) but their context ratings were not. Mediation analysis revealedhow BDI group influenced the size of p(O) effects through behavioralsensitivity to p(O) in a manner not captured by standard ANOVA com-parisons. Specifically, the high BDI group showed no behavioral sensi-tivity to p(O), maintaining high key pressing rates throughout andproducing almost a 10-point larger p(O) effect on action ratings. Onthe other hand, the low BDI group increased their levels of behaviorwhen there were fewer outcomes available, which counter-intuitivelyreduced the size of the p(O) effect.It is also important to note one key area of similarity in the findingsof the two experiments, while also bearing inmind an important caveat.In both experiments ΔPEXP was not predictive of ratings, either directly,or indirectly, as a step on a pathway that starts withmood effects on be-havior. This is contrary to our hypothesis which suggested that changesin levels of behavior would modify the number of occurrences of cell Aevents, and importantly impact on the availability of a key source of am-biguity, cell D events and p(O| ~ A) thus influencing the experiencedcontingency and judgments of control. These finding are similar toBlanco et al. (2011) who also found that the experienced contingencythey calculated using a discrete trials procedure was not predictive ofratings in spite of there being significant variability between the experi-enced and programmed contingencies. In their study, as in this one,behavior was a key predictor of ratings.Table 4Mediation analyses for Experiment 2 showing the relationships between BDI group, activity levels (key presses), ΔPEXP and (1) p(O) effects, and (2) control (action− context).Direct Path β LCL UCL Indirect path β LCL UCLAnalysis 1*, where Y = p(O) effect (Χ High p(O) − Χ Low p(O)), Key Presses= (Χ High p(O) KP− Χ Low p(O) KP), and ΔPEXP = (Χ High p(O) ΔPEXP− Χ Low p(O) ΔPEXP).a1 118.98 28.27 209.68 a1b1 9.74 2.72 21.14a2 0.06 − .001 .001 a1d21b2 − .02 −2.04 1.07b1 .082 .03 .14 a2b2 − .46 −7.01 2.62b2 −8.24 −65.85 49.37d21 .001 − .001 .002c′ −2.04 −23.62 19.53Analysis 2*, where Y = Control (Action1− Context1), Key Presses = Key Presses block 1, and ΔPEXP = ΔPEXP block 1. Order of presentation is a covariate.a1 −82.42 −196.30 31.46 a1b1 −5.21 −13.65 1.19a2 − .01 − .09 .07 a1d21b2 .03 −1.84 1.60b1 .06 .001 .13 a2b2 .01 −3.37 3.17b2 −1.32 −89.11 86.46d21 .001 .001 .003c′ −5.46 −32.84 21.75Note. *N=69; Confidence limits refer to bias corrected bootstrap 95% confidence limits. Note that in both analyses, Gender and anxiety are included as covariates though the inclusion ofthese covariates does not influence the results.9N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12However, an important caveat here concerns the time frame overwhich cell C and D events should be counted, and thus p(O| ~ A) calcu-lated, which is not clear when free-operant procedures are used. In Ex-periment 1, we matched the cell count time frame to the behavioralconstraint introduced by the instructions (i.e. every 15-s the pro-gramme checked for a cell C or D event). This programming strategywas maintained in Experiment 2 for equivalence across experiments.However, the behavioral time frame was very different with a keypress recorded every 2-s on average. This means that, in Experiment2, the cell C/D time frame was out of kilter with behavior and ΔPEXPmay have been inaccurate. This raises a very important point aroundthe appropriate time frame of p(O| ~ A) experience and we will returnto this later in the general discussion.7. General discussionThe findings of two experiments on judgments of causal controlmade after exposure to a free-operant contingency procedure showedthat behavior and context are critical aspects of people's experiencesand perceptions of causal control which are affected by the symptomsof depression. Although both can be manipulated by an experimenter(Matute, 1996; Msetfi et al., 2005), these findings show that both canalso be influenced by the participant themselves thereby increasingtheir sense of agency with potential implications for alleviating feelingsof helplessness in depression. Specifically,within the constrained proce-dure, which preserves temporal spacing as in previous studies, low BDIparticipants were more sensitive than high BDI participants to levels ofoutcomes available, both in relation to action and context ratings. HighBDI participants were sensitive to p(O), but less so than others. For con-text ratings, which are a measure of sensitivity to outcomes available inthe environment, p(O) sensitivity took longer to develop in the high BDIgroup and thiswas concurrentwith their high levels of behavioral activ-ity. This points towards activity levels, and the ability to withhold activ-ity, as being crucial in allowing people to develop outcome ratesensitivity and personal control as demonstrated by behaviorally medi-ated BDI effects on perceived control. When the behavioral constraintwas removed, activity levels increased dramatically and consequentlytemporal spacingwas reduced. Asmight have been predicted, all partic-ipants' action ratings were sensitive to p(O) but their context ratingswere not, presumably because they had almost no experience of theoutcome rate in the absence of activity. However, low BDI participants'behaviorwas highly sensitive to outcome levels, withmuchhigher ratesof behavior evident in low p(O) conditions when fewer outcomes wereavailable. Counter intuitively, the high BDI group pressed consistentlyacross all conditions, and this increased the size of the p(O) effect ontheir action ratings. This again demonstrates that when the ambiguityof p(O| ~ A) experience is removed from the equation, here because ofbehavioral increase, perceived and experienced causal control is en-hanced. Thus, a key outcome of this study is the finding that, together,behavior and context provide two linked pathways to perceived causalcontrol, and that by creating fixed immutable experimental procedureswe are ignoring important aspects of behavior that humans use in orderto assert, determine or respond to causal control. Although we discussthese separately below, the interactivity between context and behaviormust be emphasized.7.1. Behavioral pathway to causal controlIn these experiments, we observed shifts in behavioral activity,though not exactly as expected. We certainly expected that peoplewould produce high rates of behavior in these naturalistic free-operant conditions (Matute, 1996) and this is what we found. However,we also expected that those scoring higher on the BDI would show lessactivity than others and that this tendency would be linked to a smallerp(O) effect (Blanco et al., 2012). In fact, we found no evidence of a gen-eral trend towards lower levels of behavior in high BDI participants.When constraints were imposed on behavior, at least initially, highBDI participants engaged in twice as much key pressing as low BDIparticipants, before their activities normalized to the same level asothers. This effect was concurrent with reduced p(O) sensitivity oncontext ratings and a between (BDI) group difference on action ratings.This mood difference in action control ratings has been observed onmany occasions (Blanco et al., 2012; Msetfi et al., 2005), and has beenexplained via low levels of behavior in depression or an inability to pro-cess context information. The findings of the current study suggest thathigher behavior levels reduce ability to be sensitive to outcome rates inthe environment, with a knock on effect on perceived action control.We had also anticipated that that higher levels of activity would beevident in high p(O) conditions where activity is reinforced on themajority of trials, increasing motivation to respond on the next trial(Matute, 1996). When, activity was unconstrained by the task instruc-tions, we did observe a p(O) effect on behavior, but it was lowp(O) conditions that produced the highest levels of behavior in lowBDI participants, with no difference present for high BDI participants.Not only is this finding inconsistent with assumptions made about therelation between key pressing and reinforcement (Matute, 1996), it isalso inconsistent with Herrnstein's (1961) matching law which statesthat behavior tends to ‘match’ the reinforcement contingencies. In theunconstrained procedure reported here, behavior was more consistentwith a ‘maximization’ strategy (Msetfi et al., 2012) in which behaviorincreased in spite of a low outcome probability in order to maximizethe absolute levels of outcomes received.However, considering the contrasting findings of the two experi-ments, an important observation emerges. When participants were10 N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12allowed to engage in as much or as little behavioral activity as theychose, activity levels increased dramatically. This increase was impor-tant to causal control in two ways. First, it resulted in no sensitivity tooutcome rates in the environment as relevant experience was limited.Second, ambiguity was removed from the control situation as the par-ticipant gained almost no experience of not responding and notingwhether or not the outcome occurred. In other words, cell C and Doccurrences were almost eliminated from the contingency meaningthat ΔP= p(O|A). We will return to this issue later, however an impor-tant point, not addressed by our data, is whether or not behavior wasused strategically to create these effects or whether it was a reflexresponse to environmental contingencies.7.2. Contextual pathway to causal controlTheoretical approaches to contingency learning involving the devel-opment of associations have proposed context as a key moderator var-iable in learning about causal control. There are different mechanismsproposed for how context exerts its influence. For example, theRescorla-Wagner model (RWM: Rescorla & Wagner, 1972), whenapplied to contingency learning, describes perceived control as beingdependent on the strength of action-outcome associations, though allstimuli present in a learning situation including the context will alsoacquire associative strength (Dickinson et al., 1984). RWM assumesthat outcomes can only support a limited amount of associative strengthand thus actions and context compete for associationwith the outcome.This notion of associative competition means that an action will gainassociative strength to the extent that the context (or indeed otherrelevant stimuli) does not have it, and vice versa. The Comparator Hy-pothesis (Miller & Matzel, 1988) proposes an alternative mechanismto explain the influence of context (amongst other effects). Accordingto this view both context and action gain associative strength indepen-dently but the response depends on the comparison between the two,rather than the absolute strength of the individual associations. Ourfindings do not explicitly distinguish between these two approaches.However, whichever approach is taken, the implications are that ifthat the process of context-outcome association acquisition or extinc-tion is impaired, compromised or affected in anyway, there will be aknock on effect on perceived control. Thus these findings are consistentwith the idea that context is a key moderator of learning about causalcontrol and mood differences provide insight into the mechanismsinvolved.Along these lines, our previous work also suggested that contextmay be the key feature of contingency learning which distinguishesthose who score low and high on the BDI (Msetfi, Wade, & Murphy,2013). Manipulations of periods of context exposure with zero contin-gencies had no effect on high BDI groups' judgments of low andhigh p(O) conditions of which there was no difference, whereas lowBDIs were affected such that p(O) effects were only strongly evidentwith long periods of contextual exposure (Msetfi et al., 2005). Our inter-pretation of this was that contextual exposure acts as an instance ofcell D in the contingency matrix, or a non-reinforced context onlytrial, allowing low BDIs to extinguish context associations and thusstrengthen action associations, with high BDIs impervious to thismanipulation. The findings of Experiment 1 here, in which the longtemporal space was preserved, were consistent with those previousfindings made using discrete trials procedures. Low BDI participantsevidenced stronger p(O) effects on their action ratings than high BDIparticipants. However, in this experiment, in which we took explicitratings of context, we saw no evidence in low BDI participants ofweak context ratings caused by the long cell D spaces. In fact, contextratings were relatively high for these participants. Moreover, higherlevels of depressed mood predicted higher levels of key presses, whichthen produced a larger difference between action and context ratings.If this last metric, levels of discrimination between action and context,represents a more accurate measure of perceived control than actionor context ratings individually, this might imply that irrespective ofthe absolute level of ratings, those who were mildly depressed experi-enced an enhanced sense of control. Furthermore, as specified by theComparator Hypothesis (Miller & Matzel, 1988), action and contextassociations may develop independently, and the contrast betweenthem at the time of judgment may determine perceived control, asopposed to the strength of the action association.7.3. Temporal constraints and ambiguous informationWe have discussed thus far how these data suggest that behaviorand context influence each other to provide two linked pathways tocausal control. However, the contrast in the data collected betweenthese two experiments demonstrates the importance of the temporaland behavioral constraint present in the control scenario. This couldbe an instructionalmanipulation in a lab task like this one, or it could in-volve real world constraints that limit or induce activity thus influenc-ing the extent to which the context is exposed. It is clear in these datathat patterns of control ratings, which are thought of as characteristicof depression, are evident in constrained situations and that removalof the constraint provided a behaviorally mediated shift in ratings.This suggests that circumstances, which constrain people's natural ten-dencies to respond to the contingencies around them, could constitute ablock in an important pathway to causal control.In fact, when constraints were removed in our study, high levelsof behavior eliminated the all-important ambiguity inherent in con-textual information. In our introduction we stated that this ambigu-ity is because cell D experience, which is composed of instances of noactions and no outcomes, could reside in extra-trial as well as intra-trial experience (Msetfi et al., 2005) but could also potentially in-clude other experiences from an individual's life (Baker et al.,1996). While the experimental context serves as an important mark-er for a focal set of relevant events (Cheng & Novick, 1990) and itseems likely that only those in the experiment are processed as rele-vant to causal control, a further area of ambiguity and complexity re-mains. It is not clear whether one period of contextual exposure,marked for example at the beginning and end by an occurrence of acell A or cell B event, would count as one cell D event or many(Msetfi et al., 2005), or whether the duration of the exposure couldbe segmented into multiple cell D experiences. In other words thetemporal frame, over which cell D accumulates, or indeed contextassociations develop, is unclear. Similarly, for experimenters pro-gramming no action, cell C and D experience within a free-operantprocedure, the temporal frame chosen is arbitrary and may not beconsistent with temporal frame used in everyday information process-ing. Indeed, if a temporalwindowwere adopted thatwould allow ongo-ing experience to be ‘parsed’ into individual events, its size could bedynamic and based on pre-existing knowledge about the situation ormany other factors (Buehner, 2005; Greville & Buehner, 2010). Howev-er, while in our study participants were able to remove this ambiguityfrom the causal control problem via their behavior, temporal dynamicsand event parsing remain another important known-unknown ofcausal control learning.7.4. Implications for depressionThe implications of these findings for our understanding of depres-sion cannot be discussed without first acknowledging the limitationsof this work. First of all, participants were not patients diagnosed by aclinician as experiencing depression. They were university studentsscoring above or below the cut-off for mild depression on the BeckDepression Inventory. Although such cutoffs have been validated onpsychiatric (Beck et al., 1961) as well as student samples (Bumberryet al., 1978), any implications for more severe levels of depressionmust be treated with caution. Secondly, data and findings were clearlyderived from laboratory tasks, which, although constructed for this11N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12study to facilitate behavioral flexibility, can be thought of as artificialand thus generalizability to the real world could be questioned (Haaga& Beck, 1995). Moreover, given the uncertainty that we have identified,both here and elsewhere (Msetfi et al., 2005), as to the true contingencyrelation that participants experienced and even the correct measure ofcontrol, it would be foolhardy to relate findings to judgment bias or ac-curacy in either group of participants.Whilst acknowledging all of theselimitations, however, there are implications of these findings for milddepression which are not predicated on assumptions of a knownexperienced contingency.In this study, all participants engaged in relatively high levels ofbehavior with no evidence of a general trend towards behavioralpassivity amongst those who were mildly depressed. However, al-though those with signs of mild depression were certainly capableof high behavior levels, these did not shift, whether strategically orautomatically, as a function of outcome availability. This suggeststhat any behavioral impairment associated with depression is notan absolute but may be specifically related to outcome sensitivityand the extent to which reinforcing outcomes drive behavior. Irre-spective of this, mildly depressed participants benefited fromhigh levels of behavior in unconstrained conditions, eliminatingthe moderating role of context and producing action controljudgments that were high and similar to those with low BDI scores.This is important given that many successful therapeuticapproaches to depression include a behavioral activation compo-nent (including various types of cognitive therapy), which involvesincreasing levels of activity and opportunities for positive rein-forcement (see Dimidjian, Barrera, Martell, Muñoz, & Lewinsohn,2011 for a detailed discussion), but may not adequately recognizethe relation between behavior and context as interlinked pathwaysto control.8. ConclusionIn this paper, we set out to study the roles of levels of behavior andthe availability of outcomes in the environment, and their interactiveeffects, on causal control learning in people who scored low and highon a depression scale. Initially, we had identified the moderating effectof context as a key area of ambiguity in control learning, which seemsto separate people with and without signs of depression. This was thecase in the present study. Key findings are that behavior, via its effecton exposure to the context, provided a powerful pathway to resolvethis particular ambiguity, though others remain in relation to the tem-poral parsing of events. Temporal and behavioral constraints on controllearning, as a product of the situation or an individual difference, such asdepression, may act as a block to people's ability to enhance their senseof control.AcknowledgementsThisworkwas supported by the ESRC (http://www.esrc.ac.uk) grantnumber: RES-062-23-2525 awarded to Dr. R. M. Msetfi.ReferencesAllan, L.G. (1980). A note on measurement of contingency between two binary variablesin judgment tasks. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 15(3), 147–149.Allan, L.G. (1993). Human contingency judgments – rule-based or associative.Psychological Bulletin, 114(3), 435–448.Allan, L.G., & Jenkins, H.M. (1983). The effect of representations of binary variables onjudgment of influence. Learning and Motivation, 14(4), 381–405.Alloy, L.B., & Abramson, L.Y. (1979). Judgement of contingency in depressed and non-depressed students: Sadder but wiser? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,108(4), 441–485.A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement andnonreinforcement: Appleton-Century-CroftsRescorla, R.A., & Wagner, A.R. (Eds.).(1972).Baker, A.G., Murphy, R.A., & Vallee-Tourangeau, F. (1996). Associative and normativemodels of causal induction: Reacting to versus understanding cause Causal LearningVol.34. (pp. 1–45), 1–45.Barona, A., Reynolds, C. R., & Chastain, R. (1984). A demographically based index ofpremorbid intelligence for the WAIS-R. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,52(5), 885–887. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006x.52.5.885.Beck, A.T.,Ward, C.H., Mendelson,M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, J. (1961). An inventory formea-suring depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 4, 561–571.Blanco, F., Matute, H., & Vadillo, M.A. (2009). Depressive realism: Wiser or quieter? ThePsychological Record, 59(4), 551–562.Blanco, F., Matute, H., & Vadillo, M.A. (2011). Making the uncontrollable seem controlla-ble: The role of action in the illusion of control. The Quarterly Journal ofExperimental Psychology, 64(7), 1290–1304. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2011.552727.Blanco, F., Matute, H., & Vadillo, M.A. (2012). Mediating role of activity level in thedepressive realism effect. PLoS ONE, 7(9). http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0046203.Buehner, M.J. (2005). Contiguity and covariation in human causal inference. Learning &Behavior, 33(2), 230–238.Buehner, M.J., & McGregor, S. (2006). Temporal delays can facilitate causal attribution:Towards a general timeframe bias in causal induction. Thinking and Reasoning,12(4), 353–378.Bumberry, W., Oliver, J.M., & McClure, J.N. (1978). Validation of the Beck DepressionInventory in a university population using psychiatric estimate as the criterion.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46(1), 150–155.Chase, H., Crockett, M.J., Msetfi, R.M., Murphy, R.A., Clark, L., Sahakian, B., et al. (2011). 5-HT modulation by acute tryptophan depletion of human instrumental contingencyjudgements. Psychopharmacology, 213(2-3), 615–623.Cheng, P.W., & Novick, L.R. (1990). A probabilistic contrast model of causal induction.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(4), 545–567.Dickinson, A., Shanks, D., & Evenden, J. (1984). Judgment of act-outcome contingency:The role of selective attribution. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. A,Human Experimental Psychology, 36(1), 29–50.Dimidjian, S., Barrera, M., Jr., Martell, C., Muñoz, R.F., & Lewinsohn, P.M. (2011). Theorigins and current status of behavioral activation treatments for depression.Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 1–38.Greville, W.J., & Buehner, M.J. (2010). Temporal predictability facilitates causal learning.Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 139(4), 756–771.Haaga, D.A.F., & Beck, A.T. (1995). Perspectives on depressive realism: Implicationsfor cognitive theory of depression. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(1),41–48.Heisenberg, W. (1927). Über den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischenKinematik und Mechanik. Zeitschrift für Physik, 43(3-4), 172–198.Herrnstein, R.J. (1961). Relative and absolute strength of response as a function offrequency of reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 4,267–272. http://dx.doi.org/10.1901/jeab. 1961.4-267.Hume, D. (1789). A treatise of human nature (reprinted from the original ed. in 3 volumes).Oxford England: The Clarendon Press.Lewinsohn, P.M. (1974). A behavioral approach to depression. In R.J. Friedman, & M.M.Katz (Eds.), The psychology of depression: Contemporary theory and research. Oxford,England: John Wiley and Sons.Lewinsohn, P.M., Sullivan, J.M., & Grosscup, S.J. (1980). Changing reinforcement events:An approcah to the treatment of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research andPractice, 17, 322–333.Lezak, M.D. (1995). Neuropsychological assessment (3rd ed.). New York: OxfordUniversity Press.Lovibond, P.F., & Lovibond, S.H. (1995). The structure of negative emotional states:Comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck De-pression and Anxiety Inventories. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(3),335–343.Matute, H. (1996). Detecting response-outcome independence in analytic but not innaturalistic conditions. Psychological Science, 7(5), 289–293. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1996.tb00376.x.Miller, R.R., & Matzel, L.D. (1988). The comparator hypothesis: A response rule for the ex-pression of associations. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning andmotivation, Vol. 22. (pp. 51–92). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.Msetfi, R.M., Murphy, R.A., & Kornbrot, D.E. (2012). Dysphoric mood states are related tosensitivity to temporal changes in contingency. Frontiers in Psychology, 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00368.Msetfi, R.M., Murphy, R.A., & Simpson, J. (2007). Depressive realism and the effect ofintertrial interval on judgements of zero, positive, and negative contingencies. TheQuarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60(3), 461–481.Msetfi, R.M., Murphy, R.A., Simpson, J., & Kornbrot, D.E. (2005). Depressive realismand outcome density bias in contingency judgements: The effect of contextand the inter-trial interval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,134(1), 10–22.Msetfi, R.M., Wade, C., & Murphy, R.A. (2013). Context and time in causal learning:Contingency and mood dependent effects. PLoS ONE, 8(5), e64063. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0064063.Murphy, R.A., Vallee-Tourangeau, F., Msetfi, R.M., & Baker, A.G. (2005). Signal-outcomecontingency, contiguity, and the depressive realism effect. In A.J. Wills (Ed.), Newdirections in human associative learning (pp. 193–219). Mahwah, NJ US: LawrenceErlbaum Associates Publishers.Shanks, D., & Dickinson, A. (1987). Associative accounts of causality judgment.Psychology of Learning and Motivation-Advances in Research and Theory, 21,229–261.12 N.C. Byrom et al. / Acta Psychologica 157 (2015) 1–12Shanks, D., Pearson, S.M., & Dickinson, A. (1989). Temporal contiguity and the judgmentof causality by human subjects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. B,Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 41(2), 139–159.Taylor, S.E., & Brown, J.D. (1988). Illusion and well-being – a social psycho-logical perspective on mental-health. Psychological Bul let in , 103(2),193–210.Wasserman, E.A., Chatlosh, D.L., & Neunaber, D.J. (1983). Perception of causal relations inhumans: Factors affecting judgments of response-outcome contingencies under free-operant procedures. Learning and Motivation, 14(4), 406–432.Wasserman, E.A., Elek, S.M., Chatlosh, D.L., & Baker, A.G. (1993). Rating causal relations:Role of probability in judgments of response-outcome contingency. Journal ofExperimental Psychology Learning Memory and Cognition, 19(1), 174–188.