ABSTRACT: 
The article deals with the problem of chronological determination of three sacral edifices located in the middle, as well as in the highest cultural horizon of the region of Matka near Skopje. Due to the lack of historical sources, as well as preserved portions of the original fresco ensembles, the buildings are dated on the ground of their architectural features and according to the archeological finds discovered in their vicinity. In that regard, the church of St. Kyriake on the highest mountain post of Matka is dated in the first half of the fourteenth century, the temple of St. Archangel Michael at the site of Peter’s Rock in the late twelfth, while the church dedicated to St. Saviour, as a restoration of the later, was repeatedly built in the period between the late thirteenth and the second half of the twentieth century. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article focuses on the historical and cultural past of the church of Saint Archangel Michael at the site of Peter's Rock, located some 2 km south of the village of Gorna Matka. Erected in a form of a small cubus covered by a cubical dome and enclosed by rustically executed facades, it successfully resisted the savage winds of destruction from the high, almost frightening position of its spatial location. Erected at the peak of the rocky landscape, which with its vertical position challenge the dizzy depth of the aerial abyss and decorated with compactly designed and skillfully executed ensemble, the church of Saint Kiriake was elevated in the “Wuthering heights” of King Marko's town as an immoral symbol of the faith and a secure retreat for its inhabitants. Protected by the watch tower, today called King Marko's windmill, the church of Saint Kiriake represents a precious sacral edifi ce in the vast and safety region of the canyon of Matka. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Key words: Matka, church architecture, building opus, building technique The fascinating and ultra-picturesque eco structure of the canyon Matka, grandiose by its colossal dimensions and unique by the spectacular vista of dizzy vertical lines and tamed horizontal layers, is one of the most beautiful natural ambients in the territory of Macedonia and in the wider Bal- kan region. Conﬁ gured of hallucinating heights of the ﬁ erce rocky structures, as well as of deep blue spheres of the vast water horizon, this windy and moist gorge of the Treska River is enumerated among the most luxurious sights in the natural heritage of the country. The cultural horizon of the sacral ediﬁ ces created in the territory of Matka, on the other hand, represents a rich panorama of artistic monuments, marked by diverse architectural features and remarkable painterly attainments. Erected with the passionate skill of the anony- mous builders, decorated with impressive fresco ensembles and carefully nurtured during times of wars and military in- vasions, they represent the most persuasive and most vivid witnesses to the historic and cultural past documented on the territory of Matka in the course of the last millennium. Among the dozen monuments created in the medieval and late medieval period, we will pinpoint some interesting re- marks about three of them, situated in the middle, as well as in the highest geographic horizon of the region. The ﬁ rst church that deserves our attention is the one dedicated to St. Archangel Michael at the site of Peter’s Rock, located some 2 km south of the village of Gorna Matka. Lying amidst the terrain abundant in archaeologi- cal remnants and surrounded by building structures from In the heavenly horizons Three Christian temples in the region of Matka near Skopje Elizabeta Dimitrova* University “Ss. Kiril and Metodij” Skopje, Faculty of Philosophy UDC 726.5.033(497.7 Skopje) DOI 10.2298/ZOG1135101D Оригиналан научни рад different historic periods, this temple is preserved in its original architectural form, manifesting remarkable spatial dimensions of what is considered to be the oldest Christian monument from the medieval era in this region.1 According to its architectural conception, the church of Saint Archan- gel Michael is a basilica with quite remarkable dimensions, out of which the walls up to 1 m in height are preserved (ﬁ g. 1). It is erected in the middle portion of the ﬂ atten pla- teau at the site of “Peter’s rock”2 as a central sacral building in the Middle Byzantine epoch, while today is surrounded by additionally conﬁ gured architectural elements originat- ing from the later medieval period. According to its dimen- sions, this building can be enumerated among the basilicas with medium size, while according to its spatial organiza- tion it belongs to the elaborated ground plans of this ar- chitectural type from the last period of its public promo- tion.3 The orientation of the ediﬁ ce is almost regular (east – west), with deviation of 10 degrees in direction towards north. The length of the basilica’s ground plan is 17,35 m, whereat the longitudinal span from the apse to the western wall of the naos is 10,75 m, while the western part of the building is 6.60 m long. The width of the church is 4.90 m, while the thickness of the walls measures 0.80 m. The church of Saint Archangel Michael as a longitu- dinal ediﬁ ce spatially manifested along the axis east-west and functionally divided into two structural parts – naos and narthex. The naos measures 9.40 x 4.90 m, at the eastern part of which an apse has been formulated with a radius of 1.35 m. The narthex measures 6,60 x 4,90 m and is designed with two separate structures, which, within the functional organi- zation of the architectural ground plan, received the roles of narthex and exonarthex. This tripartite division of the ba- silical plan points to a sacral ediﬁ ce with a regular liturgical service and testiﬁ es to the efforts for a serious protocol in the * Elizabeta Dimitrova (pizo@unet.com.mk) 1 V. Lilčić, Matka niz vekovite, Skopje 1995, 68. 2 E. Dimitrova, V. Lilčić, K. Antevska, A. Vasilevski, Matka – kul- turno nasledstvo, Skopje 2011, 161. 3 Dj. Stričević, La renovation du type basilical dans l’architecture ecclésiastique des pays centraux des Balkans au IXe – XIe siècles, Actes du XIIe Congres International d’Etudes Byzantines I, Beograd 1963, 165– 211; V. Korać, Sur les basiliques médiévales de Macédoine et le Serbie, Actes du XIIe Congres International d’Etudes Byzantines III, Beograd 1964, 173–185.102 ЗОГРАФ 35 (2011) [101–110] structure, as well as in the performance of the church ritual.4 On the other hand, the existence of a single apse on the east- ern side of the building, being a reference of the single-apse concept in the design of the sanctuary, can point to a basilical ground plan of a compact type, appropriate to the conditions of its spatial location and/or the needs of the church function. The discovery of a massive tombstone with an epitaph writ- ten in Old Slavonic language in the central part of the naos doubtlessly refers to the existence of a medieval necropolis in the surrounding of the church walls.5 All of this speaks of the possibility that the church dedicated to Saint Archangel Michael, the protector of the righteous souls and the caring physicopompus, erected in a compact basilical arrangement and accompanied by a medieval graveyard, had a funereal function and was designated for funerary ceremonies. The temple dedicated to Saint Archangel Michael is built out of broken, partly hacked stones, arranged in hori- zontal rows and alternated with ceramic material, placed in irregularly designed opus. The stone peaces and the bricks were joined with a bit of mortar, applied in thin layers. The building components are placed carefully, but the building technique displays a number of inconsistencies in regard to the coherence of the execution. Due to the lack of appropriate material, the mixed building opus of the church was supple- mented by older elements, originating from the architectural corpus of an Early Christian basilica.6 Among them, one can notice imposts, bases of stone columns and cancel fragments. The resourcefulness of the masters builders in solving of the problem with the scarcely available material can be seen in the usage of stone spolia from an ancient pagan temple, built into the lateral walls of the ediﬁ ce.7 Contrary to the slackly work with the building materials, the ediﬁ ce was covered with neatly molded and skillfully modeled bricks of a “Kom- nenian” type.8 The church mobiliar has not been preserved. The fresco painting has, also, been demolished. Although the lack of historical sources and written texts is obstructing the precise dating of the church, the ar- chitectural features of its composition point to a certain chro- nology, which can be conﬁ rmed only by extensive archae- ological excavation at the site. In that context, one should mention the compact architectural ground plan in the design of the basilica, the monolite spatial arrangement of the altar part and the semicircular shape of the apsidal exterior, all pointing to the late twelfth century, as the most appropri- ate chronological horizon in the execution of the building corpus of the temple.9 A testimony to the same dating is also the rustic building technique, as well as the used bricks, the chronology of which belongs to the second half of the twelfth century.10 The last argument that speaks in favor of the men- tioned chronology is the ﬁ nding of Byzantine coins belong- ing to the period at the turn of the thirteenth century.11 In that sense, we can assume that the church of Saint Archangel Michael (today dedicated to the Holy Trinity) is a monument created in the era of the Comnenoi that reﬂ ects the charac- teristic architectural traditions from the last decades of the twelfth century and bears the features of the last phase of the Middle Byzantine creative production. Erected in the sun- down of a wealthy and productive period from the history of Byzantine architecture on the Balkan’s territory, the temple dedicated to Saint Archangel Michael at the site of Peter’s Rock is representative of the last creative moments prior to the collapse of the Empire in 1204 and of the ﬁ nal cultural and artistic performances of the Middle Byzantine epoch. Fifty meters north from the temple dedicated to Saint Archangel Michael, the church of Saint Savior is located, which, according to its present architectural conﬁ guration, belongs to the second half of the twentieth century and on the ground of the disposable data written on the commis- sioners’ board located above the entrance, was erected in 1968.12 The church is of a small size and robustly built with inserted spolia from older ediﬁ ces, while in its surroundings, a number of elements of building material from the medi- eval and post-medieval period has been discovered (ﬁ g. 2).13 All these references point to the conclusion that the existing church is a contemporary renewal of an older ediﬁ ce, for the precise dating of which no available data can be found. Written sources that could help in the disclosure of the old- est history of the original church at this location are missing. Archeological material that would point to a certain cultural horizon, i. e. to a certain chronological determination, has not been found yet. The contemporary church is erected with a single- naved ground plan, with a tri-sided apse on the eastern side. The length of the ediﬁ ce is 7.50 m., while the width is 4,10 m. It is built out of pieces of roughly chopped stone that are marked by highly unproportional dimensions and reduced usage of mortar. The stones are mostly laid in horizontal rows, but due to their irregular shape, the rhythm of their arrangement is quite disturbed. Among the stones which are very different in size, elements of older building mate- rial found in the vicinity were inserted, originating from Antiquity and from the medieval period. In that sense, by its dimensions, a quite massive fragment of an architrave stands out,14 built into the western part of the south wall; it most probably originates from the sanctuary of an Early Christian basilica, conﬁ rmed by the Latin inscription in its upper part, marked by epigraphical features from the ﬁ fth- Fig. 1. The church of St. Archangel Michael, an overall view of the structure 4 Th. F. Mathews, The Early Churches of Constantinople. Architec- ture and Liturgy, University Park – London 1977, 117–125. 5 Lilčić, Matka niz vekovite, 68. 6 I. Mikulčić, Skopje so okolnite tvrdini, Skopje 1982, 97. 7 Ibid., 97. 8 Lilčić, Matka niz vekovite, 68. 9 S. Korunovski, E. Dimitrova, Macedonia. L’arte medievale dal IX al XV secolo, Milano 2006, 52. 10 Dimitrova, Lilčić, Antevska, Vasilevski, Matka, 164. 11 Lilčić, Matka niz vekovite, 68. 12 Dimitrova, Lilčić, Antevska, Vasilevski, Matka, 165. 13 Lilčić, Matka niz vekovite, 70. 14 Mikulčić, Skopje so okolnite tvrdini, 96.103 Dimitrova E.: In the heavenly horizons sixth century.15 The same date is shared by the peace of a cancel screen found next to the church.16 Due to the rustic character of its architectural execu- tion, the church of Saint Savior displays a very modest façade design. On the lateral walls, perforations were open (one on each façade), roughly and unskillfully framed with mortar, while above the west entrance – a semi-circular niche was shaped in order to provide a place for the traditional image of the church patron. The eastern exterior of the temple is designed identically as the other façade surfaces, thus it also lacks any brick-work decoration. The outer line of the tri- sided apse is monotonous as well, with the exception of the miniature monophore in its center. Only the dado-zone in the exterior of the church preserved up to 0.50 m in height is quite impressive by its execution. The distinction in the applied material between the dado-zone and the rest of the ediﬁ ce, the consistency in the placement of the stone elements and the greater proportion- ality of their dimensions, as well as the fact that the dado- zone is 0.40 m wider than the total width of the facades, clearly point to the older chronology of this part of the archi- tectural structure of the ediﬁ ce. The execution of this lower belt of the building’s exterior refers to some of the recog- nizable features of the architecture from the Post-Byzantine period. This chronology, however, can not be conﬁ rmed by painterly references, since it is obvious that the church has not been decorated with frescoes; however, its interior is or- namented with a number of specimens from icon painting of contemporary zographs, as well as reproductions of famous works of art from the medieval and post-medieval era. Thus, a comfortable and pleasant ambient is created for the many believers or adventurers, who visit the church on their jour- neys through the canyon of Matka. The lack of historical sources or written data, which would probably help the construction of an argumented story on the origin of the genuine church of Saint Savior, could be, to a certain extent, substituted by our knowledge gained from literature and travelogues. Hence, we know that in the ﬁ rst decade of the twentieth century, on the location of present-day temple, there were ruins of an older church and a great number of architectural elements in a form of chopped stones, molded bricks, decorated plastic components and carved lintels, scattered all over the terrain.17 The older scholars made a difference between the robust building opus applied on the preserved part of the south wall of the church that in 1912 was still existent on the site and the relatively delicate execution of the found stone fragments, produced in the spirit of the Byzantine architectural tradition.18 Thus, one can conclude that the present-day church dedicated to Saint Savior has undergone two phases prior to 1968, which can not be precisely determined; still they can be roughly put in certain chronological boundaries. In that context, if we take into consideration all the available components mentioned in the literature or noticed in the course of our terrain explorations, we can reconstruct the time frame of the architectural activities undertaken on the ﬂ at plateau at the site of Peter’s Rock. Namely, the oldest phase would be simultaneous with the erection of the church dedicated to Saint Archangel Michael, located in the central part of the terrain and built in the late period of the Komne- nian epoch,19 which marks the last bloom of the artistic crea- tivity within Middle Byzantine chronological horizon. The easy access to the terrain and the chaotic historic occurrenc- es of the next century that did not pass by the Skopje area,20 are the probable reasons for the demolition of the temple and for its further religious “hibernation”. After the paciﬁ cation of the circumstances and consolidation of the real-estate and administrative conditions that brought the new feudal lords and new political authorities on the territory of Skopje and its surroundings, the site of Peter’s Rock was also included in the new initiatives for production of religious ediﬁ ces and their architectural setting. It was than, when the old temple of Saint Archangel Michael was probably neglected to a greater extent in favor of the new ediﬁ ce, erected at the distance of 50 m in smaller dimensions, yet in the spirit of the renewed commissioners’ privileges, as well as the re-established initiatives for un- dertaking of new artistic enterprises. The exact time of the transfer of the religious performances from the older into the new ediﬁ ce can not be established without additional data; however, the knowledge on the renewed ﬂ ourishing of archi- tectural activities after the Serbian invasion in the northern parts of Macedonian territory could point to the reinforced architectural production of smaller sacral ediﬁ ces in the low- er spatial horizons of the canyon Matka,21 where the site of Peter’s Rock also lies. This hypothetically assumed phase of the architectural structure of the church of Saint Savior, which could be chronologically placed in the late thirteenth or the early fourteenth century and has been conﬁ rmed by delicately processed stone elements discovered in the sur- rounding area,22 was probably demolished at the beginning of the Ottoman period, when a great number of religious edi- Fig. 2. The church of St. Saviour, a view from the north-east 15 Idem, Tragi na ranohristijanski baziliki okolu Skopje, Godišen Zbornik na Filozofskiot fakultet 7 (33), Skopje 1981, 108. 16 A. Evans, Antiquarian Researches in Illyricum, Part IV: Scupi, Archeology 49/1 (1885) 97. 17 Lilčić, Matka niz vekovite, 69. 18 P. Popović, Prilog za studiju stare srpske crkvene arhitekture, Starinar I (1922) 115. 19 Dimitrova, Lilčić, Antevska, Vasilevski, Matka, 168. 20 Vizantijski izvori za istoriju naroda Jugoslavije, IV, Beograd 1971, 156; M. Boškoski, Vizantiskite imperatori vo Makedonija vo XI i XII vek, Glasnik za Institutot na nacionalna istorija 23/1 (Skopje 2002) 102; idem, Skopje i skopskata oblast od VI do krajot na XIV vek, Skopje 2009, 143–145. 21 T. Tomoski, Skopje od XI do XIV vek, in: Spomenici za sredno- vekovnata i ponovata istorija na Makedonija, I, Skopje 1975, 59. 22 Dimitrova, Lilčić, Vasilevski, Antevska, Matka, 97.104 ЗОГРАФ 35 (2011) [101–110] ﬁ ces were devastated as a result of the chaotic breakthrough of the new historic era. After the circumstances improved, the ruined church was rebuilt in a much modest architectural shape and with a much more rustic building technique, the testimony to which is the skillfully created dado-zone, preserved in the lower part of the facades that probably originates from the opulent in sacral architecture seventeenth century,23 the time when smaller religious ediﬁ ces arose at the locations of the older medieval temples. At the beginning of the twentieth century, when the Post-Byzantine temple found itself located on the estate bought by some of the Muslims living on the terri- tory of the canyon, the ediﬁ ce was once again demolished, an argument already mentioned in the literature.24 After the circumstances at this site have changed, at the location of the older temple the contemporary church was erected in 1968, which is the sole whiteness to the centuries-long, persistent survival of the Orthodox faith at a territory marked by the eternal and immortal sacral values. The names of the com- missioners, written on the plate located above the entrance, are the last and most relevant historic argument on the al- most millennium-long existence and the multiple ktetorial renewal of the church of Saint Saviour. Two kilometers north-eastern of the site of Peter’s Rock, on the highest post of the mountain range oriented transversally to the ﬂ ow of the Treska River, the small church of Saint Kyriake is located, today heavily devastated, tragi- cally ruined and preserved only in modest architectural and painterly remnants (ﬁ gs. 3–5). Erected by an unknown ktetor in the savage and inhospitable rocky palms of the ridge Osoj, this miniature temple is one of the most difﬁ cult to access sacral locations on the territory of Medieval Macedonia. El- evated, as it was noticed by its earliest visitors at a “fright- ening position”,25 at a dizzy vertical spot that hangs over the surrounding terrain without any horizontal support, the church of Saint Kyriake is a true example of a sacral ediﬁ ce situated on a location that aims at the unreachable heights, protected by the horrifying uneasiness of its own geographi- cal ambientum. Situated on the central rocky plateau in the middle of the medieval “town of King Marko”,26 it repre- sented local sanctuary for its citizens, spiritual refugee for the dedicated believers, as well as save heaven for the brave travelers and adventurers. The church of Saint Kyriake is erected at the top of a cliff that mounts vertically at the left bank of the Treska River, at its entrance in the gorge. Built on the ﬂ at surface of the plateau in the south-eastern part of the urban settle- ment and erected over the very abyss, hundreds of meters above the hallucinatory landscape of the deep canyon, the church of Saint Kyriake testiﬁ es to the thrilling craftsman- ship of the architects and represents a remarkable creative achievement in the architectural production of the medieval epoch. Although preserved in ruins and decorated with heav- 23 S. Dimeski, Istorija na makedonskata pravoslavna crkva, Skopje 1989, 266–268. 24 Popović, Prilog, 115. 25 Ibid.,116. 26 V. Lilčić, Markov grad – Matka, Istorija XIX/2 (1983) 285–297. Fig. 3. The church of St. Kiriake, eastern arch, south-eastern pendentive and the preserved part of the southern wall Fig. 4. The church of St. Kiriake, northern façade105 Dimitrova E.: In the heavenly horizons ily damaged fresco painting, it retained the basic contours of its original building and painterly design, which testiﬁ es to the ambitious expectations of the khtetor, as well as to the signiﬁ cant attainments of the artistic atelier. Created in the spirit of a monolithic architectural work of art and decorated with skillfully conceived fresco painting, the church of Saint Kyriake is a representative of the recognizable artistic ten- dencies of the Late Byzantine epoch and of the efforts for creation of attractive, creative and inventive sacral monu- ments. According to its ground plan, the church of Saint Kyriake is a cruciform ediﬁ ce (cross in square design), once covered by a dome.27 Due to the reduced spatial opportuni- ties, it was erected in a small size and executed as an ediﬁ ce of a compact architectural type, which implied maximum use of the terrain circumstances in favor of the pragmatic constructive solution. Hence, the total length of the church measures 6.50 m, while the width is 4.05 m. These miniature dimensions of the building were chosen as ideal not only for its spatial exposition, but also for its appropriate ambiental inclusion within the exterior design of the urban structures in the town of King Marko. Located on the city plateau and accompanied by residential objects and other elements of the urban infrastructure,28 the church represented the main reli- gious point in the settlement, fulﬁ lling the essential needs of its ktetor and his fellow citizens. In regard to its architectural matrix, the temple dedicat- ed to Saint Kyriake is single-naved and composed of a central bay with dimensions: 2,40 x 2,40 m, originally covered by a dome. Today, the only testimony to the existence of the dome are the remnants of the pendantives in the eastern part (ﬁ g. 5), as well the spatial design of the ground plan, which displays the construction of a bay in the area under the dome, accom- plished by reduction of the width of the lateral walls of the ed- iﬁ ce. On the ground of the church’s dimensions, as well as on the ground of the data found in older-date literature, the dome was cubical in the exterior and its angles were strengthened by stone collonetes.29 The dome rested on pilasters, constructed over the lateral walls, as well as on the arches, partially pre- served on the eastern side. Hence, one can suppose that the small dome dominated over the central part of the church, while to the east and to the west of it, the architectural space was covered with narrow barrel vaults, located transversally to the longitudal axis of the ediﬁ ce. To the east, the sanctuary was formulated with tri-sided apse in the exterior, while in the interior of the temple, two miniature niches laterally of the apse, enabled the function of a prothesis and diakonikon. When the remnants of the ediﬁ ce come to question, one can notice that the north wall of the ediﬁ ce along its full length, the southern half of the apsidal conch, the southern wall up to the point where the western cota of the central bay ended and a small portion of the western wall in its northern line, are pre- served out of the original architectural structure of the church. The highest point of the preserved building structure, which is a part of the genuine eastern arch under the dome, can be 27 Popović, Prilog, 116. 28 Lilčić, Markov grad – Matka, 286. 29 Popović, Prilog, 116. Fig. 5. The church of St. Kiriake, eastern arch106 ЗОГРАФ 35 (2011) [101–110] seen at the height of 4.12 m, while the preserved walls of the temple are 0.70 m in width and were composed of shopped stone peaces, joined with mortar and alternated with ceramic material of older, antique provenance. The building opus was organized in horizontal rows, with serious deviations from the regularity in the execution. The preserved parts of the original walls do not display brick-work decoration; the only remnants of architectural elaboration are the thin lesenae that reﬂ ect the interior design on the facades of the ediﬁ ce. Also, it is notice- able that the northern wall was perforated twice and the two windows were placed one above the other. The overall conception of the design and execution of the building emanates simplicity and compactness of the architectural matrix. Small by its dimensions and rational by the spatial qualities, pragmatically conceived and mate- rialized as a miniature, yet monolite architectural organism, the church of Saint Kyriake stood at the plateau of the town of King Marko, distinguishing itself with its unpretentious building vista. Erected in a form of a small cubus covered by a cubical dome and enclosed by rustically executed fa- cades, it successfully resisted the savage winds of destruc- tion from the high, almost frightening position of its spatial location. Although the interior of the temple does not contain any ktetorial inscription, the organization of the ground plan and the manner of the applied building technique unambigu- ously point to the ﬁ rst half or the middle of the fourteenth century.30 On the pick of the dome a bronze cross was once positioned measuring 0.40 m. which, after the demolition of the vault portions, was brought to the Church Museum of the Skopje Metropolitan eparchy.31 The fresco decoration applied on the walls of the church is devastated to a great extent, mostly due to the dem- olition of the dome and the damages done to the wall struc- tures. As a result, only small portions of the original painting are preserved, mainly in the eastern part of the ediﬁ ce. Out of the genuine fresco ensemble designed for the decoration of the interior, one can see parts of the altar arrangement, fragments of the compositions depicted on the lateral walls, as well as several saintly images, recognizable in the eastern parts of the north and south wall surfaces. These preserved portions from the painted decoration are highly damaged and pale, whereat the pictures are visible only in silhouettes. According to the degree of demolition, it is clear that after the destruction of the vault structures, the atmospheric con- ditions caused erosion to the painterly pigment, which could indicate that the colors were applied on a dry surface. Hence, the massive devastation of the painterly structure comes as no surprise, since the al secco technique is highly sensitive to the atmospheric moist, as well as to the drastic amplitudes of aerial climate.32 Out of the genuine painterly program in the temple, one can see that a part of the composition depicting Ofﬁ ciat- ing Church Fathers is preserved on the semi-circular surface of the apse, in which the bishops attain the ceremony in hon- or of the sacriﬁ ced Christ. Although the preserved elements are not sufﬁ cient for a complete reconstruction of the scene, the dimensions and the position of the bishopric ﬁ gure in the southern part of the apsidal wall imply a chamber format in the execution of the Liturgical Service, appropriate to the spatial opportunities, restricted by the modest diameter of the altar apse. On the pilasters west of the sanctuary, the ﬁ g- ures of two stilites are depicted, the signatures of whom are highly devastated, thus, the inscriptions veriﬁ ed in the older- date literature <styi si>meony i <styi> danily,33 are no longer readable. Represented on the top of their pillars, carefully decorated with geometric ornaments, the two well- respected representatives of this saintly category gained signiﬁ cantly festal location within the painted decoration of the temple.34 The saintly busts, depicted above them in the second zone of the fresco arrangement, due to the heavily damage caused to the decoration, can not be identiﬁ ed. In the upper zone of the northern wall, one can barely see the 30 Korunovski, Dimitrova, Macedonia, 112–122. 31 S. Radojčić, Starine Crkvenog muzeja u Skoplju, Skoplje 1941, 85. 32 D. V. Thompson, The materials and techniques of medieval paint- ing, New York 1956, 71–72. 33 M. Ljubinković, Crkva Svete Nedelje nad klisurom Treske i prob- lem njenog datovanja, Zbornik zaštite spomenika kulture II/1 (1951) 97. 34 I. M. Djordjević, Sveti stolpnici u srpskom slikarstvu srednjeg veka, ZLUMS 18 (1982) 41–51; idem, Die Säule and die Säulenheili- gen als hellenistisches Erbe in der byzantinischen und serbischen Wand- malerei, XVI Internationaler Byzantinistenkongress, Akten II/5, JOB 32/5 (1982), 93–100. Fig. 6. The church of St. Kiriake, the patron saint107 Dimitrova E.: In the heavenly horizons pale remnants of the composition, once identiﬁ ed as the Cru- ciﬁ xion.35 The best visible peace of the fresco painting that dec- orated the walls of the church is the portrait of the patron saint, represented in the central part of the southern wall, in the second zone (ﬁ gs. 6–7). Although the signature written beside her image is completely wasted, the typological char- acteristics of the depiction are relatively well preserved, re- ﬂ ecting the recognizable vista of St. Kyriake, discovered in a number of other monument in the territory of the Balkans. Depicted in an elegant stance and dressed in luxurious attire that reﬂ ects her noble origin,36 she holds her martyrial cross in the right hand, while with the left she reﬁ nely expresses her sacral feeling to the believers at their approach towards the sanctuary. On the long dress she wears, one can notice execution of a rich ornamental decoration with an emulation of luxurious embroidery in golden color. The red color of the dress, the yellow geometrical ﬁ elds in shape of rhombs and the stylized ﬂ oral motives of lilies ﬁ ll the soft, palatial fabric with the glamorous glow of the Byzantine “couture”. In the upper part, the dress ends with a peace of cloth that covers her neck, luxuriously decorated with large pearls, while on her head, St. Kyriake wears a crown made out of two metal rings, crisscrossed on the forehead and attached to the ﬁ rm fabric underneath. Under the crown, there is a light, bright in color veil, running down St. Kyriake’s shoulders and cover- ing her hair. The image of St. Kyriake, depicted in the church in King Marko’s town at Matka, reﬂ ects the typological fea- tures in the presentation of this martyr saint in the fresco painting from the fourteenth century, displaying notifying similarities with her other portraits found in the monuments on the territory of Macedonia. In that regard, according to the visual characteristics of the crown, her portrait from Matka ﬁ nds analogies in the image of St. Kyriake depicted in the narthex of the church dedicated to the Mother of God in the village of Kučevište (1332–1337),37 in her portrait represented in the naos of Saint George in Gorni Kozjak (ca. 1340),38 as well as in the image of the same saint in the narthex of the temple dedicated to the Virgin in Mateič (1348–1352),39 while the luxurious attire of the patron saint of Matka has its parallel in the dress of St. Kyriake depicted on the northern wall in the naos of Saint George in Pološko (1343–1345).40 In that sense, the portrait of St. Kyriake from her temple in Matka could be compared with the depictions of this saint in the fresco painting of the monuments from the ﬁ rst half of the fourteenth century, in which she was rep- resented within the gallery of lady saints. However, due to her role of a patron and titular saint of her church in King Marko’s town, her image in the fresco decoration of Matka glows with much more remarkable distinction of the spatial, as well as iconographical elements in comparison to the oth- er mentioned monuments. Unfortunately, the components of the jewelry, noticeable in her images in the other monuments from the fourteenth century, due to the massive demolition of the frescoes in the church of Saint Kyriake, have become completely unrecognizable. On the ground of our insight in the existent literature and its illustrative contribution, it can be stated that the por- trait of St. Kyriake in the church at Matka was a part of the ktetor’s composition, depicted on the southern wall (ﬁ g. 8).41 However, due to the long-term neglect of the building, the part of the painted decoration applied to the west of the pa- tron saint’s image, where older scholars located the depiction of the commissioner with the church model, has been de- molished.42 Because of that, the effort for any reconstruction of the ktetorial arrangement or its conception, which would lead to more serious analysis of the sociologic features of the church of Saint Kyriake is no longer possible. The lack of ktetorial inscription or genuine written documents, are also in favor of the highly mysterious historical dimension of the temple and of its ﬁ nancial patrons. The data on the real-estate ownership of the nobleman Bojko over the region of Matka,43 as well as the chronological concurrence of its 35 Ljubinković, Crkva Svete Nedelje, 96. 36 H. Delehaye, Synaxarium Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae, Brux- elles 1954, col. 804; Justin Popović, Žitija svetih, za juli, Valjevo 1975, 138–141. 37 I. M. Djordjević, Slikarstvo XIV veka u crkvi Sv. Spasa u selu Kučevištu, ZLUMS 17 (1981) 104; idem, Zidno slikarstvo srpske vlastele, Beograd 1993, 136. 38 Djordjević, Zidno slikarstvo srpske vlastele, 139. 39 E. Dimitrova, Manastir Matejče, Skopje 2002, 224, T. LVII. 40 Djordjević, Zidno slikarstvo srpske vlastele, 149. 41 Popović, Prilog, 116. 42 Ljubinković, Crkva Svete Nedelje, 99, sl. 6. 43 Lj. Stojanović, Stari srpski zapisi i natpisi, 1, Beograd 1902, 29, br. 66; J. Hadži-Vasiljević, Skoplje i njegova okolina, Skoplje 1930, 458; G. Tomović, Morfologija ćiriličkih natpisa na Balkanu, Beograd 1974, 56. Fig. 7. The church of St. Kiriake, the patron saint, a detail (photo: I. M. Djordjević)108 ЗОГРАФ 35 (2011) [101–110] territorial authority over this important strategic location with the closest painterly analogies of the church’s fresco decoration, are not sufﬁ cient references to the ktetorial at- tribution of the fresco painting in the temple to this powerful and respectable aristocrat. In regard to the painterly features of the fresco paint- ing executed in the temple, one can discuss their quality solely on the ground of the badly preserved parts of the decoration, which give small evidence to the program con- cept, as well as to the stylistic characteristics of the frescoes. However, the preserved parts indicate the basic structure of the fresco decoration, which, besides the dome arrangement (demolished due to the collapse of the vaults) and the altar program with the portion of the Liturgical Service, included also the illustration of the Great Feasts in the upper zone of the walls, the saintly busts in the middle register and the gallery of saints in the lowest horizon of the ensemble. Due to the modest spatial capacity of the church’s interior, the exposition of the Festal cycle was, most probably, reduced to eight scenes, out of which, the heavily damaged parts of the Cruciﬁ xion (northern wall), as well as a small fragment of an unrecognizable composition depicted in the central part of the southern wall are preserved.44 On the pilasters, as main supportive elements of the ediﬁ ce, the images of the stillites were depicted with their symbolical role of uncompromising pillars of the fait, while on the most festal position on the southern wall – the patron saint was represented as accept- ing the ktetorial gift in a shape of a church replica from her generous donor, the image of whom has been lost long ago in the merciless abyss of destruction and oblivion. The stylistic features of the painting point to a mas- ter with a precise drawing and clearly formulated contour, whose painterly procedure was based upon the ﬁ rm mod- elation of the shapes and large formats of the depicted sce- nic components. In the execution of the saintly ﬁ gures, he employed an elegant stature of the personages, dressed in rich fabrics, depicted with broad strokes and skillfully or- namented decorative elements. Although the fragmentar- ily preserved images and compositions do not help to see his approach to the structuring of the facial features of the saints, nor the manner of conﬁ guration of the dynamics and dramacity of the illustrated events, one can clearly notice the painterly energy of the zograph, manifested in the precisely modeled ﬁ gural anatomy, as well as in the pictorial fresh- ness of the applied pigment. These stylistic characteristics of the painting on one hand, and the mentioned analogies with the monuments from the ﬁ rst half of the fourteenth century on the other, doubtlessly point to the ﬁ rst decades of that century as the most adequate period for the origination of the fresco painting in the church of Saint Kyriake. The data on the reference to this temple in the charter of King Milutin issued to the monastery of Saint George Gorgos in Skopje (from the year of 1300) also speak in favor of the assump- tion for the chronological determination of the church in the ﬁ rst decades of the fourteenth century.45 The choice of the architectural ground plan of a compact cross in square, the manner of construction and the elaboration of the facades with narrow lesenes reﬂ ecting the inner spatial structure of the ediﬁ ce,46 are additional references to the probable chro- nology of the church of Saint Kyriake that belongs to the opening decades of the fourteenth century. Erected at the peak of the rocky landscape, which with its vertical position challenge the dizzy depth of the aerial abyss and decorated with compactly designed and skillfully executed ensemble, the church of Saint Kiriake was elevated in the “Wuthering heights” of King Marko’s town as an im- mortal symbol of the faith and a secure retreat for its in- habitants. Protected by the watch tower, today called King Marko’s windmill – located on the highest spot of the rocky structure of the ridge, the church of Saint Kiriake represent- ed a precious sacral ediﬁ ce in the vast and safety region of the canyon of Matka. A work of art of well educated masters builders, who erected the temple over the edge of the abyss and creation of skilful and inventive zograph, the church of Saint Kiriake in King Marko’s town is a wonderful little piece of heavenly sanctity, brought down in the rocky palms of medieval Matka. 44 Ljubinković, Crkva Svete Nedelje, 98. 45 R. Grujić, Tri hilandarske povelje, Zbornik za istoriju Južne Srbije i susednih oblasti, I, Skoplje 1936, 16–17; R. Ljubinković, Srpski crkveni spomenici u klisuri reke Treske, Skoplje 1940, 6; V. Mošin, L. Slaveva, K. Ilievska, Gramoti na manastirot Sv. Georgi-Gorg Skopski, in: Spomenici za srednovekovnata i ponovata istorija na Makedonija, I, Skopje 1975, 207. 46 R. Krautheimer, Early Christian and Byzantine architecture, Har- mondsworth 1965, Fig. 404; A. Rashenov, Mesembriĭski t︠s︡ŭrkvi – Églises de Mésemvria, Soﬁ i︠͡a︡ 1932, 90–98; A. Orlandos, Η Μονή της Κάτω Πανα- γιάς, Αρχείον των Βυζαντινών μνημείων της Ελλάδος 2 (1936) 75–77; C. Mango, Byzantine αrchitecture, New York 1976, Fig. 308. Fig. 8. The church of St. Kiriake, the ktetor’s composition (drawing: P. Popović)109 Dimitrova E.: In the heavenly horizons ЛИСТА РЕФЕРЕНЦИ – REFERENCE LIST Boškoski M., Skopje i skopskata oblast od VI do krajot na XIV vek, Skopje 2009. Boškoski M., Vizantiskite imperatori vo Makedonija vo XI i XII vek, Glas- nik na Institutot za nacionalna istorija 23/1 (Skopje 2002) 102. Delehaye H., Synaxarium Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae, Bruxelles 1954. Dimeski S., Istorija na makedonskata pravoslavna crkva, Skopje 1989. Dimitrova E., Lilčić V., Antevska K., Vasilevski A., Matka – kulturno nasledstvo, Skopje 2011. Dimitrova E., Manastir Matejče, Skopje 2002. Djordjević I. M., Die Säule and die Säulenheiligen als hellenistisches Erbe in der byzantinischen und serbischen Wandmalerei, XVI Internation- aler Byzantinistenkongress, Akten II/5, JOB 32/5 (1982) 93–100. Djordjević I. M., Slikarstvo XIV veka u crkvi Sv. Spasa u selu Kučevištu, ZLUMS 17 (1981) 77–110. Djordjević I. M., Sveti stolpnici u srpskom slikarstvu srednjeg veka, ZLUMS 18 (1982) 41–51. Djordjević I. M., Zidno slikarstvo srpske vlastele, Beograd 1993. Evans A., Antiquarian Researches in Illyricum, Part IV: Scupi, Archeology 49/1 (1885) 97. Grujić R., Tri hilandarske povelje, Zbornik za istoriju Južne Srbije i sused- nih oblasti, I, Skoplje 1936, 16–17. Hadži-Vasiljević J., Skoplje i njegova okolina, Skoplje 1930. Korać V., Sur les basiliques médiévales de Macédoine et le Serbie, Actes du XIIe Congres International d’Etudes Byzantines III, Beograd 1964, 173–185. Korunovski S., Dimitrova E., Macedonia. L’arte medievale dal IX al XV secolo, Milano 2006. Krautheimer R., Early Christian and Byzantine architecture, Harmonds- worth 1965. Lilčić V., Markov grad – Matka, Istorija XIX/2 (1983) 285–297. Lilčić V., Matka niz vekovite, Skopje 1995. Ljubinković M., Crkva Svete Nedelje nad klisurom Treske i problem nje- nog datovanja, Zbornik zaštite spomenika kulture II/1 (1951) 97. Ljubinković R., Srpski crkveni spomenici u klisuri reke Treske, Skoplje 1940. Mango C., Byzantine αrchitecture, New York 1976. Mathews Th. F., The Early Churches of Constantinople. Architecture and Liturgy, University Park – London 1977. Mikulčić I., Skopje so okolnite tvrdini, Skopje 1982. Mikulčić, Tragi na ranohristijanski baziliki okolu Skopje, Godišen Zbornik na Filozofskiot fakultet 7 (33), Skopje 1981, 108. Mošin V., Slaveva L., Ilievska K., Gramoti na manastirot Sv. Georgi-Gorg Skopski, in: Spomenici za srednovekovnata i ponovata istorija na Makedonija, I, Skopje 1975, 207. Orlandos A., Η Μονή της Κάτω Παναγιάς, Αρχείον των Βυζαντινών μνη- μείων της Ελλάδος 2 (1936) 75–77 [Orlandos A., Hē Monē tēs Katō Panagias, Archeion tōn Byzantinōn mnēmeiōn tēs Hellados 2 (1936) 75–77]. Popović Justin, Žitija svetih, za juli, Valjevo 1975. Popović P., Prilog za studiju stare srpske crkvene arhitekture, Starinar I (1922) 115. Radojčić S., Starine Crkvenog muzeja u Skoplju, Skoplje 1941. Rashenov A., Mesembriĭski t ︠ s ︡ ŭrkvi – Églises de Mésemvria, Soﬁ i ︠͡ a ︡ 1932. Stojanović Lj., Stari srpski zapisi i natpisi, 1, Beograd 1902. Stričević Dj., La renovation du type basilical dans l’architecture ecclé- siastique des pays centraux des Balkans au IXe – XIe siècles, Actes du XIIe Congres International d’Etudes Byzantines I, Beograd 1963, 165–211. Thompson D. V., The materials and techniques of medieval painting, New York 1956. Tomoski T., Skopje od XI do XIV vek, in: Spomenici za srednovekovnata i ponovata istorija na Makedonija, I, Skopje 1975, 59. Tomović G., Morfologija ćiriličkih natpisa na Balkanu, Beograd 1974. Vizantijski izvori za istoriju naroda Jugoslavije, IV, Beograd 1971. Међу десетинама цркава које се налазе у региону Матке код Скопља посебну пажњу привлаче три храма у средњем и највишем географском појасу тог подручја. Прва од њих јесте црква посвећена Светом арханђелу Михаилу на локалитету Петрова стена, два километра јужно од села Горње Матке. То је најстарији средњовековни хришћански споменик у региону, пре- ма одликама градње и археолошким налазима датован у касни XII век. Реч је о базиликалној грађевини с нартек- сом, чији су зидови сачувани до висине од једног метра. У цркви је пронађен богат археолошки материјал. Међу важније налазе спада масивна погребна стела са епита- фом исписаним на црквенословенском језику, пронађена у средишњем делу наоса. Та стела, као и други архео- У небеским висинама Три средњовековне цркве у региону Матке код Скопља Елизабета Димитрова лошки налази, упућује на постојање средњовековне некрополе и говори у прилог претпоставки да је црква Светог арханђела Михаила, заштитника праведних душа и брижљивог психопомпа, имала фунерарну функцију и да су се у њој обављали погребни обреди. Друга црква, посвећена Светом Спасу, саграђена је педесетак метара од храма Светог арханђела Михаила. Подигнута је шездесетих година XX века на темељима старије грађевине, која, према истраживањима аутора овог текста, потиче из касног XIII и раног XIV века; у то време црква Светог арханђела Михаила већ је била ван употребе, што је потврђено налазима прецизно обрађених камених блокова, откривених поред данашњег храма. Црква је била порушена почетком турског перио-110 ЗОГРАФ 35 (2011) [101–110] да, па је поново саграђена током XVII века, о чему гово- ри одлично очуван сокл са обележјима поствизантијске архитектуре скопске области. Почетком XX века, пошто се нашао на имању досељених муслимана, храм је поно- во страдао, да би 1968. године (како стоји у ктиторском натпису) последњи пут био подигнут. Та грађевина сачу- вана је до данас. Трећа црква налази се два километра од локалите- та Петрова стена, у највишем делу планинског појаса, на централном платоу у тзв. Марковом граду. Посвећена Светој Недељи и саграђена у облику уписаног крста са- жетог типа, та је црква представљала главни религиозни пункт у поменутом насељу, у којем је живео и њен не- познати ктитор. Иако је од архитектуре преостало врло мало (поткуполни лук на источној страни, два источна пандантифа, бочни зидови до висине од једног и по ме- тра), сачувало се и нешто живописа (Литургијска служба у олтару, лик свете Недеље на јужном зиду), а он својим стилским обележјима упућује на могуће датовање сли- карства храма у прву половину XIV столећа.