ABSTRACT: 
The football World Cup is the greatest multicultural sporting extravaganza of modern times. The notion of post-fandom tries to capture the ways in which fans now participate in and engage in self-aware and reflexive strategies to obtain their desired outcomes from attendance at or viewing such major events. This illustrated photo-essay on the World Cup looks at the experiences and behaviour of fans in three countries, Scotland, Germany and Australia, during the tournament with a view to extending our understanding of the relationships between fans and others temporarily interested in the World Cup and the promoters of such mega-events. It argues that the participants brought a wide range of expectations to the tournament and engaged in highly flexible and innovative approaches to ensure that they gained the maximum benefit, individually and collectively, from the experience. <br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper examines the experiences of the fans in Germany, Scotland and Australia and the ways in which they related to the football and/or tourist environment in which they were expected to participate. It argues that the participants brought a wide range of expectations to the tournament and engaged in highly flexible and innovative approaches to ensure that they gained the maximum benefit, individually and collectively, from the experience. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 - tionships between fans and others temporarily interested in the World Cup and the promot- ers of such mega-events. It argues that the participants brought a wide range of expectations to the tournament and engaged in highly flexible and innovative approaches to ensure that they gained the maximum benefit, individually and collectively, from the experience. The football World Cup is the greatest multicultural sporting extravaganza of modern times. Its only conceivable rival, the Olympic Games, is a multi-sports activity in which all member countries can take part in a tournament that is concentrated in two weeks, usually in a single city. Even at the Olympics, however, the largest attendances at the Games have been for the football tournament, despite the fact that it used to be restricted to amateur players and now consists of players under the age of 23.[1] The World Cup, by contrast, is usually spread over a whole country, or even two as in Korea and Japan in 2002.[2] It lasts four weeks and involves more countries in its qualifying competition than there are members of the United Nations.[3] Attendances are huge and are spread across the nation(s) acting as host(s). This makes the month- long tournament a truly national experience, and there was a clear sense of patriotic pride in Germany in 2006 that the tournament had been successfully prepared and presented.[4] This grew with the unexpectedly good performances of the national team in the early stages of the competition. Roy Hay, Sports and Editorial Services Australia; Tony Joel, Deakin University. Correspondence to: Roy Hay, haysoc@big.pond.com D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 2 R. Hay and T. Joel Photo 1 The media entered into the party spirit. Cover of Der Spiegel. Scanned by Tony Joel. Photo 2 The new Allianz Stadium, Munich, 18 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 3 Photo 1 The media entered into the party spirit. Cover of Der Spiegel. Scanned by Tony Joel. Twelve host cities were involved in Germany in 2006, each with a modernized or completely new stadium ranging in capacity from 66,000 at the Olympic Stadium in Berlin to 43,000 in Leipzig.[5] Photo 2 The new Allianz Stadium, Munich, 18 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. In 2006 more than 3 million people watched the games live, and probably several times that number watched at public screening areas throughout Germany and the world. Television audiences ran into the billions, with women making up approxi- mately 40 per cent of those watching.[6] An estimated 60,000 Australians were in Germany during the World Cup, most without tickets for games, but there to take part in the experience.[7] Scotland did not qualify for the World Cup final tournament, yet there were many thousands of Scots in Germany in June 2006, some with tickets, but probably the majority without. The World Cup has become a highly commercialized event.[8] Whereas at the first tournament in 1930, the host country Uruguay offered to pay the expenses of the teams invited to take part, in 2006 the World Cup generated an income for FIFA of over $1 billion from ticket sales, television and other media rights, merchandise rights and sponsorship.[9] Nevertheless, the finances of the world body remain a matter of concern. In 2001–2002 the organization was facing a serious financial shortfall, in part because of the collapse of entities with which it had been doing business. There was a major controversy over the appropriateness of the measures taken to overcome the financial crisis, but this became bound up in the political struggle over the presidency of FIFA.[10] When Sepp Blatter won the latter contest, he was able to ride out the financial storm in the short term, yet according to the most recent official information from FIFA, the long-term financial issue will not be settled for some time. Although its ramifications and processes are highly complex, the essential plank of the Blatter financial manipulation has been the so-called ‘securitization’ of future income from the World Cup to underpin the current revenue position of the organization which otherwise would show a considerable deficit: FIFA is therefore seeking to increase its equity to such a level that running costs can in future be financed by the funds remaining from the previous World Cup rather than needing to cover them using prepayments of revenue for the subsequent event. This process will, however, take several World Cup cycles to complete. The creation of financial reserves is one of the requirements laid down in the FIFA Statutes.[11] For the host country the tournament represents major costs in infrastructure invest- ment, security and the improvement of domestic tourist facilities, plus staging costs for the event and its ancillary activities, but this is offset by more than a month’s exposure on the world’s media, substantial spending by fans, tourists and visitors, and some possible long-term benefits from the experiences of those who attend the tournament in commercial or other capacities.[12] The host organization and the commercial companies, as well as FIFA and the foot- ball authorities of the competing countries, set out to make significant revenue from the World Cup and to shape and contain the experience of the fans involved in the tournament.[13] They also sought to minimize the disruption to normal activities in Germany by channelling fan involvement into particular areas and events, and set up a massive security organization to try to ensure that there was little or no violence D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 4 R. Hay and T. Joel associated with the tournament. In addition, there was a significant ideological campaign to bolster the image of Germany as a country which was highly committed to football, which could marry football and cultural events, and which could break down stereotypes of dour efficiency and regimentation by being open, friendly and receptive to visitors. FIFA joined in with its various campaigns about assisting with the alleviation of world poverty, tackling racism and promoting its concept of fair play.[14] Photo 3 Mixing culture and football in Munich. A reconstruction of Rio de Janeiro in terrracotta bricks by eight youngsters from the favelas. Projecto Morrinho (little hill) Do Morro Da Pereira, Haus der Kunst, June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. Although the football and commercial organizations went to great lengths to control and channel the experiences and activities of the fans in Germany, it is clear that there was a hugely varied response by the fans themselves. Some academic writers in the last decade have tried to conceptualize the differences between those involved with foot- ball-related events today and those in the past, under the notion of post-fandom.[15] Post-fans are reflexive, ironic and participatory: Post-[fans] acknowledge that, within the multi-million dollar [football] industry, their capacity to generate meaningful change is rather limited. Nevertheless, post- [fans] pursue alternative travel [and other] strategies … Post-fans are cognizant of the constructed nature of fan reputations, and the vagaries of the media in exagger- ating or inventing such identities. They adopt a reflexive approach in interpreting the relative power positions of their players and club within the political structures of domestic and international football. They maintain an ironic and critical stance towards the apologetic propaganda emanating from [the football authorities.][16] Photo 3 Mixing culture and football in Munich. A reconstruction of Rio de Janeiro in terrracotta bricks by eight youngsters from the favelas. Projecto Morrinho (little hill) Do Morro Da Pereira, Haus der Kunst, June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 5 In what follows we look at the experiences of the fans we met in Germany, Scotland and Australia and the ways in which they related to the football and/or tourist environment in which they were expected to participate. The story is not about attempts to change the overall structure of the World Cup but rather about the many ways in which fans adapted to, amended or subverted the scenarios and experiences that were planned for them. The fact that Scotland did not qualify for the World Cup finals might rule it out in some eyes, but in fact the experience of the Scottish fans at home and in Germany makes a marvellous counterpoint to that of the Germans and the Australians. The other fact that links these three countries is that the eventual winner, Italy, knocked them all out of the tournament. Scotland went out in the European qualifiers, Australia in the round of sixteen and Germany in the semi-final. Scotland Before the tournament got under way Scotland was almost a World Cup–free zone, judging by the local media. Of course, Scotland did not qualify for the 2006 World Cup so one might not expect overwhelming popular interest prior to the tournament, but given that the Scottish football fans are among the most knowledgeable and broadest in their taste for the game, the occasion seemed to be being downplayed somewhat. There was the odd story about the warm-up games and the performances of the various stars, a few reports of injuries to the same, and the odd picture of them larking about in training. But one got the sense that news editors were grasping at straws for stories, so when Andrew Murray, the Scottish tennis player, said that he would not be support- ing England at the World Cup, his comments were presented as a spur to an ancient Photo 4 Scottish t-shirt. Photo: Roy Hay. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 6 R. Hay and T. Joel prejudice about AbE (Anyone but England). Similarly, when the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, himself a Scot, said he expected his compatriots to support England, he was howled down in the media. A popular item in many stores was a t-shirt with the message ‘I support two teams. Scotland and whoever is playing England’. Photo 4 Scottish t-shirt. Photo: Roy Hay. In at least one case anti-English sentiment was carried too far when two people were assaulted in Linwood in Renfrewshire simply because they were wearing English colours in Scotland.[17] Responses on websites indicated that many Scots and others were critical of those who seemed to define themselves by their anti-Englishness, while others regarded the matter as harmless differentiation.[18] When the tournament began there was a sudden change of mood in Scotland, even though the Scottish team was not there.[19] Large numbers supported Trinidad and Tobago instead.[20] In the opening week of the finals it appeared that T and T shirts were sold out in Scotland. To the outsider this might seem bizarre, but apart from the AbE factor, there were some connections between the Scots and the Soca Warriors, as Trinidad and Tobago styled themselves. Several of the team played for clubs in the Scottish leagues. There was even a player called Scotland. Jason Scotland normally turned out for St Johnstone in the Scottish First Division.[21] More high-profile players included Marvin Andrews, a big, strapping centre-half who became a cult figure at Glasgow Rangers, played for them in the Champions League in the season prior to the World Cup. Unfortunately, he turned an ankle in training and was unable to take Photo 5 A spectacular costume worn by a Trinidad and Tobago performer in the street procession in Dortmund the day after the match against Sweden, 11 June 2006. Photo: Jörg Wimper. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 7 part. Then there was the charismatic and brilliant, if ageing, Russell Latapy, now with Falkirk in the lower leagues, but formerly with Hibernian in Edinburgh. He was also a great mate of that party animal and T and T skipper, Dwight Yorke, who had a stellar season with Australian A-League champion Sydney FC. So there was plenty to keep the Scots interested and many glasses were raised to the Soca Warriors when they managed to hold the might of Sweden to a scoreless draw in the opening game, even though this result made it easier for England to qualify for the later stages of the tournament when they scrambled to a single-goal victory over Paraguay, thanks to an own goal from a diverted David Beckham free kick. Following their game in Dortmund against Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago mounted a charm offensive with a street parade through the city centre. Photo 5 A spectacular costume worn by a Trinidad and Tobago performer in the street procession in Dortmund the day after the match against Sweden, 11 June 2006. Photo: Jörg Wimper.6 The whipm ster. Trinidad and Tobago performer in the st eet procession in Dortmund the day after the match against Sweden, 11 June 2006. Photo: Jörg Wimper. There was a large contingent of Scottish fans in Germany for the tournament proper, many supporting Brazil, everyone’s second team. Several of them were present at the Australia versus Brazil game in Munich on 16 June, and many more were in the city and at the big screens in the fan fests. One group of mixed Rangers and Celtic fans from Motherwell, near Glasgow, consisted of 14 young men with only two tickets between them.[22] Another Scot, spotted in Kaiserslautern, was wearing a kilt but no shirt and had his head painted as a replica of the Adidas ball used in the tournament. In Scotland a person’s whose behaviour is bizarre might be referred to as a ‘bawheid’, literally ‘ball head’, and this one certainly was. Photo 6 The whipmaster. Trinidad and Tobago performer in the street procession in Dortmund the day after the match against Sweden, 11 June 2006. Photo: Jörg Wimper. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 8 R. Hay and T. Joel Then there were two lads in Glasgow Celtic shirts walking down the main thorough- fare from the ground, but when we stopped to talk, it turned out they were from Perth – Perth, Western Australia! There were many others around with clear Scottish accents, but thankfully there were few signs of the ‘See You, Jimmy’ headgear, which consists of a tartan bonnet with a wig of orange hair attached, making the wearer look like a refu- gee from the film Braveheart. Photo 7 One kilted Australian-Scot at the fanfest in Stuttgart, 22 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. One of the authors had obtained two tickets for Australia’s games in the second round of the distribution organized by the Football Federation of Australia. However, while on a jet boat on Loch Ness with his 92-year-old mother-in-law, he received a phone call from his son in Sydney with an offer of tickets for the opening game against Japan. That led to some frantic telephone calls to try to arrange flights and transport and to pick up the other author in Cologne to accompany him to Kaiserslautern. Back in Scotland the papers were now full of the World Cup and many fans were cheering on the Soca Warriors when they took on England in their second match. Sir Alex Ferguson, manager of Manchester United, was portrayed as aiding Trinidad and Tobago, both by trying to prevent his young superstar Wayne Rooney from playing for England because he was recovering from a broken bone in his foot and by providing training facilities for the captain of Trinidad and Tobago, Dwight Yorke. Yorke had been part of United’s British and European treble-winning team in 1999 but had then parted company with the club. Since the end of the Australian A-League season, Yorke had been back training in Manchester, with Ferguson giving him every facility to maintain his fitness. Ferguson denied any anti-English bias and claimed to have a good relationship with the England manager, Sven-Goran Eriksson.[23] Photo 7 One kilted Australian-Scot at the fanfest in Stuttgart, 22 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 9 All the local papers went to great lengths to find a Scottish connection to the current competition. If a player once had a short spell with a Scottish club, even well in the past, this was brought up and highlighted. One current star who gave superb performances was the Croatian striker Dado Prso of Glasgow Rangers. Although he was unable to score against Brazil, Japan or Australia, his efforts on behalf of his team were outstanding.[24] But it was not just the current tournament that made headlines in Scotland. The Scots were also advancing a claim that they invented the modern rule-bounded game. This is based on the discovery of a 1711 edition of a little Latin book Vocabula, written by David Wedderburn, an Aberdeen schoolmaster, in 1633, which referred to a passing game with goalkeepers. It was on display in Hamburg during the World Cup.[25] The story of the origins of modern football is highly contested among historians at the moment, but this episode showed that the Scots continue to take the game as seriously as one of their most famous sons, the charismatic Liverpool manager, Bill Shankly.[26] Germany The major long-term benefit for Germany from being the host nation of the World Cup emanated from the month of intense and overwhelmingly positive worldwide media exposure it received. Since the Second World War Germany has been saddled with a poor public image abroad, owing to the seemingly eternal burden of Hitler and the legacy of National Socialism. Equally, for decades Germans have grappled domestically with the problematic process they themselves refer to as Vergangenheits- bewältigung, or coming to terms with the past.[27] The question of what constitutes appropriate and acceptable German nationalism after Auschwitz, indeed, whether such a concept is acceptable at all, has featured prominently in public political discourse both before and since reunification.[28] A strong case can be made for the argument that hosting the World Cup has done more for Germany’s post-war international image and Germans’ national pride (as opposed to nationalism) than any other single event in the past six decades. Many Germans were astounded by the unexpected and unprecedented level of spontaneous flag-waving and the extent to which the national colours, ‘Schwarz-Rot-Gold’, were proudly displayed.[29] Photo 8 Fanfest in Cologne, with the spires of the cathedral in the background before the Germany versus Argentina match on 30 June 2006, which was taking place in Berlin, 500 kilometres away. Photo: Tony Joel. For someone like Jörg Wimper, a 20-year-old from Dortmund in the Ruhr, it was ‘fantastic to see German flags almost everywhere’. The chance of seeing a German flag on display in his home-town prior to the World Cup was ‘slim to none’, he said. Wimper spent 10 months prior to the World Cup as part of Germany’s national civil service program assisting international students who were living in Dortmund while they were attending an intensive German language course. He believed the most strik- ing aspect of the ‘World Cup hype’ experienced throughout Germany was that ‘Germans suddenly not only started to be proud of their country, but, moreover, wanted to show it to the world’.[30] And Germans were not alone in being highly impressed by this trend. Tongtong Dou, a New Zealander of Chinese extraction currently undertaking a two-year Masters degree at Berlin’s Humboldt University, was pleasantly surprised by the atmosphere in the German capital during the tournament, which she viewed as an appealing mixture of patriotism and celebration: D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 10 R. Hay and T. Joel For a country that struck me as being uncomfortable with open patriotism, it was refreshing to see the whole city suddenly awash in black, red and gold – out of every window, from every car, even waving from the back of bicycles. Likewise, not renowned for being a ‘party folk’, it was great to see the Germans loosen their ties and continue to make some noise long into the night after victory.[31] Photo 9 Put out more flags. Many German cars were decorated with flags, to the mild surprise of much of the population. Photo: Tongtong Dou. Indeed, in a nation where overt expressions of nationalism have not been widely practised or condoned for over a half-century, many Germans clearly were deeply touched by the groundswell of emotion and open embrace of national pride.[32] The reasons for this were twofold, one relating to the dazzling off-field presentation and the other to outstanding on-field performances. The German organizers set out quite explicitly to overturn many commonly held stereotypes of the country and its people. In particular, they sought to convey the impression that the people were not remote, dourly efficient and regimented, but were friendly, open and welcoming. Here we can quote the two official slogans: the universal English one for visitors – ‘A Time to Make Friends’ – and the untranslatable German slogan for the host population –‘Die Welt zu Photo 8 Fanfest in Cologne, with the spires of the cathedral in the background before the Germany versus Argentina match on 30 June 2006, which was taking place in Berlin, 500 kilometres away. Photo: Tony Joel. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 11 Gast bei Freunden’. German radio breakfast shows and comedians alike had a field day toying with the latter phrase being officially translated as ‘a time to make friends,’ because it does not exactly mean this at all. It is virtually impossible to translate but fundamentally was urging the German people, as hosts, to be friendly and receptive to all their guests and new friends from around the globe. Perhaps it could even be considered as a metaphorical message for Germany itself, meaning its official role as the host nation was to open itself up to the rest of the world. Photo 10 Tony Joel and the untranslateable slogan, Dortmund, 22 June 2006. Photo: Jörg Wimper. Meanwhile, the national football team’s character traditionally has mirrored Germany’s aforementioned reputation for being highly efficient, dour and regimented – dare we even say ‘boring’ – in its success. But, in the same manner that the German organizing committee effectively shed this unwanted tag off the field, so too did Jürgen Klinsmann’s ‘un-German’ tactics out on the pitch. Having lost a pre-tournament friendly to Italy in Florence 4–1, in March ‘Klinsi’ faced his moment of truth in Dortmund when the Mannschaft hosted the USA in a final friendly before the World Cup squads had to be named. Rumours in the German media suggested another bad showing and Klinsmann would have lost his job on the eve of the tournament if Germany had been defeated. A 4–1 victory masked the uninspiring performance and Klinsmann was safe, but still with much to do to win over the doubting German public and hovering media. Eschewing the supposedly ‘German’ approach of overly-cautious football, the Mannschaft enthusiastically adopted Klinsmann’s attractive brand of Photo 9 Put out more flags. Many German cars were decorated with flags, to the mild surprise of much of the population. Photo: Tongtong Dou. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 12 R. Hay and T. Joel attacking football and exceeded all expectations once the World Cup began. Five scin- tillating wins later, Germany returned to Dortmund for a rematch with Italy, this time with a place in the World Cup final at stake. However, the dream finale was not to be as Germany succumbed to the same fate as Scotland and Australia before it, bowing out to the eventual world champions. Nonetheless, ‘Klinsi’ had been transformed from national villain to hero and was subsequently begged to stay on as national team manager, including by those who had been calling for his head prior to the tournament. A surprise third-place finish, combined with the outstanding organization and presen- tation of what is arguably the ‘greatest show on earth’, gave Germans ample cause for celebration. Dr Jochen Becker, a German language teacher based in Cologne, succinctly sums up the positive impact of the World Cup on Germans’ self-assessment: After the wonderful experience of the World Cup, German people no longer feel uneasy saying ‘I’m proud to be German’. The reasons why I am personally proud are twofold: first, because of the fantastic, friendly international atmosphere we success- fully created; and, second, because of the refreshing way the German national team played. Both of these developments were unexpected by us Germans as well as our guests.[33] Photo 10 Tony Joel and the untranslateable slogan, Dortmund, 22 June 2006. Photo: Jörg Wimper. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 13 Photo 11 Kids and football. The spirit of the world game, Dortmund, 22 June 2006. Photo: Tony Joel. Becker’s sentiments are echoed by another Cologne resident, kindergarten supervisor Meike Düllmann. The significance of receiving an opportunity to showcase what Germany has to offer to the entire world was a highlight of Düllmann’s World Cup experience: I think we Germans have shown the world we are good hosts and know how to enjoy life. There was such an outburst of the joy of life from match-day one until the very last minute of the final in Berlin –this was despite not winning the Cup, which I guess was not expected of us. I do hope it has changed our image internationally and makes people want to come to our country in the future.[34] One person who, long before the World Cup, fell in love with Germany (and a certain German, Ute Lommerzheim, in particular) is Frenchman Olivier Friedrich. For several years now, he has called Cologne his home, where he and Lommerzheim are raising their young family. Although Friedrich was pleased by the Mannschaft’s performances and satisfied with their achievement of finishing in third place, he admits to being a little disappointed about having missed out on the chance of seeing a Germany–France final. Impressed by Germany’s organization of the tournament, Friedrich nevertheless partic- ularly enjoyed the peaceful and friendly atmosphere in Cologne during the World Cup month, noting that guests from the world over had been made most welcome.[35] Photo 11 Kids and football. The spirit of the world game, Dortmund, 22 June 2006. Photo: Tony Joel. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 14 R. Hay and T. Joel Photo 12 Public art was a feature of the host cities. Football shoes in Berlin. Photo: Tongtong Dou. 3 Public art as a feature of the host cities. Berlin bears. Photo: Tongtong Dou. Returning to the topic of international exposure, if an individual German has gone anywhere near achieving as much worldwide media attention as der Führer received, then perhaps der Kaiser (Franz Beckenbauer, the chair of the organizing committee and Germany’s greatest ever footballer) is that person![36] Therefore, it is ironic that the World Cup final took place in Berlin’s Olympic Stadium, the very same place in which Hitler infamously watched on with utter contempt as Jessie Owens won four gold medals. Seven decades later fans making their way to Berlin’s Olympiastadion from the nearby train station walked along what has long since been renamed Jesse- Owens-Strasse. For Germany, hosting the World Cup surely has been the best socio-cultural experi- ence since reunification. However, on the downside it must be noted that of all the host cities only Leipzig is located in the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) terri- tory. That only one former communist city successfully navigated the tortuous and financially highly demanding route leading to selection as a World Cup host city perhaps tells us a lot about the enormous economic discrepancies which still between most ‘Ossis’ and ‘Wessis’, 16 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall.[37] In any case the Photo 12 Public art was a feature of the host cities. Football shoes in Berlin. Photo: Tongtong Dou. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 15 obvious geo-political imbalance was rather disappointing, given that Angela Merkel, the incumbent Chancellor of the Federal Republic during the World Cup month, is a former GDR-citizen, as is the Mannschaft’s captain and hero Michael Ballack, who was born in Görlitz and first learned to kick a ball when living in Chemnitz or what was then known as Karl-Marx-Stadt. The Limits of Friendliness Not all visiting fans were prepared to enter into the spirit of friendliness. Groups of young English fans, with safety in numbers, could be heard defiantly chanting, ‘Ich bin Auslander, nicht sprechen Deutsch’. There was some serious hooliganism involving German and Polish fans in Dortmund, preventive arrests by the German authorities and an altercation involving English groups in Stuttgart. Some English hooligans wore provocative t-shirts and engaged in offensive chanting with reference to the Second World War. Some Croatian fans were also very foul-mouthed in their chanting but seem to have had only very local impact in Berlin, Dortmund and Stuttgart.[38] In comparison with previous international tournaments held in Europe, the level of public violence seemed to be much lower.[39] Similarly, in Australia the various communities with links to competing countries participated in friendly rivalry, with the minor excep- tion of some trouble in Lygon Street in Melbourne after Australia narrowly lost to Italy Photo 13 Public art was a feature of the host cities. Berlin bears. Photo: Tongtong Dou. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 16 R. Hay and T. Joel in the round with 16 countries left in the competition. There were 14 arrests in Melbourne after the Croatia-Australia match, some for possession of flares.[40] The first predicted flashpoint was the match between Germany and Poland in Dortmund on 14 June. There were reports in the German media for several months prior to the World Cup about Polish hooligans openly bragging about ‘doing a job’ on the Germans on the day of the match. In the event, over 400 people, mainly Germans, were taken into custody, including a large group of well-organized German hooligans well known to police. They were apprehended trying to make their way to the big screen that was showing the match live. Ironically, the big screen is located in Dortmund’s Friedensplatz – the square of peace. All but three of the 400-odd arrested were released first thing next morning, indicating that the German authorities ‘got their retaliation in first’ to ensure that the good atmosphere surrounding the Cup would be maintained. While Polish hooligans might still be harbouring long-held hatred as a result of the German occupation during the Second World War, Germany was hoping to shed that image while it was the host nation. The official guest of honour at the Germany–Poland match in Dortmund was Daniel Nivel – the French gendarme beaten into a coma by German hooligans in Lens during the World Cup in France in 1998. The Germany–Poland clash in Dortmund was the first but certainly not the only occasion when heated confrontation between rival sets of fans threatened to occur. Stuttgart, like all German towns in the early evening of Saturday 24 June, was buzzing with ecstatic local fans celebrating the Mannschaft’s emphatic victory over Sweden in Munich. The picturesque capital of Baden-Württemberg was also swarming with tens of thousands of English fans gathering for their nation’s knockout match against Ecuador in the usually tranquil city the following day. As is so often the case in life, the few can ruin things for the many: England fans’ notorious reputation for hooliganism – indeed, the so-called ‘English disease’ – really only applies to a small minority. None- theless, since at least the 1985 Heysel disaster an expectation of troublemaking precedes them wherever they travel. And, in Germany 2006, on top of the England fans’ usual notoriety, was their bitter rivalry with the host nation.[41] Hence, in all German towns in which England were to feature, riot police were on hand and ready to intervene in such numbers that were deemed totally unnecessary for all other match-day venues, other than the aforementioned Germany–Poland clash in Dortmund. Earlier in the tournament, when English fans congregated in Cologne for their last group match against Sweden, local German fans (once again, already celebrating the host nation’s position as top of its group due to an impressive win against Ecuador in Berlin earlier that afternoon) were out en masse and the two sets of fans revelled in taunting each other.[42] In fact, an England loss that evening would have seen Sweden on top of their group and the second-placed England facing their nemesis Germany in the round of 16. Therefore, tension between the two sets of fans was high as collective cries of ‘In-ger-lund, In-ger-lund, In-ger-lund’ were drowned out by rowdier renditions of ‘Berlin, Berlin, wir fahren nach Berlin’ (‘We’re going to Berlin’).[43] Indeed, neutral onlookers could have been forgiven for forgetting Sweden was a far more immediate part of the equation, as fans decked out in blue and yellow D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 17 wandered the streets without a care in the world.[44] While many riot police patrolled the Domstadt, no serious trouble broke out in Cologne. Photo 14 Police line in Cologne. Photo: Tony Joel. England scraped through with an uninspiring draw against Sweden in Cologne, averted a clash with the Germans in Munich, and instead headed off to Stuttgart, where large groups of German and English fans clashed in the city centre. Riot police inter- vened after bottles, chairs and punches were thrown by both sets of supporters.[45] They were not the first things that had been thrown that day; some distasteful England hooligans threw model Spitfires into the air while belting out rousing renditions of chants mentioning the war. To provoke local Germans even further, some wore t-shirts with the words of the most popular of the war-inspired chants emblazoned front and back: ‘Ten German bombers flying through the air … But the RAF from England shot them down …’.[46] It seems that the tournament’s official slogan, ‘A Time to make Friends’, failed to overcome certain fans’ long-held animosities. In the two nights prior Photo 14 Police line in Cologne. Photo: Tony Joel. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 18 R. Hay and T. Joel to the England–Ecuador clash, approximately 500 England fans were detained by police, mainly for drunken and aggressive behaviour, of whom close to half were arrested. Stephen Thomas, head of the British police team working in Germany during the tournament, surely spoke on behalf of the overwhelming majority of English fans when he voiced his disgust at the hooligans’ behaviour: ‘I don’t consider these people to be English football supporters because they actually damage the reputation of the many thousands of real English supporters that will be here today’.[47] A Family Story Indeed, the small hooligan minority’s actions – however repugnant and intolerable – must be put into proper perspective: an estimated 60,000 good-natured and well- behaved England fans converged on Stuttgart (and other host cities) to soak in the predominantly convivial atmosphere experienced on match day.[48] Justin Murphy was one such England fan in Stuttgart on the day of the match.[49] Murphy, a Londoner and a passionate football fan of both club (Chelsea) and country, flew into Stuttgart with two older brothers, ready to cheer on the Three Lions. Their mother, sister and a younger brother had been in Germany since the start of the tournament. While the Murphys revelled in being in Stuttgart to help cheer on England (an experi- ence Murphy describes as ‘top draw’) and enjoy the overall World Cup festivities, there was a far more important, and personal, reason for their trip to Germany. They had a family member to support. So, while a trademark free-kick from the much- maligned Captain ‘Becks’ sent England and their travelling hordes onto what would prove to be a most memorable – but ultimately heartbreaking – quarter-final date with Portugal in Gelsenkirchen in the Ruhr, the Murphys were headed instead for nearby Kaiserslautern. Over 700 elite players filled the squads representing the 32 nations competing in Germany. In addition to the inner strength and sense of belonging engendered by being a member of a professional and intensely committed tight-knit squad, individual play- ers also could draw inspiration from their own families who were in Germany to offer love, support and encouragement. Justin and the rest of the proudly English Murphy family were one such source of support and encouragement, although it happened to be an Australian they were cheering on: Harry Kewell, Australia’s best known and argu- ably greatest ever footballing export, is married to the popular British television personality Sheree Murphy. It was Kewell’s superb late equalizer against Croatia in Munich that set up an encounter in the final 16 with the highly fancied Italy. Photo 15 Harry Kewell scores against Croatia. Photo: ? Unfortunately, his man-of-the-match performance came at a cost, and the Socceroos were downcast when Kewell arrived at Kaiserslautern’s Fritz-Walter-Stadium on crutches. Justin and his two brothers knew that Kewell, whom they proudly and endearingly consider to be ‘like one of our brothers’, would not be playing in Kaiser- slautern; in fact, they had been informed that his injury – septic arthritis, which was erro- neously announced as gout – was so severe that he would not be able to take the field even in the following match if Australia were to progress. But, true to form for such a close-knit and supportive family, this only meant that there was even more of a need to D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 19 be in attendance. And, even without their ‘H’ out on the pitch, they barracked for the Socceroos with such gusto that any ‘fair dinkum Aussie’ would have been proud.[50] Indeed, in hindsight Justin recalls being ‘more gutted’ by Australia’s elimination than England’s, primarily owing to the way the two teams had performed throughout the tournament. The Murphys travelled to the stadium in a three-coach convoy full of player’s families and everyone was seated together. The atmosphere inside the stadium was electric and, according to Justin, was ‘a breath of fresh air’, compared with Chelsea matches back home in London. The Australian fans surrounding them were a ‘good friendly bunch’ full of ‘great songs and banter’. Italy, having played much of the match with only 10 men after a dubious red card decision, won the enthralling contest after talisman and playmaker Francesco Totti slot- ted home an equally dubious penalty awarded just eight seconds before the end of injury time. After the match, as disbelief gave way to despair, tension mounted between dejected Australian fans and the triumphant Italians. Noticing that the situation was ‘getting a bit rowdy’, Justin relied on a ‘bit of good old Chelsea win, lose or draw energy’ and started a chant: ‘We’re proud of you, we’re proud of you, Aussies’. It did the trick, for the temper soon changed as other players’ families and surrounding fans progres- sively joined in the singing. Indeed, everyone was pleasantly surprised and immensely proud of the Socceroos’ performances in Germany 2006; and history would soon record that it took the world champions to knock them out of the tournament. As for summing up his feelings about having a close family member not only playing football for one of Photo 15 Harry Kewell scores against Croatia. Source: Football Federation Australia website, http:// www.footballaustralia.com.au D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 20 R. Hay and T. Joel the most famous clubs in the world, but also representing his nation on the world stage at the pinnacle of the sport, the World Cup, Justin Murphy says the family are ‘extremely proud and honoured’. Surely this sentiment was shared by the families and loved ones of those who took part on the field in Germany between 9 June and 9 July 2006. One resident with dual loyalties summed up a widespread feeling: The World Cup 2006 in Germany was a breath-taking event. My compliments to the organizers for a well-done job, for providing such an entertaining World Cup. Germans should be very proud of themselves, what an excellent World Cup! It was just a pity that the football itself wasn’t as good this year as it has been in previous years, but the people on the streets made this World Cup the most exciting I have ever seen. It was like the birth of a new Germany: the country was almost getting mad. Germans finally ‘dared’ to show their flags, and the energetic national team, headed by Jürgen Klinsmann, was just fantastic. The most memorable moment was Germany against Portugal, not just the football match (that was still excellent) but to see a banner in the German crowd saying ‘Thank you for being our guests’ was just amazing.[51] Australia Australia’s travelling support was in Germany in force. Just before leaving Australia one of the authors attended a farewell for a group of Australian-Croatian fans who were heading for Germany. Former North Geelong player Eddie Radojevic, who was kept at home by family commitments, presented his cousin with a red and white diced hat, which looked for all the world like a Croatian grb. But if you looked closely, the logo on the front said ‘Sydney Swans’, the Australian rules football team. Goran Skoko promised to get one of the authors a football shirt which was half-Croatia and half- Socceroo for the big game in Stuttgart on 22 June, which many thought would decide which team qualified for the knockout stages. It was fascinating to see how the support divided ahead of that occasion. Some members of the group said they would barrack for Croatia, others for Australia. Joe Radojevic, grandfather of Geelong’s Croatian keeper, Joey Didulica, could not travel to Stuttgart, but he said he would barrack for Australia all the way through, unless Joey was in goal when the teams met, when family loyalty would take precedence.[52] Photo 16 Australian-Croatian farewell party. Steve Radojevic, Mary Didulica, mother of Joey Didulica, one of the Croatian national team goalkeepers, and Eddie Radojevic. Photo: Mary Didulica. As soon as it became clear that the World Cup was going to generate considerable popular interest in Australia, well beyond the normal football fans and devotees, one of the major television networks decided to send its flagship Australian rules and rugby league variety programs, The Footy Show, to Germany to be recorded and broadcast on the day of the match against Brazil. This was pure opportunism on the part of the Channel 9 programers, since the show had poured scorn on soccer and its supporters throughout its existence. In particular, one of the main presenters, John ‘Sam’ Newman, himself a former AFL player, had been provocatively scathing about the world game. When Newman arrived in Munich he was almost immediately involved in an altercation with some football fans, one of whom spat on him. Such actions are indefensible but understandable. The fans were quite clear that Channel 9 had just jumped on the bandwagon for its own commercial reasons and that it would quickly revert to its normal role of bagging football when the World Cup was over. Hence they D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 21 sought to make their feelings known directly to Newman and one fan obviously went too far in his response. Inside and outside the stadia the fans used the public address attempts by ground announcers and fanfest hosts to get them involved for their own amusement. Among the Australians there was a great response to Men at Work’s I Come from a Land Down Under and above all for AC/DC’s Highway to Hell. In the Altstadt in Kaiserslautern before and after the match they had AC/DC, Midnight Oil, Cold Chisel, Men at Work and others blaring out of the sound system set up as part of the festivities. Aussie Rock, not Japanese pop music, dominated the airwaves, although it was not clear whether this was because the Australians were responsible for the festivities or a product of local preferences, as Australian pop music is very popular on German radio. At matches the Australian national anthem was sung with a fervour not seen and heard since previous World Cup qualifiers in Australia against Iran and twice against Uruguay in Sydney and Melbourne. Yet, for the most part, the fans concentrated on their own chants and there was much less of the staple Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, Oi, Oi, Oi that seemingly features at every major Australian sporting event . Some of the chanting was slightly derivative but quite appropriate, such as in the latter stages of the match against Croatia when the Australian section of the crowd as one was belting out ‘You are red, you are white and you’re going home tonight’.[53] Quite close to the authors during the Australia–Japan game in Kaiserslautern a couple of young fans Photo 16 Australian-Croatian farewell party. Steve Radojevic, Mary Didulica, mother of Joey Didulica, one of the Croatian national team goalkeepers, and Eddie Radojevic. Photo: Mary Didulica. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 22 R. Hay and T. Joel tried to get those around them to join in offensive chants replete with crude language and racist overtones. One of us thought they might have been German agent provoca- teurs, but the other said their German was too poor to be locals and they were almost certainly Australian. In any event, the reaction of the crowd around them was fasci- nating. One young coloured Aussie lad told them explicitly and clearly, ‘We are a multicultural society and don’t want any of that kind of thing here’. He clearly spoke on behalf of the surrounding Australian contingent, who collectively continued to ignore the drunken, would-be troublemakers who remained isolated throughout. What the considerable Japanese crowd directly behind us made of this we do not know. They were lively and supportive of their team with expectations rising as the game went on and Japan clung to its 1–0 lead. When Australia made its comeback – three match-winning goals in seven minutes – and the Aussies erupted, the Japanese were very disappointed but showed no anger, only despair that defeat had been snatched from the jaws of victory. Photo 17 Japanese shirt banner at Fritz Walter Stadium, Kaiserslautern, before the Japan versus Australia match on 12 June. Photo: Tony Joel. Australian banners in the stadia showed that there was a clear mixture of old and new fans. Several were in non-English languages, particularly Greek, reinforcing the sense that Australia is a proud and tolerant multicultural country, and many reflected the club loyalties of the various ethnic groups making up the diverse Australian fanbase. Photo 18 Australian fans and their banners before the Brazil versus Australia match in the Allianz Stadium, Munich, 18 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. Some reflected the notion that Australia’s physical style of play would lead to ‘simu- lation’, as FIFA calls it, or diving by opponents. Hence ‘Get up ya pussy’ displayed at Kaiserslautern.[54] Photo 19 Australian banner at Kaiserslautern. Photo: ? Some played on the links with Australia’s only previous qualification for the World Cup, coincidentally the one held in West Germany, in 1974. Others picked up a phrase that became associated with the late Johnny Warren, affectionately known as Captain Socceroo, and one of the country’s pioneering players who participated in 1974. He died from cancer in 2005 before Australia qualified but had always argued that Austra- lia should not just be aiming to qualify for the World Cup, but should set its sights on winning the competition. He wanted ‘I told you so’, as his epitaph and this was used as a visible backdrop on SBS television’s coverage of the World Cup from Germany and on several of the fans’ banners visible in the stadia in Germany.[55] Photo 20 Fans watching fans before the Croatia versus Australia match in the Gottlieb-Daimler Stadium, Stuttgart, 22 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. At the tournament’s conclusion the Germans, Scots and the Australians could console themselves that they were knocked out of the World Cup by the eventual winner, Italy. In Scotland’s case this occurred in the qualifying competition, while Australia lost to the champions in the round of the final 16 by a controversial penalty goal. The decision came in the last minute of added time and there was no chance to restart the match before the final whistle. It has to be said that Italy played for much of the match with 10 men after defender Marco Materazzi was sent off, and Australia failed to trouble the Italian keeper for the remainder of the match. Materazzi was to have a huge influence on the World Cup. He scored two crucial goals in general play, one in the final, converted a penalty kick during the shoot-out which decided the outcome of the tournament and provoked the French captain, Zinedine Zidane, into retaliation by a head butt, which saw the latter sent off.[56] This deprived the French of their most inspirational player and leading taker of penalty kicks and so can be said to have helped Italy to win the Cup. After the tournament both players were sanctioned D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 23 for their part in this incident. Within 48 hours of the Zidane–Materazzi incident a video game emanating from Italy which allowed you to use a Zidane figure to zap Materazzi figures by head-butting them was circulating on the Internet. A later one had Photo 17 Japanese shirt banner at Fritz Walter Stadium, Kaiserslautern, before the Japan versus Australia match on 12 June. Photo: Tony Joel. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 24 R. Hay and T. Joel what purported to be the Miss World contest, in which Miss France turned and head- butted Miss Italy.[57] In Australia the reception of the World Cup by the mass of the population was extraordinary. This was reflected in the media, which seemed to have underestimated the extent of popular enthusiasm.[58] Large screens in major venues saw crowds of several thousands gather to watch matches. Federation Square in Melbourne was packed, with some people travelling from Geelong, 80 km away, to watch matches on the big screen rather than at home or in a local hotel.[59] The games finished at Photo 18 Australian fans and their banners before the Brazil versus Australia match in the Allianz Stadium, Munich, 18 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. Photo 19 Australian banner at Kaiserslautern. Source: Fanatics website, www.the fanatics.com D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 25 Photo 20 Fans watching fans before the Croatia versus Australia match in the Gottlieb-Daimler Stadium, Stut- tgart, 22 June 2006. Photo: Roy Hay. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 26 R. Hay and T. Joel anywhere between 3a.m. and 7a.m. in the morning, Eastern Standard Time. After the Australia–Japan and Australia–Croatia games a significant number of those present at Federation Square, estimated at around 2,000 on the former and 4,000 on the latter occasion, marched to the steps of state parliament in Spring Street.[60] Why these ‘manifestations’ should have taken place is not clear. It is a well-known political meeting point, but why football supporters should have felt the need to demonstrate in this way needs further investigation.[61] At the first march one man had a banner ‘Guus for PM’, and the parliament steps party lasted half an hour, including the singing of the national anthem. In Sydney, George Street was at a standstill in the mornings after games, with cars and pedestrians festooned with colours, shouting and celebrating.[62] Although the media had contributed to the build-up to the tournament and had done a great deal to promote interest and convey the extent to which the rest of the world had focused on it, the overwhelming impression is that members of the media were taken aback by the popular response. Many of those who had spent much of their lives denigrating ‘this foreign game’ admitted that they had not experienced anything, either in Germany or in Australia, to match what they saw and in which they became involved.[63] Typical is the reaction of Garry Lyon, former Melbourne AFL player and now anchor of the Melbourne version of Channel 9’s The Footy Show: As for soccer, I have had no interest, other than to argue arrogantly that the game will never be known as football here in Australia and that I will be long gone before it threatens our beautiful game as the No.1 ball game in this country. It has taken a trip to the other side of the world, to witness the most amazing sporting festival you could imagine, to see the true game of football through the eyes of those who have been championing it for decades as the biggest sport on the planet. To be over there was a humbling experience. It is hard to argue against those who say it is the biggest sporting event in the world. I have been to the Olympics and they have a dignified prestige attached to them that demands everyone’s respect. But the World Cup is a seething mass of emotion where the passion generated by coaches, players and supporters is the closest thing to war without weapons that you are likely to find. The focus on the games reduces presidents and prime ministers to the same level as factory workers and school kids; that of the everyday sports fan.[64] While Australian fans in Germany were enjoying the football, some of them appeared to have been exploited on a giant scale. Those fans who signed up for the FFA Travel (Exclusive Official Overseas Tour Operator of the Football Federation Australia for the 2006 FIFA World Cup) A-tour, led by Frank Farina and Robbie Slater, complained bitterly about the service they had or had not received.[65] The trip promised 12 nights, three match tickets and accommodation in a range of hotels from standard to de-luxe. One of the authors talked to several people on the FFA A-Tour to Germany. All were scathing about the arrangements. Apart from an opening talk by Farina and Slater about the highlights they were about to experience, the members of the tour had not seen them thereafter.[66] No written itineraries were provided. Word-of-mouth supplied such information as it came out. If a member did not see the relevant tour offi- cial prior to an event, it was possible to miss an activity completely.[67] The so-called B-Tour was an unescorted operation and hence less costly, but those on the A-Tour D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 27 said that the B-Tour facilities and access were better. Several said they would not use FFA travel again. There is a long list of specific complaints. As an example, on Monday 19 June there was a three-hour train journey from Munich leaving at 8.30a.m. to watch the Australians train in Öhringen, but the train- ing did not start till 4p.m. The fans were promised privileged access to the training session and the players, but when they got there it was an open session with lots of the locals present and little or no chance to talk to the players.[68] Two buses carrying Australian fans were turned back thanks to traffic congestion and one arrived after the training session ended. Then it was an equally long journey back to Munich, so the fans did not return until 11.30p.m. and were more tired than the players. The trains being used had been specially chartered and were old rolling stock and ran in the gaps between the fast regular services so that the journeys took much longer than the normal services. The idea of special trains seemed like a good one, but it had not worked out in practice. Some of the groups we spoke to decided to do things independently, hiring cars and planning their own days out. A couple of brothers from Queensland talked to us over breakfast one morning. One had worked in the travel industry and said, ‘I would have been sacked on the spot, for doing this’. We do not want to convey the impression that the fans had not coped with what happened or that they had not had wonderful experiences.[69] Most seem to have enjoyed themselves immensely, commenting on the friendliness and helpfulness of the Germans. The resourcefulness and resilience of the fans involved is impressive. But if FFA Travel is going to repeat the exercise in future it will have to lift its game. The majority of Australians in Germany had not come on the official tours and most of them had made their own arrangements. Our own experience suggests that this is much the best way to go. The numbers involved are probably very difficult to calculate, but there is a suggestion that this has been ‘the largest outward movement of Australian people since the Second World War’. One World Cup or Many? The impact of the World Cup can be felt in the strangest places. Several years ago it was a radical feminist writer who pointed out that the only time the guns fell silent during the previous civil war in Lebanon was when the World Cup was being played. ‘Perhaps the way to solve the Middle East torment is to give the men round-the-clock live male contact sports,’ she wrote, though this time Hamas, Hezbollah and the Israelis seem not to have paid enough attention to the Cup.[70] Here in Australia we have seen the wonderful phenomenon of sport dividing to unite, as people from all the countries which make up this nation watched Australia and the country whose heritage they share and appreciate come together in football competition.[71] Families split for the duration of the matches but then came together in celebration once the result was determined.[72] Certainly, many Australians ceased to be involved once Australia was eliminated, but many more, having experienced what World Cup football means, followed the tournament to its conclusion, while those D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 28 R. Hay and T. Joel thousands who made the pilgrimage to Germany returned with experiences which they will never forget.[73] The conservatives in Australia who worry about divided loyalties among Australia’s multicultural population need have no fears.[74] The more we know about the world, and international football is a great way to learn about it, the better a place it will be for its citizens, as we found when we talked to the young and old Aussies who were part of the tournament.[75] So there was not a World Cup, but many world cups for the groups of fans and indi- viduals, each with its own story and its own set of relationships to the overall tourna- ment. Of course, this would not be unique to football for we encounter similar patterns at the Commonwealth and Olympic Games. The modern fan is not to be denigrated for he and she is an active participant in the event, moulding the experience to fit personal and group needs and expectations, and adapting to surroundings in at least some ways which were certainly not conceived of by the organizers. Yet, and this is the point which is often missed, credit must go to the German organizers of this World Cup in that they set up a structure in which these multifarious adaptations could take place, almost entirely without trouble, for which the resilience and good humour of the hosts and visitors were also responsible. Notes [1] Murray and Hay, The World Game Downunder, 135. [2] The World Cup is for males only. FIFA also organizes a separate Women’s World Cup and tournaments for age-restricted youths of both genders. [3] This was mentioned by the Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, and the President of FIFA, Joseph S. Blatter, at a celebratory function during the tournament to hand over the hosting of the 2010 tournament to the South African Football Association and the country’s president, Tabo Mbeki. For a critical look at the potential impact of the World Cup on South Africa see Grahame Jones, ‘Why the World Cup is one circus Africa doesn’t need’. Age, Sport (10 July 2006), 20, originally published in the Los Angeles Times. [4] Murdo MacLeod, ‘Germany revelling in patriot games’. Scotland on Sunday, International (18 June 2006), 20. [5] FIFA website, www.fifaworldcup.yahoo.com, accessed 3 August 2006. [6] Viewing figures are notoriously rubbery. Until 1998 global audiences were inflated by the inclu- sion of figures for China, based on an estimate for Shanghai City, which was then assumed to be representative of China as a whole. Since 2002 FIFA has claimed that data for China is audited. [7] Dan Oakes, ‘As green and gold army flies out, soccer tragics prepare to keep home fires burning’. Age, News (10 June 2006), 9, quoted estimates of 50,000–60,000. Chris Johnston and Nabila Ahmed, ‘All aboard the Aussie Express’. Age, Focus (14 June 2006), 14–15 quoted 60,000–80,000, although the German Tourism Office in Sydney put the figure at 60,000 at most. [8] Coca Cola paid between $US40 million and $US60 million for its global World Cup sponsor- ship and many millions more were spent on advertising during the tournament. Nepalese players used during a commercial shoot in Kathmandu were paid much less than African players used in the shoot. Connie Levett, ‘Stars of Coke’s worldwide Cup campaign paid a pittance’. Age News (9 June 2006), 3. [9] ‘World Cup 2010 already dwarfing World Cup 2006 in terms of revenue’, South Africa 2010 website, 12 April 2006. Available from www.worldcup2010southafrica.com/content/view/ 338/92/, accessed 9 August 2006. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 29 [10] Jennings, Foul, 164–230. [11] FIFA records further revenue surplus for 2005’, FIFA website, www.fifa.com/en/media/index/ 0,1369,116729,00, accessed 1 August 2006. [12] In 1998 France experienced a decline in overall tourism during the World Cup as ‘normal’ visitors stayed away during the tournament, fearing the disruption caused by the football and the possibility of football-related hooliganism and violence. ‘Dodging the ball’. New York Times (14 June 1998). Available from http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res =9C04E3DA153AF937A25755C0A96E958260, accessed 9 August 2006. Stefan Bielmeier, ‘Kicking off economic growth’. The Globalist (5 April 2006), concluded that the 1998 World Cup produced a net drag on French tourist revenues which normally make up about 7 per cent of GDP. Available from Boston Globe website, http://www.theglobalist.com/ StoryId.aspx?StoryId=5232, accessed 9 August 2006. [13] Adidas stated that its sponsorship of the 2006 FIFA World Cup was its most successful ever after chalking up record football sales on the back of its association with the tournament (Newslines, newslines@sportbusiness.com, 30 June 2006). But a Standard and Poor’s survey of share price movements queried the value of previous World Cup sponsorships, Leon Gettler, ‘Sponsors’ pitch corners little net gain’. Age, Business, (9 June 2006), 3. See also Kate Hagan, ‘Sponsors splash cash as Socceroos line up for World Cup’. Age, Business (12 June 2006), 1 & 3. [14] It would not be too cynical to see in all this the attempt by the President of FIFA to gain the Nobel Peace Prize, something which was stymied in July 2000 when he tried to get the hosting of the 2006 World Cup awarded to South Africa. On that occasion, the New Zealand Scot, Charles Dempsey, as President of the Oceania Confederation, abstained at the last minute, thus frustrating the FIFA president. The tournament was awarded to Germany instead. For a critical look at FIFA’s practices and the argument that the President was playing a double game in 2000, see Jennings, Foul, 267–85. [15] Giulianotti, Football, 146–52; Redhead, Post-fandom. [16] Giulianotti, Football, 148. [17] Nicholas Christian, ‘ “Sickening” attack on two English fans’. Scotland on Sunday, Edinburgh (18 June 2006). [18] Andy Milne, ‘Flying the flag … for anyone but England’. Evening News, Edinburgh (16 June 2006), and the Internet responses to this article. Available from http://news.scotsman.com/ topics.cfm?tid=375&id=885192006, accessed 31 July 2006. [19] ‘The cross we have to bear’, Scotland on Sunday. Focus (18 June 2006), 13. The paper sent a number of its staff wearing English football shirts to various parts of the Scotland in to gauge reaction. It was predictably varied. [20] This was the first time Trinidad and Tobago had qualified for the World Cup final tourna- ment. Fans and media did not pick up on the corruption scandals involving Jack Warner from Trinidad, vice-president of FIFA, who narrowly escaped sanction for selling World Cup tickets through a family company, Roy Hay, ‘Financial foul play’. Geelong Advertiser (9 August 2006), 39. Another FIFA executive committee member, Ismail Bhamjee of Botswana, was forced to resign and ordered to leave Germany after admitting selling tickets for the England versus Trinidad and Tobago match at three times their face value, Guy Jackson, ‘FIFA embar- rassed over official selling tickets’. Agence France Presse, Berlin (18 June 2006). [21] Jason Scotland’s picture was used on billboards to advertise Irn Bru, ‘Scotland’s Other National Drink’. Phil Gordon, ‘Amazing pace and power of Scotland’. The Independent on Sunday, (4 June 2006), 63. [22] The bulk of the primary evidence for this paper was collected by the authors, and a number of colleagues who provided specific information, pictures and perspectives, during the tournament. It has no pretence to be a comprehensive scientific sample of the World Cup experience and the authors are aware that there are various biases in the material presented. Nevertheless, they think that much of what they observed was fairly typical of the experiences of fans in Germany, Scotland and Australia. One of the authors was domiciled in Germany for the duration of the tournament. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 30 R. Hay and T. Joel He was researching for his doctorate on an unrelated topic but took some time off to collect and present this information. The other spent most of the early part of the tournament in Scotland, with two visits to Germany, and returned to Australia for the concluding stages. [23] Dominic Fifield, ‘Ferguson will not rush Rooney’. Guardian Unlimited Football (5 May 2006). Available from http://football.guardian.co.uk/. Ferguson is a Scot and former manager of the Scottish national team, so he had experience of both sides of the club/country divide. [24] See also Mark Wilson, ‘Viduka, from tantrum to talisman’. Herald, Glasgow, World Cup lift- out (5 June 2006), 6–7, which also mentions Brent Sancho, Ulises de da Cruz, Rino Gatttuso and Giovanni van Bronckhorst who also played for Scottish clubs in the past. [25] Eben Harrell, ‘Scots invented beautiful game’. Scotsman, News (14 June 2006), 3. [26] Hay, ‘Approaches to sports history’, 70–81. Shankly is often associated with the remark about football being ‘more serious than life and death’. [27] Michael Lynch, ‘ “Deutschland uber alles” is ringing out again’. Age, Opinion (4 July 2006), 11. The article belies the headline, being a sophisticated discussion of the nature of German national pride in the success of the national team and the tournament. A correspondent, Stefan Mummert, pointed out the inappropriateness of the headline the next day. [28] Following reunification, the Nobel laureate Günter Grass and the social philosopher Jürgen Haber- mas were among the most famous writers on the subject of ‘German nationalism after Auschwitz’. [29] The Federal Republic of Germany’s official national colours, as depicted by its flag, are black, red and yellow. In German the yellow is commonly referred to as gold, as in ‘Schwarz-Rot- Gold’. [30] Interview with the authors, July 2006. [31] Interview with the authors, July 2006. [32] Personal information from Stefan Unterberg, Munich, 20 June 2006. The sentiment was widely expressed in the media. [33] Interview with the authors, July 2006. [34] Interview with the authors, July 2006. [35] Interview with the authors, July 2006. [36] Beckenbauer was the star and captain of the German World Cup victory in 1974 and then coached the national team to success in Italy in 1990. Although a select few have won the World Cup first as a player and then manager, Beckenbauer holds the unique distinction of having been both a winning captain and a manager. Since then he has become a highly influential figure in Germany as president of the leading club, Bayern Munich, and in the councils of UEFA and FIFA. For his reactions see ‘No Classic Matches’. FIFA Magazine, no. 8 (August 2006), 16–18. [37] Rostock and Magdeburg were two other former GDR cities originally interested in becoming host cities, but for a variety of reasons they had to end their interest early on in the decision- making process. See Wolfgang Niersbach, ‘The Winner is Germany’, in FIFA World Cup, 2006, Official Programme, 30–1. [38] Personal information from Steve Radojevic, who is an Australian of Croatian parentage and who attended two of Croatia’s games. [39] There were a few arrests in Frankfurt after the opening matches, but according to police these were mainly for drunken behaviour not hooliganism, ‘Drunken fans arrested’. Age, Sport (11 June 2006), 7. [40] Age, World Cup liftout (26 June 2006), 4. [41] Greg Baum, ‘United but only up to a point’ Age, World Cup liftout (26 June 2006), 7. [42] See photograph of police line in Cologne. [43] This chant is widely used in German club football in relation to the DFB-Pokal (German Football Association Cup). Recently, the final has been staged in Berlin each year, similar to the FA Cup at Wembley, in an effort to promote more interest. During DFB-Pokal matches, club supporters chant this as a sign of hope or confidence that their team will progress to the competition’s final. With the World Cup final also to be held in Berlin, all German fans of the national team united in adopting this chant for the duration of the tournament. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 A Photo Essay on Germany 2006 31 [44] Personal observation by author. [45] ‘Red card for England fans in Stuttgart’, Deutsche Welle website, http://www.dw-world.de/dw/ article/0,2144,2066880,00.html, accessed 16 July 2006; ‘England fans held by riot police’ BBC News website, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/5112364.stm, accessed 16 July 2006. [46] For an amateur video recording of the ‘Ten German bombers’ chant being sung in Stuttgart see http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=betKA3baAnU, accessed 16 July 2006; For a photo of the t- shirt see http://www.jour.sc.edu/opps/studyabroad/blogabroad/30.html, accessed 16 July 2006. [47] Quoted in ‘Red card for England fans in Stuttgart’. [48] Mihir Bose, ‘English fans win over the Germans’ Electronic Telegraph (6 July 2006). Available from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport>. [49] Interview with the authors, July 2006. [50] Harry Kewell was not the only player with family support. Approaching the Allianz Stadium in Munich, one of the authors came across three fans in Australian colours with the name Wilkshire on the back. Given that Luke Wilkshire was a very late inclusion in the starting line- up for the World Cup, it was intriguing to find that he had a fan club. When the author asked one of the group to explain, the reply was, ‘He’s my brother’. Shane Wilkshire had persuaded two of his friends to put on the full Australian rig, yellow shirt, green shorts, long green socks – and with thongs over the socks! [51] Paula, born in Portugal, married to a German and bringing up her family in Germany. [52] See also Roy Masters and Michael Cockerill, ‘Nations opposed but families united by deep bonds’. Age, World Cup liftout (22 June 2006), 5. This article looked at the Skoko and Didu- lica families in Geelong, whose sons Josip Skoko and Joey Didulica played together as juniors, but Skoko was in the Australian squad and Didulica in the Croatian squad for the World Cup. [53] Back in Australia the chants included ‘Your shirt looks like a tablecloth, da-da, da-da’, sung at the Croatians, and ‘You only sing when you’re whaling’, at the Japanese. Some of the football chants were picked up and modified for a subsequent rally against the Coalition government’s industrial relations laws, Chris Johnston, ‘Ole, ole, ole … World Cup joins the march’. Age, News (29 June 2006), 3. [54] Fanatics website, www.thefanatics.com, accessed 2 August 2006. [55] Warren was a leading figure in the Special Broadcasting Service’s football programs over the best part of three decades, along with his colleague Les Murray. See Harper, Mr and Mrs Soccer. He donated his corneas post-mortem and one of the recipients was able to see again a week after the operation. Warren’s partner hoped that this man would be able to see the World Cup through Warren’s eye! Amy Lawson, ‘Strangers benefit from legacy of soccer guru’ Age, News (18 June 2006), 5. [56] Initial reactions suggested that there was a racial element in the comments directed by Materazzi at Zidane, but both players subsequently denied this, Guardian Unlimited (13 July 2006). Available from www.footballguardian.co.uk). [57] Miss Mundo Francia, a wmv file, Malgusto.com, supplied to the author by Bill Murray, 7 August 2008. [58] Age did print a pre-tournament guide to the locations where the different groups of fans could watch their favourite teams in action, Age (3 June 2006), 9. [59] Personal information from Jamie Mallon, Geelong, 21 July 2007. [60] Crowds in Federation Square, Melbourne, for the four Australian matches ranged from 7,000 to 12,000, with a similar number at Birrarung Marr, another public open space, for the Croatia and Italy games, Chris Johnston, ‘Cheers to the Square’. Age, Focus (28 June 2006), 13. [61] We owe this information to Ian Syson of Melbourne, who witnessed the episode. See also Dewi Cooke, ‘Flares remain the defiant football fan’s ultimate fashion statement’ Age, News (24 June 2006), 4; Liz Minchin, ‘Jubilant crowd marches of Parliament Huus, Huus, Huus’ Age, Focus (14 June 2006), 14–15. Minchin says the destination was unplanned. Syson also reported that, after the Italy versus Australia game, some people marched to Lygon Street, the centre of Italian–Australian revelry, and there were some scuffles and fights among supporters. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 32 R. Hay and T. Joel [62] Personal information from Ross Hay, Sydney, 24 June 2006. [63] Roy Hay, ‘ “Our wicked foreign game”’,165–86. [64] Garry Lyon, ‘A force more powerful than footy’. Herald-Sun (27 June 2006). We owe this reference to Ian Syson. [65] Although one tour member sat next to Hollywood actor and Sydney FC director Anthony LaPaglia at the Japan–Australia game, John Huxley, ‘Yellow fever grips Munich’s lager-than- life knees up’. Age, News (19 June 2006), 5. [66] The welcome function was criticized by Paul Hansford, ‘Socceroo diaries’. Australian Four- FourTwo (September 2006), 68–73. [67] Paul Hansford, ‘Socceroo diaries’, 72. [68] The alternative trip that day was to the Dachau concentration camp, according to Huxely, ‘Yellow fever’, 5. [69] ‘But back at the grass-roots, with Gavan Flower of Hopper’s Crossing … there’s no commer- cial relationships on offer … this World Cup, for the ordinary tourists, is all about the sport, the beer, the pride and the adventure’, Chris Johnston and Nabila Ahmed, ‘All aboard the Aussie express’. Age, Focus (14 June 2006), 14–15. [70] Morgan, The Demon Lover, 284. [71] Greg Baum, ‘A game to embrace, not divide, our loyalties’. Age, World Cup liftout (22 June 2006), 4–5. [72] ‘Football is a game in [sic] which Australians of all ethnic backgrounds support, so I think this is likely to unite Australians in ways that other sporting achievements have not done … It proposes a kind of national pride that’s inclusive.’ (Richard Waterhouse, professor of history, University of Sydney, quoted in Chris Johnston, ‘Just a game? More like national pride’. Age, World Cup liftout (26 June 2006), 3. [73] There was a clear element of relief in Steve Waldon’s article on the front page of the Age on 3 July when attention once again turned to Australian rules football, ‘The passionate celebrate as “our” football returns’. Age (3 July 2006), 1. [74] Natasha Cica, ‘Sometimes a patriotic Australian can only say: Go Croatia!’ Age Opinion (22 June 2006), 17. She quotes a Greek friend who announced, ‘I’m backing the underwog’. For the conservative view see Peter Moore, ‘B-grade Aussies: Newcomers should back their new country’. Geelong Advertiser (4 July 2006), 13. [75] Roy Hay, ‘Divided and united by the Cup’. Geelong Advertiser (8 July 2006), 33, and Roy Hay, ‘World Cup sits aloft the footy pantheon’, Football Federation Victoria website, 12 July 2006, http://www.footballfedvic.com.au/. References Giulianotti, Richard. Football: A Sociology of the Global Game. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1999. Harper, Andy. Mr and Mrs Soccer. Sydney: Random House, 2004. Hay, Roy. ‘“Our Wicked Foreign Game”: Why has Association Football (Soccer) Not Become the Main Code of Football in Australia?’ Soccer and Society 7, nos. 2–3 (April–July 2006): 165–86. Hay, Roy, ‘Approaches to Sports History: Theory and Practice’. Sporting Traditions 22, no. 2 (May 2006): 70–81. Jennings, Andrew. Foul: The Secret World of FIFA: Bribes, Vote Riggings and Ticket Scandals. London: HarperSport, 2006. Morgan, Robin. The Demon Lover: On the Sexuality of Terrorism. New York: Norton, 1989. Murray, B. and R. Hay (eds). The World Game Downunder. ASSH Studies in Sports History, no. 19. Melbourne: Australian Society for Sports History, 2006. Redhead, Steve. Post-fandom and the Millennial Blues: Transformation of Soccer Culture. London: Routledge, 1997. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 5:0 1 1 4 J an ua ry 20 15 