ABSTRACT: 
The characteristics of the immediate locale greatly affect the ability of homeless people to adapt to life on the street and in shelters, with different types of places nurturing different circumstances for survival. Current conceptualizations of the place–survival nexus are too narrow, relying on small-scale, intensive studies of particular places that are known to sustain homeless survival while ignoring more suburban and exurban locales, as well as failing to set these places of survival within the larger socio-economic spaces of the metropolitan area. Further, the literature is heavily qualitative, lacking any kind of ‘‘big picture” quantitative assessment of the nexus. In response, we contribute to the place–survival nexus literature by developing a typology of space for homeless survival and then use interview data to examine the variation in survival strategies across three types of urban space in Los Angeles County. Our results speak to how our innovative and exploratory approach enabled a broader, more extensive and variegated understanding of place–survival among homeless people than previous studie. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper explores the relationship between place-homeless survival nexus in the place-homeless survival nexus. We explore the intersection between the broader socio-economic spaces of the city and the lived experiences of the place-survival nexus. We explore the intersection between the broader socio-economic spaces of the city and the lived experiences of the place-survival nexus. We explore the intersection between the broader socio-economic spaces of the city and the lived experiences of the place-survival nexus. We conclude that there is a need to re-conceptualize the place-survival nexus by addressing these gaps through an innovative approach that develops a typology of space for homeless survival and then use interview data to examine the variation in survival strategies across three types of urban space in Los Angeles County. Our results speak to how our innovative and exploratory approach enabled a broader, more extensive and variegated understanding of place-survival among homeless people than previous studies. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxxARTICLE IN PRESSContents lists available at ScienceDirectCitiesjournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate /c i t iesTowards a contextual approach to the place–homeless survival nexus: Anexploratory case study of Los Angeles CountyMatthew D. Marr *, Geoff DeVerteuil, David SnowFlorida International University, Department of Global and Sociocultural Studies, Asian Studies DM 312, University Park Campus, Miami, FL 33199, United Statesa r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 8 May 2009Received in revised form 28 July 2009Accepted 29 July 2009Available online xxxxKeywords:HomelessnessSurvivalAdaptationSubsistenceSpacePlace0264-2751/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Ltd. Adoi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 305 348 4004; faxE-mail address: mmarr@ﬁu.edu (M.D. Marr).Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et aAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.ciThe characteristics of the immediate locale greatly affect the ability of homeless people to adapt to life onthe street and in shelters, with different types of places nurturing different circumstances for survival.Current conceptualizations of the place–survival nexus are too narrow, relying on small-scale, intensivestudies of particular places that are known to sustain homeless survival while ignoring more suburbanand exurban locales, as well as failing to set these places of survival within the larger socio-economicspaces of the metropolitan area. Further, the literature is heavily qualitative, lacking any kind of ‘‘big pic-ture” quantitative assessment of the nexus. In response, we contribute to the place–survival nexus liter-ature by developing a typology of space for homeless survival and then use interview data to examine thevariation in survival strategies across three types of urban space in Los Angeles County. Our results speakto how our innovative and exploratory approach enabled a broader, more extensive and variegatedunderstanding of place–survival among homeless people than previous studies. 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.IntroductionSurvival among people experiencing homelessness is under-stood to be far more precarious than for the housed population(Wolch and Dear, 1993). Recently, and spurred by worries abouttheir image, public safety and livability, local governments andbusinesses have systematically implemented anti-homeless ordi-nances to outlaw certain behaviors and survival techniques in pub-lic spaces, including panhandling, camping, sleeping, sitting,loitering, urinating and, in some cases, even providing free mealsto the hungry (Mitchell, 1997; Merriﬁeld, 2000; National Coalitionfor the Homeless, 2007). Residential communities have also re-sisted development of shelters and other housing programs, caus-ing them to be concentrated in some neighborhoods and excludedfrom others (Takahashi, 1999). While we should not overestimatethe impacts of these trends upon a group that is often very resilient(DeVerteuil, 2006), they nonetheless have presented additionalchallenges to persons living in public space and shelters.This context makes understanding the nexus between place andhomeless survival all the more important. Since homeless peopleare resource-poor by deﬁnition, the characteristics of the immedi-ate locale greatly affect their ability to adapt to life on the streetand in shelters (Wolch and Dear, 1993). Moreover, different typesof places nurture different circumstances for survival. But we alsocontend that current conceptualizations of the place–survivalll rights reserved.: +1 305 348 3605.l. Towards a contextual approaties.2009.07.008nexus are too narrow, relying heavily on small-scale, intensivestudies of particular places that are known to sustain homelesssurvival. The current literature also does not set these places ofsurvival within the larger socio-economic spaces of the metropol-itan area. Last, the literature is heavily qualitative, lacking any kindof ‘‘big picture” quantitative assessment of the nexus.In this paper, we contribute to the place–survival nexus litera-ture by addressing these gaps through an innovative approach thatdevelops a typology of space for homeless survival and then usesinterview data (n = 25) to examine the variation in survival strate-gies among our respondents across three types of urban space inLos Angeles County. Our exploratory research focuses on whetherour innovative approach enables a broader, more extensive andvariegated understanding of place–survival among homeless peo-ple than previous studies. To this end, we ﬁrst outline the homelesssurvival literature, emphasizing that not all places ensure survivalequally. We then re-conceptualize the place–survival nexus byproposing a broader, more mixed-methods approach. As a back-drop to our study, we sketch the larger context of homelessnesswithin Los Angeles County. Next, we outline our research proce-dures and analytic techniques, speciﬁcally (1) the development ofa cluster analysis that categorizes Los Angeles County into prime,transitional, and marginal spaces, and (2) the survival patternswithin the three spaces derived from our in-depth interviews oftwenty-ﬁve homeless informants. We then present and elaboratethe results of the cluster analysis and its interplay with relevantinterview materials, focusing on the multifaceted survival patternsof homeless people within the three cluster spaces. Finally, wech to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of Los2 M.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxxARTICLE IN PRESSdiscuss the utility of our innovative approach in terms of expand-ing our understanding the place–survival nexus.The place–homeless survival nexusThere is an extensive literature on how homeless people materi-ally survive and adapt to their circumstances (Baldwin, 1998;Cohen and Sokolovsky, 1989; Dordick, 1997; Duneier, 1999; Gounis,1992;Hopper, 2003;Hopper et al., 1985; Koegel et al., 1999; Passaro,1996; Rollinson, 1990; Rowe and Wolch, 1990; Ruddick, 1996;Snow and Anderson, 1993; Wolch and Dear, 1993; Wright, 1997).We wish to highlight two points that connect homeless survivalwith the crucial role of place. First, place matters for material sur-vival, in profound and direct ways. Wolch and Dear (1993, p. 246)argue that ‘‘coping on the outside. . .[is] inextricably linked to thequalities of the local context.” Not all places ensure survival equally;only a few work especially well, those that Duneier (1999) deems‘‘sustaining habitats.1” He studies poor black men, most of whomwere living in public spaces in and around Sixth Avenue in New YorkCity’s Greenwich Village, and how this area became such a well-working place–survival nexus. Among the questions Duneier seeksto answer is why thesemen congregate around this area of Sixth Ave-nue after their eviction from Penn Station. His answer is that this areaﬁts the personal preferences and resource availability of themen, thatit is a resource-rich and accepting place that constitutes a sustainingenvironment for homeless people. The latter includes a number ofelements, none of which is necessary, but are sustaining because oftheir complementarity: heavy pedestrian trafﬁc for panhandling;cheap or free food; a generally sympathetic community willing tomake donations; safe and open public spaces in which to sleep;opportunities to scavenge; nearby services (shelters, food pantries,etc.) for homeless people; and hiding places (‘‘niches”) that can beused for privacy (Duneier, 1999, pp. 144–153). Although we cannotgeneralize his concept to other places, we can use it as an exampleof where the place–survival nexus works particularly well to meetimmediate needs amid homelessness. Sustaining environmentsmay not necessarily facilitate an exit from homelessness, as this de-pends more on housing and employment opportunities (Marr,2007). Going further, Dordick (1997) argues that homeless placesare not merely ‘‘stations” but constitute life-worlds unto themselves,powerfully structuring subsistence patterns and strategies. For in-stance, using a private shelter implied more consistent survival pat-terns, especially regarding food and shelter, but also greaterconstraints on personal freedom, while more informal settings, suchas encampments, enabled the development of intensive personalrelationships while also constraining the ability to secure basic sub-sistence. One analytic implication from Duneier (1999) and Dordick(1997) is that the distribution of homeless people and their adaptivebehaviors are place-contingent, with places within a larger spacebeing differentially supportive or nutrient of homeless subsistence.Second, homeless people have a role to play in the creation andpersistence of favorable place–survival nexuses, suggesting someagency. While all human agency is constrained, homeless agencyis especially constrained. Although various structural constraintsmay impede survival patterns, homeless individuals may also exer-cise considerable discretion. As Snow and Anderson (1993, p. 21)observe, ‘‘Repertoires of survival strategies [for homeless people]do not emerge willy-nilly. They are the product of the interplay be-tween the resourcefulness and ingenuity of homeless people andlocal organizational, political, and ecological constraints.” Hopper(2003) uses extensive ﬁeldwork in 1970s and 1980s New York City1 In the remainder of the paper when we refer to Duneier’s concept, we use‘‘environments” rather than ‘‘habitats,” given the danger of the latter to imply moreprimitive, animal-like survival strategies among persons experiencing homelessnesscompared to those who are more stably housed.Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008to show that many individuals would logically forgo staying inlarge public shelters due to widespread violence, illness, anddemoralizing treatment by staff in favor of the dignity and auton-omy of the streets and particular niches such as a municipal air-port. Further, Duneier (1999) shows how broad political contexts,like legal efforts to support the right to sell written material on citysidewalks based originally on First Amendment rights, can enableand constrain certain survival strategies often in unintended ways,in this case promoting the practice of selling recycled books andmagazines among homeless people. The concept of ‘‘constrainedagency” balances the notion of homeless people as ‘‘active, rationaland competent actors engaged in negotiating their social world”(Molina, 1998, p. ix) with fundamental structural constraints (e.g.extreme poverty, excessive unemployment, lack of affordablehousing, regulation of public spaces) that set boundaries to allbehavioral choices.Despite the richness of the literature on the place–survivalnexus, there remain three key and inter-related gaps. First, currentconceptualizations of the place–survival nexus are too narrow,focusing only on small-scale, intensive studies of known sustainingenvironments. We know relatively little about how homeless peo-ple go about surviving in less resource-rich neighborhoods thatmay include suburban and even exurban/rural (Cloke et al.,2002), ethnic, transitional or even exclusive areas. Second, the cur-rent literature does not set these places of survival within the lar-ger socio-economic spaces of the metropolitan area, preferringinstead micro-studies of particular neighborhoods. The importanceof embedding places of survival within broader socio-economicspaces of the extended city lies in simultaneously understandingmicro-level and macro-level processes. Third, the current literatureis heavily qualitative and intensive, lacking any kind of ‘‘big pic-ture” quantitative assessment of the nexus. This means that cur-rent research is not easily replicable, nor is it amenable to linkingthe places of survival with the broader socio-economic spaces ofthe city. There remains a need, in sociology and urban studies, tocombine the strengths of both quantitative and qualitative ap-proaches to clearly demonstrate the interaction between macro-le-vel social relations reﬂected in urban spaces and micro-level livedexperiences of places.Reconceptualizing the nexusWe begin addressing these gaps through an innovative ap-proach to understanding the broader context of the place–home-less survival nexus. This approach combines (1) a typology ofurban space that moves well beyond the typically resource-richneighborhood study that currently characterizes the literature;(2) the application of a quantitative technique to map such a typol-ogy over a much larger geographic space, thus analyzing macro-so-cial spatial relations; and (3) analysis of qualitative life-historyinterviews to demonstrate the linkages between macro and microlevel social processes. Ultimately, we are interested in whether ourinnovative approach actually enables a potentially broader under-standing of the place–survival nexus. By this we mean a moreextensive and more variegated understanding than in the existingliterature. We explore the following questions: How do differentspaces theoretically allow for different survival strategies/sustain-ing environments? How does homeless survival proceed in lessthan promising locales, given that most of our current knowledgeonly examines locales that intuitively support survival?First, and building on the earlier work of Duncan (1983), Snowand Anderson (1993) and Logan and Molotch (1987), we employSnow and Mulcahy’s (2001) categorization of urban space intoprime, marginal, and transitional. Prime space refers to main-stream spaces used by the socio-economically well-off population,entrepreneurs and politicians for everyday, commercial andch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of LosM.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxx 3ARTICLE IN PRESSsymbolic purposes. Conversely, marginal space has little value tothese groups, but can be readily transformed into prime space, asoften occurs with redevelopment and gentriﬁcation. Transitionalspace2 represents a middle ground by functioning to combine bothprime and marginal uses and/or to act as a buffer between thetwo. For homeless people, marginal space is essential, as it containsmuch of their sustaining resources, including spaces to camp or sleeprough with relatively low probability of police interference, shelters,cheap hotels, services and affordable, albeit unattractive housing.The distribution and availability of marginal space is thus criticalin shaping the how and where of homeless survival patterns. How-ever, the proximity of prime space is also important, as it providesopportunities for scavenging, recycling and especially panhandlingthat may not exist in marginal spaces themselves. These opportuni-ties are usually connected to thriving commercial districts. Cruciallythen, each of these spaces has varied characteristics for sustaininghomeless individuals and their survival practices. These expectationson the relationship between the resource availability in marginal,transitional and prime spaces and individual agency and survivaltechniques play in to each other, with neither necessarily determin-ing the other. In other words, homeless people may select speciﬁcspaces to survive in, but that those spaces offer certain constraints.Second, we employ a k-means cluster analysis to categorizeurban space according to Snow and Mulcahy’s (2001) tripartitedivision. This statistical procedure is commonly used in geo-demo-graphics as a data reduction technique to identify relativelyhomogeneous groups of observations based on selected variables.As a non-hierarchical and unsupervised technique, k-means clusteranalysis requires an a priori speciﬁcation of the number of clusters(Rogerson, 2001); in our case it will be the three pre-designatedspaces (marginal, transitional and prime). The use of a k-meanscluster analysis maximizes intra-group cohesion and inter-groupvariability, allows for replication, and serves as an efﬁcient toolto categorize and reduce the massive amount of socio-economicdata associated with complex and multifaceted global city-regions.We combine the tripartite categorization of space, using the k-means cluster analysis, to a far more extensive geographical areathan previously studied in the literature. This is innovative becausealmost all previous studies are narrowly micro-level in nature. Weapply this alternative approach to the place–survival nexus withinthe Los Angeles County metropolitan area at the census tract level,using 2000 Census data.Third, we merge the results of the cluster analysis with qualita-tive life histories, so as to examine some of the interplay betweenthe lived experiences of the place–survival nexus and the broadersocio-economic spaces of the city, thereby constituting a crucialcomponent of our innovative approach to the place–homeless sur-vival nexus. Given that only 25 homeless individuals were inter-viewed, we cannot claim strong relationships between marginal,transitional and prime spaces and typical survival behavior there-in. Rather, we seek to identify the key features of each space interms of the place–survival nexus, including which clusters pro-vided more structured and stable material survival than others. Be-fore the analysis, however, we need to provide some backgroundon the context of homelessness in Los Angeles County.The context of homelessness in los angeles countyOur goal here is to brieﬂy provide the context of homelessnessin our case study – Los Angeles County – and explore some of theassociations with the three kinds of spaces. Los Angeles County isthe most populous in the United States, with an estimated 9.8 mil-2 This transitional space is dissimilar to the Chicago School’s ‘‘zone in transition,” inthat the former represents an in-between space – neither marginal nor prime (Parkand Burgess, 1925).Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008lion inhabitants in July 2007 (US Census Bureau, 2008) and 88municipalities and numerous unincorporated areas. The point-in-time homeless population is also seen to be the largest in absolutenumbers in the nation, including at least 88,000 people in 2005, aswell as being high in per-capita terms (LAHSA, 2006).Across such a complex environment, homeless people haveadapted to a wide variety of places, some more favorable to mate-rial survival than others. These range from the city’s dingy andcrowded Downtown Skid Row to upscale beach communities,down-at-the-heels inner suburbs, and distant defense-dependentexurbs on the region’s fringe. Across these sharply differentiatedsettings, homeless people encounter vastly different resourcesand constraints. Some places are heavily institutionalized, charac-terized by large-scale shelters and other social services; otherplaces are virtually devoid of formal services, but offer other, lessformalized places and resources that can facilitate the survival ofsome homeless individuals. Such wide-ranging environmental dif-ferences in place intersect with individual-level differences in hu-man and social capital and demographic and biographiccharacteristics and vulnerabilities to shape adaptation patterns toliving on the streets or in shelters.The largest concentrations of homeless individuals are found inolder, denser and heterogeneous inner-city neighborhoods, wherehomeless services tend to cluster in ‘‘service hubs” (Dear et al.,1994; DeVerteuil, 2006). Of these, the largest is Skid Row in Down-town Los Angeles, where a disproportionate array of shelters, Sin-gle-Room Occupancy (SRO) hotels, drop-in centers and substanceabuse treatment facilities are concentrated. In 2000, this 50-squareblock area held 25% of the County’s over 13,000 shelter beds (CCA,2002; DeVerteuil, 2006).The ecological constraints and conditions that affect the charac-ter, concentration, and distribution of the place–survival nexusmust necessarily be framed within a larger political-economic con-text. Increasing numbers of precariously-housed individuals in LosAngeles County became homeless in the 1980s as a result of theintersection of global, national, and local forces and conditions (Da-vis, 1992; Wolch and Dear, 1993; Wolch and DeVerteuil, 2001).This growth generated various responses at the local level, rangingfrom highly supportive to overtly punitive. A 1991 Los AngelesCounty survey of 83 cities identiﬁed three speciﬁc types of re-sponses: homelessness as a problem of social control (i.e. homelesspeople are disorderly and must be contained, controlled, etc.),homelessness as a social welfare crisis (i.e. local governmentsought to provide services to needy residents who ‘‘become home-less for more structural reasons”), and homelessness as a problemof zoning and land-use planning (i.e. homelessness is primarily atechnical and locational issue of balancing the needs of clients withother land users) (Law, 2001). Since 1991, however, the numberand visibility of homeless people in Los Angeles have clashed withredevelopment visions and engendered a series of institutionalbacklashes (Wolch and DeVerteuil, 2001). While prime spaces inthe County have always been hostile to homeless people, servicesfor them and poor people more generally, it was not until the early2000s that a similar intransigence emerged within marginal andtransitional spaces. Since the late 1990s, several marginal and tran-sitional spaces – such as Hollywood, the historic core of Down-town, and Downtown Long Beach – have been revitalizing, handin hand with growing anti-homeless activity (Wolch, 2008). As aresult, homeless people are at greater risk of being evicted frompublic space. Still, we should be careful not to overstate the extentto which these pressures have actually translated into permanentdisplacement of homeless people, given their tenacity and ingenu-ity. Our interviews occurred in 2003, just when this added pressurewas becoming apparent at street level. It is within and in responseto this context, and particularly the ongoing scramble for shelter ofsome kind, that the survival strategies of homeless people emerge.ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of Los4 M.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxxARTICLE IN PRESSData and proceduresCluster analysisWe used a non-hierarchical k-means cluster algorithm to iden-tify Snow and Mulcahy’s (2001) prime, marginal, and transitionalspaces in Los Angeles County, based on socio-economic variablesfrom the 2000 Census at the census tract level. Ten variables fromthe 2000 Census were chosen for their ability to distinguish primespaces occupied by largely white, high-income, well-educated andnative-born inhabitants, and marginal spaces occupied by largelynon-white, high-immigrant, low-education and low-incomeinhabitants, the key divisions said to characterize polarized globalcity-regions such as Los Angeles (Sassen, 2001; Scott, 2001). Onceidentiﬁed, we proﬁled these spaces according to their ability tosustain homeless survival, focusing on the location of emergencyshelters using an extensive database maintained by a local non-proﬁt organization (Shelter Partnership, 2000). Although not allhomeless people rely on shelters, they do constitute a critical nodefor survival for many (Burt et al., 2001; Hopper et al., 1985).We sought census variables that would cover race, poverty, citi-zenship and language, and housing status, all elements of the globalcity-region polarization thesis that posits large gaps between well-educated elites and recent immigrant, low-wage populations. Thespeciﬁc variables were (see also Rogerson, 2001; DeVerteuil, 2005for the use of the following variables): (1) Race – percentage Whitenon-Hispanic (one race response); (2) Income3 –percentageofhouse-holds on public assistance (general assistance, or General Relief as it iscalled in LosAngeles, andTemporaryAid toNeedyFamilies, but not in-kind assistance or Supplemental Security Income) and percentage ofpopulation under the poverty line; (3) Citizenship/language – percent-age of households who are linguistically isolated (i.e. a household inwhich all members 14 years or older speak a non-English languageand also speak English less than ‘‘very well”), percentage of total pop-ulation who are recent immigrants, (i.e. year of entry between 1990and March 2000), and percentage of total population who are Ameri-can citizens; (4) Housing – percentage of occupied units that areowned, percentage of occupied units with 2 or more occupants perroom (to measure overcrowding), and percentage of occupied unitsthat are single, detached units; and (5) Education – percentage of pop-ulation over 25 with a university degree. These clusters capture notonly difference in income level but also difference in access to politicalresources (affectedby race, education, citizenship, Englishability, etc.)necessary to shape responses to homelessness within local spaces,importantly the ability to engage in NIMBY (‘‘not in my back yard”)resistance to services for the homeless.Each of the percentage variables was standardized into Z-scores(Rogerson, 2001). The resulting cluster analysis was validated forgoodness-of-ﬁt through an ANOVA F-statistic, particularly howwell-separated the clusterswere fromeach other and howwell eachvariable is contributing to the success of the clustering (Levia andPage, 2000; Rogerson, 2001). After the results of the cluster analysisweremapped onto the 2054 census tracts of Los Angeles County, thelocation of a key homeless service – emergency shelter beds – wasmapped onto the three clusters using a GIS geocoding technique.Life-history interviewsWhile the cluster analysis provides a County-wide portrait ormap of different spaces for homeless people, it does not help usunderstand the interplay between these broad spaces and the ac-3 Household income was not used because we are focused more on evidence ofpoverty, which is already measured by public assistance and poverty rates. Moreover,household income on its own does not take into account the expense of basic goods,which the poverty rate does.Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008tual place of homeless survival, and between the constraints ofthe cluster spaces and the individual’s ability to select the appro-priate space for survival. To this end, we draw on 25 in-depth,life-history interviews with homeless informants across thesespaces in Los Angeles County. These interviews were part of a lar-ger project focusing on the causes, demographics, survival strate-gies, and politics of homelessness in four global cities – LosAngeles, Paris, Sao Paulo, and Tokyo. For this paper, we analyzeonly the interviews from Los Angeles in order to develop our inno-vative approach to the place–homeless survival nexus. The inter-views sought to elicit elaborated biographic commentary fromthe homeless informants in response to a host of open-ended ques-tions regarding their (a) current living situation, (b) causes/ac-counts of homelessness, (c) family background and childhood, (d)material subsistence, (e) daily routines, (f) efforts to get into stablehousing; and (h) demographic characteristics. The interviews ran-ged in time from around an hour to over three hours, but averagedapproximately 90 minutes. All respondents received $20 for theirtime.Our sampling strategy was purposive rather than random orprobability-based. Purposive sampling is most appropriate whenpopulation parameters are unknown or difﬁcult to discern, as withthe homeless population in any given city, and/or when there isinterest in learning about select cases or variation across a set ofcases or category of individuals. Since our interest was to learn,among other things, about the variability among homeless peoplein their survival strategies and adaptive behaviors across differentspaces, we employed a purposive ﬁeld sampling strategy calledmaximum variation sampling (Loﬂand et al., 2006, pp. 91–93). Itis a sampling strategy that identiﬁes the diversity or range of thephenomena of interest so as not to miss various forms or typesof adaptation. The implication for studying people who are home-less is to identify the various niches or contexts in which theymight be found and then try to include individuals associated withthose niches in the ﬁeld sample. By broadening the sampling net inthis fashion, even if a few niches are missed, we increase under-standing of the range and variation of the phenomenon of interest.In our application of purposive sampling, conducted before themapping of spatial types on the County, we recruited individualsacross Los Angeles’ vast landscape and in areas known for varyingdensities of homeless services and homeless sub-populations(using databases from Shelter Partnership, 2000; LAHSA, 2006).Also, we ensured that we interviewed a number of persons in alleight of Los Angeles’ Service Planning Areas, divisions of theCounty used for health care and other social service planning. Thus,we sought out interview respondents across obvious ‘‘servicehubs” (see Fig. 2) such as Skid Row and Santa Monica, in suburbanareas with moderate amounts of services such as Downtown LongBeach and the San Fernando Valley, in inner-city areas with highneed but relatively low levels of services such as South-CentralLos Angeles, and in areas with few to almost no services like theBeach Cities. In the vast majority of cases (22 of 25), we contactedinterviewees through service providers such as shelters, transi-tional housing programs, drop-in centers, and street outreachteams. In an attempt to incorporate the small proportion of per-sons with no use of homeless services (Burt et al., 2001), we con-tacted three interview informants directly in parks and otherpublic spaces.Through the interview materials and subsequent analysis wewere able to identify for each individual the location of their pri-mary sustaining environment. Although a few informants de-scribed extensive mobility across census tracts, the vast majoritywas limited in their mobility and, given the tendency of adjacenttracts to fall in similar spatial types, conducted most of their dailyactivities within a particular spatial type. After we had mapped thethree clusters onto the spaces of Los Angeles County, we groupedch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of LosM.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxx 5ARTICLE IN PRESSour informants according to which spatial type they resided in(where they slept) at the time of the interview. To render the inter-view material meaningful, we coded data according to an individ-ual’s demographic proﬁle, vulnerabilities, and their strategies inmeeting material challenges. After the data were coded, wesearched for patterns and variations in survival strategies withineach of the clusters.ResultsCluster analysisTable 1 outlines the three general spatial categories in Los Ange-les County, clustered in terms of selected socio-demographic andFig. 1. Prime, transitional and marginal spaceTable 1Characteristics of spatial clusters (in percent). Source: 2000 Census Data.Selected socio-demographic andeconomic characteristicsCluster 1marginalCluster 2transitionalCluster 3primeWhite non-Hispanic 7.4 20.3 60.7Households on public assistance 13.8 7.2 2.2Residents in poverty 33.7 18 6.6Residents linguistically isolated 34.5 15 5.6Recent immigrants 22.2 11.9 5.8American citizens 60.4 76.4 90Owner-occupied housing 21 45.1 67.2Two or more persons per room 21.5 8.1 1Single detached housing 31 56 72.6University degree 11.1 22.8 47.6Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008economic characteristics. We found that all of the variables hadhigh and signiﬁcant F-values (between 444 and 2198), roughlyindicating the success of the technique in differentiating the threeclusters, as well as the success of each variable in contributing tothe overall differentiation. The cluster spaces can be understoodas a rough socio-economic gradient, moving from largely non-white, poor, heavily immigrant, overcrowded, renter and under-educated areas (Cluster 1) to largely white, middle/upper class,American-born, owner and well-educated areas (Cluster 3), reﬂect-ing the broad outlines of the global city-region polarization thesis(Sassen, 2001; Scott, 2001). Cluster 2 most approaches Countymedian values.Table 1 further conﬁrms the deep socio-economic polarizationwithin Los Angeles County, the spatial distribution of which be-comes more obvious when the clusters are mapped by census tract(Fig. 1).The data shown in Table 1 and Fig. 1 provide an overall proﬁleof each cluster. Beginning roughly at the center of the County,Cluster 1 represents marginal spaces. This cluster included the lar-gely immigrant, impoverished and contiguous core of Los AngelesCounty. Cluster 2 (transitional spaces) is largely contiguous to Clus-ter 1 areas but generally inner-suburban areas with mixed-in-come and less heavily immigrant populations. These areas arelower in density, ethnically mixed, and at risk of upward ordownward ﬁltering. Finally, Cluster 3 occupies the outer ring(prime spaces) including foothill and beach communities, as wellas certain inner areas that have maintained their socio-economicintegrity.s in Los Angeles County by census tract.ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of LosTable 2Share of total county shelter beds by cluster. Source: Shelter Partnership (2000) andUS Census 2000.Totalnumberof bedsPercentage oftotal Countybeds (%)Shelter beds per 10,000 extremelypoor persons (below 50% of thepoverty line)Cluster 1 6908 57 198Cluster 2 4120 34 145Cluster 3 1194 9 100Total 12,2226 M.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxxARTICLE IN PRESSHow did the three clusters map onto the service geography ofLos Angeles County? Answering this question required generatingshelter proﬁles for each cluster. In April 2000, Los Angeles Countyhad 12,222 beds that could be mapped, with the remaining 800 orso beds part of shelters (especially battered women) without astreet address (Shelter Partnership, 2000).Consistent with our expectations about marginal spaces, Cluster1 contained over half of all shelter beds. This reﬂects the power ofcommunity opposition, often in the form of local NIMBY move-ments, to segregate services for homeless people in marginalspaces in the County (Takahashi, 1999), as well as the proximityto clients, themselves segregated to the lower income spaces ofthe County. When measured in per-capita terms of shelter bedsper very poor persons (below 50% of the poverty line), we ﬁnd inTable 2 that shelter beds remain disproportionately clustered inFig. 2. Shelter beds by street address and clusPlease cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008marginal spaces, at a rate of between 50% and 100% more thanthe transitional and prime spaces.Service hubs in marginal spaces are critical elements in the con-stitution of material homeless survival. Several such hubs, opera-tionalized as clusters of emergency shelters, were conﬁrmed viaour mapping procedures (see Fig. 2) and are mostly in Clusters 1and 2, including Downtown Los Angeles, Hollywood, Santa Monica,Downtown Long Beach, Downtown Pasadena and West LA. In con-trast, certain Cluster 3 areas (e.g. Beach Cities) had virtually no dis-cernable service hubs. Shelters in Los Angeles County are thusheavily concentrated in marginal spaces, less so in transitionalspaces, and almost not at all in prime spaces, thereby conﬁrmingthe pattern found in Table 2.Homeless survival patternsWe now amalgamate results of the cluster analysis with quali-tative life histories, so as to better examine some of the interplaybetween the broader socio-economic spaces of the city and thelived experiences of the place–survival nexus. We are particularlyinterested in identifying the key features of each cluster space interms of the place–survival nexus. Again, given that only 25 indi-viduals were interviewed, we do not claim strong relationships be-tween marginal, transitional and prime spaces and typicalhomeless survival behavior therein. However, our analysis doesshow broad differences in patterns of resources and survivalstrategies across the spatial types, demonstrating the utility of ourter, South Los Angeles County, April 2000.ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of LosM.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxx 7ARTICLE IN PRESSunique approach to understanding the place–homeless survivalnexus. As a ﬁrst step to address these questions, Table 3 illustratesvarious demographic characteristics and survival strategiesaccording to each spatial cluster.Before exploring the differences in characteristics and survivalstrategies across clusters, we consider the similarities across theentire sample that demonstrates some aspects of the nature ofhomelessness in Los Angeles.4 The average ages of the individuals(37 to 42 years) were quite similar across the clusters and close tothe median age (42 years) of the County homeless population (LAH-SA, 2006). In terms of survival patterns, difﬁculty in obtaining foodwas generally not a major issue, demonstrating a general availabilityof soup kitchens, other food programs, and waste from commercialestablishments. Contact with family was consistently reportedamong a substantial minority of respondents across the clusters,showing that not all persons experiencing homelessness are com-pletely social isolated. Finally, welfare use – mostly the County’sGeneral Relief (GR) program,5 the local program for single indigentpeople – and the related inability to secure employment, was a com-mon theme across the sample. Eighteen of the twenty-ﬁve individu-als were receiving welfare beneﬁts (with fourteen on GR, three onTemporary Assistance for Needy Families, and one on SupplementalSecurity Income), and eight were employed (one individual wasworking and on welfare simultaneously). Most of our informantsmentioned various barriers to employment: lack of education, train-ing, access to employment, mental and physical disabilities, and, ofcourse, having no ﬁxed address.The place–survival nexus in marginal space (Cluster 1)Fromour sampleof13 inCluster1, theplace–survival nexus therewas characterized by a high level of service use, itself inﬂuenced bythe signiﬁcant presence of shelters in marginal space. Individuals inmarginal spaces experienced fewer instances of homeless episodes,and had spent less time on the street than individuals in the otherclusters. This suggests that marginal spaces, with their greater con-centration of services, may attract the recently dislocated homeless.Not surprisingly, then, individuals in marginal spaces were morelikely to be service reliant, particularly with regards to obtaining aplace to live. In effect, 11 of 13 were living in shelters, compared to2 of 7 in transitional spaces and 1 of 5 in prime spaces. In turn, thestrong presence of services in marginal spaces, particularly in theSkid Row area, effectively structured the everyday lives of those liv-ing in those spaces, even those on the streets, as illustrated by theexperience of a 45-year old black man who had been homeless forﬁve years in Skid Row. He recounted a typical day for us:What I did yesterday, I spent the night over on Winston Street[on Skid Row]. I slept over there with a friend of mine in a tent. I4 Clearly our small sample size prevents us from identifying statistically signiﬁcantdifferences in characteristics and survival behaviors between persons experiencinghomelessness in the three clusters. However, in our exploratory analysis here, weidentify interesting preliminary differences across the clusters that could be testedwith larger sample sizes. In the interest of being explicit about our criteria accessingdifferences among persons across the three clusters, we use overt rather than covertcriteria often used in statements of difference across categories in qualitative research(Robson, 1997:401). We identify a difference as meaningful if there is a 25%discrepancy in prevalence (for categorical variables like racial groups, shelter versusstreet residence, etc.) or average (for continuous variables like number of timeshomeless, average current time homeless, etc.) between the highest cluster and thelowest cluster. Although the 25% criteria are statistically arbitrary, they do provide aclear guideline from which to judge differences that are meaningful in an exploratorysense.5 Los Angeles County’s General Relief program is available to documented personsthat have been in the County at least 15 days and have less than $50 in cash or in abank account. The program provides $221 in cash beneﬁts per month for up to 9 out12 months for persons deemed ‘‘employable” contingent on meeting employmentprogram and workfare requirements, and 12 months per year for those deemed‘‘unemployable” or physically unable to work (Los Angeles Coalition to End Hungerand Homelessness, 2005).Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008got up in the morning. I went to the Midnight Mission for break-fast, hung around over there for a little while, got a free haircut.Then after that, I came over and I went to my CA [Cocaine Anony-mous] meetings. I’m mandated by the court to do outside meetingsso I went to my 10 o’clock meeting. After I went to my CA meeting,I went back over here and I go to lunch. I hang out for a little whileand I go back over to the VOA [Volunteers of America drop-in cen-ter] where they have the CA and they have a 2 o’clock group. So I goto 2 meetings a day and then I go over on Vermont [west of SkidRow] where my Proposition 36 outpatient program6 is and I go overthere at 5:30. Then I come back over here and then sometimes all theshelter buses are gone so I end up sleeping outside again.Despite the sustaining nature of Skid Row, some homeless peo-ple ﬁnd it to be more of a trap than a key to subsistence and sur-vival. In the words of a 38-year old black male who had beensporadically homeless over the past 10 years: ‘‘Skid Row becomesa trap for a lot of people. . .I don’t want this to be my ﬁnal destina-tion.” Although there is a large supply of services and emergencyand transitional housing as well as some permanent subsidizedhousing on Skid Row, linkages to living wage employment is scarceand only a small minority is able to leave the area for rental hous-ing (Marr, 2007).For those living in shelters, the degree of structuring can beeven stronger. The case of a 31-year old black woman, with twochildren staying at a shelter west of Downtown Los Angeles, isillustrative. As she explained:Yeah, in terms of the services that I use right now, I am in a shel-ter in a fully furnished apartment with everything. I do have acase manager who is a very good case manager who checks inand I check in with her. You know, to see if I need anything orif she ﬁnds avenues that she can help me she gives me a call.Like this [the compensated interview] is helping me out andalso sometimes if you’re running low on food or toiletries orwhatever, you can go to the ofﬁce over there and they have foodthere. Not like a supermarket but they can give you things thatwill get you by. And they offer other support like if you haveemotional problem, they say that their door is always open,you can come and talk to them and it’s kinda like a togethernessor a unity there. They try to recognize and be appreciative ofpeople and treat everybody with respect. Basically those arethe things, other than the housing that they provide, they giveyou the forms that you need, have them completed, they dowhatever they can to get you into housing. They do have a lotof services. I never knew these services exist because I neverexperienced this before but it’s good to know that you can gethelp if you really need it. There are services here.In addition to receiving such institutional assistance covering a vari-ety of aspects of daily life, some individuals even worked for serviceproviders. For example, one 33-year old black male with severalbouts of homelessness and substance abuse, worked part-time fora shelter, and once helped count homeless people in Long Beach.His heavy reliance on the shelter and other organizations to subsistillustrates what has been identiﬁed as the ‘‘institutionally adapted”homeless (Snow and Anderson, 1993, pp. 55–57).Given their high level of service use, individuals in marginalspaces were less likely to engage in more makeshift strategies tosurvive, such as recycling and panhandling, unless they were sub-stance abusers who needed cash daily to sustain their habits. In-deed, why would people like the 31-year old mother mentionedabove engage in such activities when all her daily needs are pro-6 California State Proposition 36, the ‘‘Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act”was passed in 2000 and changed state law to allow ﬁrst- and second-time nonviolentdrug possession offenders to receive substance abuse treatment rather thanincarceration.ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of Los8 M.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxxARTICLE IN PRESSvided by the shelter? Moreover, given higher levels of surveillanceand containment, those on Skid Row are increasingly unable to ac-cess the more mainstream spaces of Downtown Los Angeles topanhandle or recycle. As noted by one of our informants, policeand private security forces often prevent Skid Row residents fromleaving the district by patrolling nearby business districts.You go to China Town [sic – he is referring to the Little Tokyocommercial district immediately north of Downtown SkidRow] right over there, as soon as the police see you over there,they are going to follow you all through China Town justbecause you different. First of all, you Black. They gonna followyou all around [pounding table] and sit there on the corner untilyou get out of sight and I bet before you walk two more blocksthere is gonna be another police ofﬁcer come in. I would assumethat they got on their dispatch unit and said, ‘We have a suspi-cious suspect.’ All of a sudden, you become suspicious. . . . It’seither private security or police ofﬁcers, but you are notallowed. You can go in there and they might not harass youbut they’ll make their presence visible to you so you get away.7 Few immigrants were among our sample (3 of 25, or 12%) considering theirproportion of the total Los Angeles County population (36% in 2000). Although nodata exists on the proportion of immigrants among homeless people in Los Angeles,Latinos, a heavily immigrant ethnic group, are underrepresented, reﬂecting higherlevels of social capital and employment, as well as a willingness to overcrowd, thanpoor blacks and to a lesser extent, whites (Gonzales-Baker, 1996; LAHSA, 2006).Interestingly, immigrants from our sample concentrated in transitional and marginalspaces, likely reﬂecting the higher concentration of housed immigrants living in theseclusters.This interviewee’s experience demonstrates how living in a shelterin a marginal space proximate to a commercial district can subjecthomeless persons, especially members of disadvantaged racial andethnic groups, to surveillance and thus encourage them to engagein daily activities within specialized service settings. Although thisinformant conducted most of his daily activities within an emer-gency shelter, a soup kitchen, and other community facilities, hisneed to support a crack cocaine addiction drove him to continueto panhandle. Akin to the Duneier’s (1999) street vendors swayedto that work by new laws intended to protect First Amendmentrights, one unintended consequence of increased policing of LittleTokyo was simply displacing and reshaping panhandling activity.This interviewee improved his physical appearance with cleanclothing, headed south of Skid Row to a gas station used by com-muters, and posed as having run out of gas a day before paydayto solicit donations from customers.The place–survival nexus in transitional space (Cluster 2)From our sample of 7, the place–survival nexus in Cluster 2 wascharacterized by makeshift patterns that reﬂected much lower lev-els of service use. This was most likely due to lower concentrationof services in transitional spaces, as well as the avoidance of mar-ginal spaces and their service offerings by interviewees.A 46-year old African-American woman in the San Gabriel Val-ley (a suburban area with relatively few formal services), for exam-ple, spends nights with friends or her son, at a local Denny’s, or inher car. She has also slept in the emergency room of a hospital andin the lobby and hallways of a motel that she had stayed in duringher descent into homelessness. Given her extremely unstable res-idential situation, her daily routines are not structured by serviceproviders. She is unable to stay for long periods with friends orher son because of a shortage of space and the presence of theirfamilies. Although she works short-term jobs through temporaryagencies, her income is neither sufﬁcient nor stable enough to rentan apartment. She has been unable to collect welfare beneﬁts be-cause of her employment in temporary jobs. She makes ends meetwith her income from these jobs, as well as through recycling, pan-handling and eating meals with friends when visiting them. Sincethere are no soup kitchens in the area, there are days where shemakes do as best she can, and occasionally does not eat at all.She uses restaurant toilets as much as possible, but ﬁnds it espe-cially difﬁcult to ﬁnd a place to wash and shower.In nearby West Covina, a young man of African-American, Puer-to Rican, and Filipino descent, stays at the business of his cousin’sPlease cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008mother-in-law without her permission. His cousin is in a similarprecarious housing situation and they help each other out. Theyhave to leave the business by 7 A.M. and cannot return until9 P.M. Since his current spell of homelessness began, this infor-mant has slept on the street, in abandoned buildings and in a win-ter shelter. To get by, he currently relies on day labor, selling drugs,recycling, and occasional small loans from friends. He does not getGR, but has applied for it and found the GR-based job training to beunhelpful and was subsequently terminated, although he was un-sure if it was because of noncompliance or a bureaucratic mix up.He worked about 15 days in the past month, getting jobs from La-bor Ready, Manpower, and other ‘‘temp” agencies, through word ofmouth, and on occasion, off of a street corner hiring site. Most ofhis work has been in construction, shipping, and moving. The vastmajority of his days are spent either working or looking for work atagencies, on the street networking with other homeless persons,and on the Internet at the local library.The shortage of formal services did not seem to bother several ofthe homeless individuals interviewed in transitional spaces; in fact,some preferred to avoid service-rich areas, especially if they are lo-cated in marginal spaces. For example, a 65-year old white male ofFrench Canadian descent, is experiencing his third spell of homelessand is staying at the San Fernando Valley ColdWetWeather shelteroperated by a local nonproﬁt organization. He alternates betweenstaying in motels, shelters, and the streets, and studiously avoidsmarginal spaces such as Downtown’s Skid Row.I told somebody, ‘You’ll never get me to live in [downtown] LA.’GR was gonna send me to LA, to a hotel down there and I said,‘No thank you. I’d as soon live on the street than live in a hotel indowntown LA where there are 20,000 people out of work downthere. How am I gonna do down there?’ I said, ‘I’ll stay in theValley where there’s not that many people out of work. I knowthe Valley better than I know LA because I worked for Goodwill.During warmer weather, he spends most of his days on the street inthe San Fernando Valley, but ﬁnds it very difﬁcult to access a publictoilet. Similarly, a Chinese-Indonesian immigrant7 in his 40s fearshaving to search for a new place to sleep if displaced: ‘‘It could betroublesome, because so far I haven’t been moving from one placeto another, I always sleep in the same spot. But for most people, itcould be difﬁcult because some places they don’t want you. If theysay no then you are still violating by going into their area, thenthey’re going to hire security.” While the surveillance describedabove by the cluster 1 informant limited his daily rounds and con-ﬁned him to a shelter, this interviewee’s description shows how pub-lic and private security agents can complicate to a greater extent thesleeping arrangements of those without access to shelters, a groupmore prevalent in Cluster 2.The place–survival nexus in prime space (Cluster 3)From our sample of 5, the place–survival nexus in Cluster 3 wascharacterized by a nearly complete lack of service utilization. Thismakeshift lifestyle is clearly illustrated by a woman informant wholives on the streets of the ‘‘beach cities,” and has managed to do sowithout services by honing her survival techniques over time. Sheuses restaurants, laundry mats, public showers on the beach, localchurches, ‘‘dumpster diving,” and occasionally panhandling andch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of LosTable 3Demographic and survival by spatial cluster.Marginalspaces(n = 13)Transitionalspaces(n = 7)Primespaces(n = 5)Demographic dataRaceAfrican-American 61% 14% 20%Latino 15% 28% 20%White 23% 43% 60%Asian Zero 28% ZeroWith children 31% Zero ZeroImmigrant 8% 28% ZeroAverage age 37 42 42Vulnerabilities (self-reported)Veteran 18% 14% ZeroFoster care 8% Zero 20%Substance abuse 61% 28% 40%Domestic violence 23% Zero 20%Criminal background 38% 28% 40%Residence/shelter/placeIn shelter 85% 28% 20%On the street 15% 71% 80%Average number of times homeless 3.1 times 4.4 times 4 timesAverage current time homeless 18 months 31 months 86 monthsEconomic/material subsistenceOn welfare 77% 71% 60%Employed 38% 28% 20%Difﬁculty in obtaining food 15% 28% 20%Difﬁculty in ﬁnding a bathroom 8% 71% 40%Recycled 15% 71% 40%Panhandled 15% 43% 40%Social subsistenceContact with family 38% 28% 40%Essentially alone 31% 14% 20%M.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxx 9ARTICLE IN PRESSrecycling to get by. She has built up an extensive local knowledgeof the area, thereby giving her an advantage over the newly-home-less: ‘‘They don’t know about these places that I mentioned to you.They’re on the streets, they don’t know nothing! Me, I’m a survivor.I’m fromway back, you know. So it’s just a piece a cake for me.” Herscavenging techniques speak of her ability to, in her view, ‘‘thrive”in her own uniquely ‘‘rich” sustaining environment.They [bagel shops in Manhattan Beach] basically know thatpeople are going to be back there and they put it [unsold food]in plastic bags and put it right on top. You open the bag, you getwhat you want and then you close the bag up nicely so the birdsaren’t gonna be attackin’ their trash cans and stuff like that. Ifyou’re walking past the place, then why not? You know, stopand see if there’s fresh bagels. Even my favorite donuts, I cango to any of these donut shops around here and they won’t havemy favorite donut but I’ll go in that dumpster out there andthere’s my favorite donut, you know? That’s weird, huh? Noth-ing is wrong with the food at all. Then again, do you know thatthere is a lot of places their policy is that like Dominos forinstance and Pizza Hut also, that if someone calls up and it’s acancelled order, they’ll just, if you go in there and say, ’Hey,do you got any cancelled orders today?’ I came out with threebig boxes full of pizzas. . .there’s lots of places you just say,’Hey, you got any cancelled orders?’ You never can starve inLA. You just can’t!This interviewee is careful not to allow her scavenging activitiescause inconvenience to the commercial establishments that serveas her source of food, demonstrating a need for a particular keen-ness when surviving outside the coverage of specialized serviceproviders.A further illustration is a 30-year old white male who is experi-encing his ﬁrst stint of homelessness aside from brief stints whilePlease cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008traveling in South America. He lives in a tent in the remote coastalarea just northwest of Santa Monica, has very few resources, andsurvives solely on food lines. He has lost all of his identiﬁcationand therefore has been unable to apply for GR or Food Stamps.He jogs one hour down to the Santa Monica beach area to go tofood lines almost daily:Let’s see, I get up from my camp, it probably takes me about anhour to get up and get cleaned up and I jog in. It’s kinda like along jog. It takes me about another hour to get to town. So that’stwo hours and then there is a food line. . .You could say thattakes two hours, you have to wait in line there usually. So that’sfour hours and then from there I come up to the park here andwait around another couple hours and there is another food lineand then jog home for another hour and that takes care of theday, basically.This informant’s experiences show a great deal of inconvenienceand need for discipline and resolve in subsisting in a remote areafar from services or a sustaining commercial district, contrastingwith the previous informant’s account.A ﬁnal example of this makeshift survival strategy associatedwith prime space is provided by a 37-year old Latino male whohas generally been homeless since age 16. At the time one of usmet him, he was staying in his car in the high-desert Lancaster areanorth of Los Angeles, where he had been living for the past ﬁvemonths. His routine involved moving nightly from one retail busi-ness parking lot to another with a ‘‘cavalry” of about six otherhomeless people living in their cars. They seek places that are quietand safe and move whenever the police tell them to do so. He wasable to buy his late 1980s model Honda Civic for around $200 witha GR check, and paid for tags and insurance with checks from sub-sequent months. Despite having proper registration and insurancehe is often pulled over by the police and ‘‘harassed.” He is wellknown to the police who often give him open container ticketsfor drinking in the park. He recently spent a week in LA County Jailwhen his tickets built up to a warrant for arrest. Prior to buying hiscar, he was ‘‘roughing it,” living in a park and sleeping in a sleepingbag, Occasionally, when the weather became severely inclement,he would move into a Cold/Wet Weather Shelter, but that was alast resort as he did not like staying in such facilities because hefound it difﬁcult to get along with the other residents.Discussion and conclusionOur research focused on whether our innovative approach en-abled a potentially broader, more extensive and more variegatedunderstanding of place–survival among homeless people. Wefound it did in at least two ways. First, the tripartite typologyproved useful for both the cluster analysis and the interviews.The results of the quantitative analysis were statistically signiﬁcantand quite efﬁcient at breaking down a very complex global city-re-gion into three distinct cluster spaces. The cluster analysis alloweda County-wide application of the typology, thereby producing amore extensive and variegated set of places to sample from. Thisalso allowed us to map the distribution of emergency shelters ontothe three clusters, the result being a high concentration in marginalspaces with low socio-economic characteristics. The results of thequalitative analysis showed, even with a limited sample, someimportant exploratory differences in the key features of theplace–survival nexus for each cluster.Second, the ability to combine the quantitative and qualitativemethods, along with the allied ability to link space and place,proved advantageous in better understanding the place–survivalnexus. More generally, we were able to demonstrate the constrain-ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of Los10 M.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxxARTICLE IN PRESSing effects of the socio-geographic containers of urban spaces onthe self-selecting survival strategies and experiences of placesamong the 25 individuals, without falling victim to the ecologicalfallacy. We were also able to explore the place–survival nexus inareas rarely studied in the literature, those suburban and exurbanlocales (e.g. Beach Cities, San Fernando Valley, West Covina, Lan-caster/Palmdale) where alternative strategies were deployed.These included the use of vacant lots, cars and restaurants. Inter-estingly, and despite the dearth of services, individuals in ser-vice-poor transitional and prime spaces saw no need to migrateto marginal spaces – why? We know from the interview data thatthere are signiﬁcant issues of stigma attached to marginal spaces,the sense of downward mobility, as well as perhaps too much com-petition. Even more interesting was the ability of homeless peopleto persist in such unpromising locales, allowing us to chronicle theplace–survival nexus beyond the conﬁnes of Skid Row and othertypical sustaining habitats. These ﬁndings also support the conclu-sion that homeless people are not idle and unwitting in their ac-tions (Duneier, 1999; Hopper, 2003; Snow and Anderson, 1993;Snow and Mulcahy, 2001). Instead, we have shown that homelesspersons actively forge survival strategies amid the economic, socialand political resources and constraints of their environments, thussuggesting a kind of elective afﬁnity between urban spaces andbehavior. This adds to our initial contentions that despite mount-ing pressures on public space, homeless people endure nonethelessand exercise considerable agency while doing so.Given our ﬁndings, research that depicts a generic, one-size-ﬁts-all relationship between urban space/place and homeless sur-vival is likely misguided. The unequal distribution of resourceshelps to pattern (but not determine) the survival of homeless per-sons in the different types of spaces. At one extreme, those in re-source-rich marginal spaces were generally more reliant uponthe institutions that provide relief services. While the daily rou-tines and lifestyle of those who inhabit transitional spaces ﬂuctu-ates between service dependence and more resourcefulindependence, those living in prime spaces, and thus at the otherextreme, tend to make do without accessible institutional re-sources and survive via more makeshift, shadow work, and scav-enging strategies.There were, of course, some important limitations to the ap-proach and particularly the actual study. We are by no means rub-ber-stamping this approach. Although the variation in subsistencestrategies across the clusters demonstrates the utility of the tripar-tite division based on Snow and Mulcahy’s conceptualization, fu-ture research may beneﬁt from using a more complex typologythat allows for more variation within prime, marginal, and transi-tional spaces. For example, within each spatial type, further catego-rizations could be made to allow for variation in factors such aspolicing strategies, transportation access, and mixture of publicand private ownership to assess their impact on subsistence strat-egies. Other shortcomings came from the (unavoidable) relianceon census data, making it impossible to understand prime/mar-ginal/transitional spaces in terms of activity and employment (Elliset al., 2004). Subsequent studies, however, could use the US CensusTransportation Planning Package to better grasp the diurnal shiftsbetween place of residence and place of work, and which would al-low classiﬁcation of parts of the County according to daytimeworkplace populations. It should be noted that homeless individu-als can be quitemobile, such that some of themhabituallymove be-tween marginal, transitional and prime spaces within a single day.8Moreover, the use of census tracts carries several well-known limita-tions, including that not all of them are of equal size or population,8 For discussion of intra-city mobility among the homeless, see DeVerteuil (2003),Lee and Price-Spratlen (2004) and Snow and Anderson (1993).Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008that people move freely among them, and that contiguity can createspecial effects – living in a marginal tract surrounded by others (theunderclass or concentrated poverty thesis) is most likely different toliving in a marginal tract right next to transitional or prime spaces.For instance, the pattern within Downtown is certainly more com-plex than the cluster designation suggests. While the area is undergo-ing signiﬁcant revitalization – as reﬂected in such mega-projects asthe Staples Center (1999), the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels(2002) and the Walt Disney Concert Hall (2003), as well as the recentsurge in loft redevelopment and the construction of new, high-endapartment complexes – Downtown remains quite marginal in theevenings, still more the domain of the homeless than Yuppies.A second source of limitations is the sample size, which isclearly too small to talk about typical patterns across each clusterspace. But we can argue that this is not an inherent problem of ourapproach, but rather of the modest sample size. Future researchcould employ a larger study that would consolidate, or potentiallychallenge, our results here. We can thus offer a broader conclusionthan simply ‘‘space matters.” Rather, we show how it matters, as anoutcome of the balance between place-based constraints and indi-vidual agency and self-selection. Prime spaces high on a socio-eco-nomic gradient, either through NIMBYism or less assertiveplanning measures, encompass few shelters and thus survivalstrategies are more makeshift. Marginal spaces at the bottom ofthe socio-economic gradient contain more ample, although insufﬁ-cient, amounts of shelters and thus homeless experiences are moreshaped by institutional contexts. The insights from our contextualapproach could be extended beyond the homeless to include theplace-dependent experiences of other vulnerable, place-boundedgroups, such as recent immigrants and recently dischargedprisoners.AcknowledgementsThe research on which the paper is based was supported by agrant from the National Science Foundation (SES-0213372, DavidSnow, Principal Investigator). We would like to thank the NationalScience Foundation and all of the individuals who responded tointerviews used in this paper.ReferencesBaldwin, D (1998) The subsistence adaptation of homeless mentally ill women.Human Organization 57, 190–199.Burt, M, Aron, L and Lee, E (2001) Helping America’s Homeless: Emergency Shelter orAffordable Housing? The Urban Institute Press, Washington, DC.Cohen, C and Sokolovsky, J (1989) Old Men of the Bowery: Strategies for Survivalamong the Homeless. Guilford Press, New York.Central City Association (2002) Downtown’s Human Tragedy: It’s Not AcceptableAnymore. Center City Association, Los Angeles.Cloke, P, Milbourne, P and Widdowﬁeld, R (2002) Rural Homelessness. Policy Press,Bristol.Davis, M (1992) City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles. Verso, New York.Dear, M, Wolch, J and Wilton, R (1994) The service hub concept in human services.Progress in Planning 42, 179–267.DeVerteuil, G (2003) Homeless mobility, institutional settings, and the new povertymanagement. Environment and Planning A 35, 361–379.DeVerteuil, G (2005) Welfare neighborhoods: anatomy of a concept. Journal ofPoverty 9, 23–41.DeVerteuil, G (2006) The local state and homeless shelters: beyond revanchism?Cities 23, 109–120.Dordick, G (1997) Something Left to Lose: Personal Relations and Survival Among NewYork’s Homeless. Temple University Press, Philadelphia.Duncan, J (1983) Men without property: the tramp’s classiﬁcation and use of urbanspace. In Readings in Urban Analysis, R Lake (ed.), pp. 86–102. Rutgers UniversityPress, New Brunswick.Duneier, M (1999) Sidewalk. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, New York.Ellis, M, Wright, R and Parks, V (2004) Work together, live apart? Geographies ofracial and ethnic segregation at home and at work. Annals of the Association ofAmerican Geographers 94, 620–637.Gonzales-Baker, S (1996) Homelessness and the Latino paradox. In Homelessness inAmerica, J Baumohl (ed.), pp. 132–140. The Oryx Press, Phoenix.ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of LosM.D. Marr et al. / Cities xxx (2009) xxx–xxx 11ARTICLE IN PRESSGounis, K (1992) The manufacture of dependency: shelterization revisited. NewEngland Journal of Public Policy 8, 685–693.Hopper, K (2003) Reckogning with Homelessness. Cornell University Press, Ithica.Hopper, K, Susser, E and Conover, S (1985) Economies of the makeshift:deindustrialization and homelessness in New York City. Urban Anthropology14(1–3), 183–236.Koegel, P, Sullivan, G, Burnam, A, Morton, S and Wenzel, S (1999) Utilization ofmental health and substance abuse services among homeless adults in LosAngeles. Medical Care 37(3), 306–317.Law, R (2001) ‘Not in my city’: local governments and homelessness policies in theLos Angeles metropolitan region. Environment and Planning C 19, 791–815.Lee, B and Price-Spratlen, T (2004) The geography of homelessness in Americancommunities: concentration or dispersion? City and Community 3, 3–27.Levia, D and Page, D (2000) The use of cluster analysis in distinguishing farmlandprone to residential development: a case study of Sterling, Massachusetts.Environmental Management 25, 541–548.Logan, J and Molotch, H (1987) Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place.University of California Press, Berkeley.Loﬂand, J, Snow, D, Anderson, L and Loﬂand, L (2006) Analyzing Social Settings: AGuide to Qualitative Observation and Analysis, 4th ed. Thomson/Wadsworth,Belmont.Los Angeles Coalition to End Hunger and Homelessness (2005) People’s Guide toWelfare, Health, and Other Services. Los Angeles Coalition to End Hunger andHomelessness, Los Angeles.Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) (2006) 2005 Greater Los AngelesHomeless Count. Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority, Los Angeles.Marr, M (2007) Better Must Come: Exiting Homelessness in Two Global Cities, LosAngeles and Tokyo. Doctoral Dissertation, University of California at Los Angeles.Merriﬁeld, A (2000) The dialectics of dystopia: disorder and zero tolerance in thecity. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 24, 473–489.Mitchell, D (1997) The annihilation of space by law: the roots and implications ofanti-homeless laws in the United States. Antipode 29, 303–336.Molina, G (1998) Social Networks Among the Inner-City Homeless: A ComparativeStudy of Latino and African-American Men. Doctoral Dissertation, University ofCalifornia at Los Angeles.National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH) (2007) Illegal to be Homeless: TheCriminalization of Homelessness in the United States. National Coalition for theHomeless, Washington, DC.Please cite this article in press as: Marr, MD, et al. Towards a contextual approaAngeles County. J. Cities (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cities.2009.07.008Passaro, J (1996) The Unequal Homeless: Men on the Street Women in Their Place.Routledge, New York.Robson, C (1997) Real World Research: A Resource for Social Scientist and Practitioners.Blackwell Publishers, Malden.Rogerson, P (2001) Statistical Methods for Geography. Sage Publications, ThousandOaks.Rollinson, P (1990) The story of Edward: the everyday geography of elderly singlesingle room occupancy (SRO) hotel tenants. Journal of ContemporaryEthnography 19(2), 188–206.Rowe, S and Wolch, J (1990) Social networks in time and space: homeless women inskid row, Los Angeles. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 80, 184–204.Ruddick, S (1996) Young and Homeless in Hollywood: Mapping Social Identity.Routledge, New York.Sassen, S (2001) The Global City. Princeton University Press, Princeton.Scott, A (2001) Introduction. In Global City-Regions: Trends, Theory, Policy, A Scott(ed.), pp. 1–8. Oxford University Press, Oxford.Shelter Partnership (2000) Short-Term Housing Directory of Los Angeles County, April2000. Shelter Partnership, Inc., Los Angeles.Snow, D and Anderson, L (1993) Down on Their Luck: A Study of Homeless StreetPeople. University of California Press, Berkeley.Snow, D and Mulcahy, M (2001) Space, politics, and the survival strategies of thehomeless. American Behavioral Scientist 45, 149–169.Park, R and Burgess, E (1925) The City: Suggestions for Investigation of HumanBehavior in the Urban Environment. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.Takahashi, L (1999) Homelessness, AIDS, and Stigmatization in the United States at theEnd of the Twentieth Century. Oxford University Press, Oxford.US Census Bureau (2000) 2000 US Census of Population.US Census Bureau (2008) 2007 Population Estimates.Wolch, J (2008) Intransigent LA. Geoforum 39, 543–545.Wolch, J and Dear, M (1993) Malign Neglect: Homelessness in an American City. JerryBass Publishers, San Francisco.Wolch, J and DeVerteuil, G (2001) New landscapes of urban poverty management.In TimeSpace, J May and N Thrift (eds.), pp. 149–168. Routledge, London.Wright, T (1997) Out of Place: Homeless Mobilizations Subcities and ContestedLandscapes. SUNY Press, Albany.ch to the place–homeless survival nexus: An exploratory case study of Los