ABSTRACT: 
The sense of agency refers to the feeling that we are in control of our actions and, through them, of events in the outside world. Much research has focused on the importance of retrospectively matching predicted and actual action outcomes for a strong sense of agency. Yet, recent studies have revealed that a metacognitive signal about the fluency of action selection can prospectively inform our sense of agency. Fluent, or easy, action selection leads to a stronger sense of agency over action outcomes than dysfluent, or difficult, selection. Since these studies used subliminal priming to manipulate action selection, it remained unclear whether supraliminal stimuli affecting action selection would have similar effects. We used supraliminal flankers to manipulate action selection in response to a central target. Experiment 1 revealed that conflict in action selection, induced by incongruent flankers and targets, led to reduced agency ratings over an outcome that followed the participant's response, relative to neutral and congruent flanking conditions. Experiment 2 replicated this result, and extended it to free choice between alternative actions. Finally, Experiment 3 varied the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between flankers and target. Action selection performance varied with SOA. Agency ratings were always lower in incongruent than congruent trials, and this effect did not vary across SOAs. Sense of agency is influenced by a signal that tracks conflict in action selection, regardless of the visibility of stimuli inducing conflict, and even when the timing of the stimuli means that the conflict may not affect performance. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This sense of agency refers to the feeling that we are in control of our actions and, through them, of events in the outside world. Much research has focused on the importance of retrospectively matching predicted and actual action outcomes for a strong sense of agency. Yet, recent studies have revealed that a metacognitive signal about the fluency of action selection can inform our sense of agency. Senent, or easy, action selectionleads to a stronger sense of agency over action outcomes than dysfluent, or difficult, selection. Since these studies used subliminal priming to task-irrelevant action selection, it remained unclear whether supraliminal stimuli affecting action selection would have similar effects. We used supraliminal flankers to manipulate action selection in response to a central target. Experiment 1 re-vealed that conflict in action selection, induced by incongruent flankers and targets, led to reduced agency ratings over an outcome that followed the participant's response, relative to neutral and congruent flanking conditions. Experiment 2 replicated this result, and extended it to free choice between alternative actions. Finally, Experiment 3 varied the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between flankers and target. Action selection performance paired with SOA. Agency ratings were always lower in incongruent than congruent trials, and this effect did not vary across SOAs. Sense of agency is influenced by a signal that tracks conflict in action selection, regardless of the visibility of stimuli inducing conflict, and even when the timing of the stimuli means that the conflict may not affect performance. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11Contents lists available at ScienceDirectActa Psychologicaj ourna l homepage: www.e lsev ie r .com/ locate /actpsyDifﬁcult action decisions reduce the sense of agency: A study using theEriksen ﬂanker taskNura Sidarus ⁎, Patrick HaggardInstitute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 17 Queen Square, London WC1N 3AZ, UK⁎ Corresponding author.E-mail address: n.sidarus.11@ucl.ac.uk (N. Sidarus).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2016.03.0030001-6918/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.Va b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 24 September 2015Received in revised form 11 March 2016Accepted 16 March 2016Available online 24 March 2016The sense of agency refers to the feeling that we are in control of our actions and, through them, of events in theoutside world. Much research has focused on the importance of retrospectively matching predicted and actualaction outcomes for a strong sense of agency. Yet, recent studies have revealed that a metacognitive signalabout theﬂuency of action selection canprospectively informour sense of agency. Fluent, or easy, action selectionleads to a stronger sense of agency over action outcomes than dysﬂuent, or difﬁcult, selection. Since these studiesused subliminal priming tomanipulate action selection, it remained unclearwhether supraliminal stimuli affect-ing action selection would have similar effects.We used supraliminal ﬂankers to manipulate action selection in response to a central target. Experiment 1 re-vealed that conﬂict in action selection, induced by incongruent ﬂankers and targets, led to reduced agency ratingsover an outcome that followed the participant's response, relative to neutral and congruent ﬂanking conditions.Experiment 2 replicated this result, and extended it to free choice between alternative actions. Finally, Experi-ment 3 varied the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between ﬂankers and target. Action selection performancevaried with SOA. Agency ratings were always lower in incongruent than congruent trials, and this effect didnot vary across SOAs. Sense of agency is inﬂuenced by a signal that tracks conﬂict in action selection, regardlessof the visibility of stimuli inducing conﬂict, and evenwhen the timing of the stimuli means that the conﬂict maynot affect performance.© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Keywords:Sense of agencyAction selectionFlanker taskConﬂictAwareness1. IntroductionThe sense of agency refers to the feeling that we voluntarily controlour actions and, through them, events in the outside world (Haggard &Tsakiris, 2009). This involves establishing a link between our intentionsand our actions, and between our actions and their external outcomes. Ithas been suggested that our experience of agency colours the back-ground of our mental lives (Chambon, Sidarus, & Haggard, 2014b;Gallagher, 2012; Haggard & Tsakiris, 2009), but we become especiallyaware of it when the smooth ﬂow from intention to action to outcomeis disrupted.Much research has focused on the second link, between actions andoutcomes. This has revealed an important signal that informs the senseof agency - the comparison between expected and actual action out-comes (Blakemore, Wolpert, & Frith, 2002; Wegner & Wheatley,1999). If outcomes match our expectations, we feel that “I did that”;while a mismatch signals a loss of agency. While mismatch signallingpartly relies on predictive processes, based on internal signals related. This is an open access article underto the action system (see Synofzik, Vosgerau, & Newen, 2008 for a re-view of comparator models), it is essentially retrospective since the ac-tion outcome must be known for the comparison to be made.Recent studies have shown that ametacognitive signal about theﬂu-ency of action selection also contributes to the sense of agency (seeChambon et al., 2014b for a review). This signal serves to establish alink between our intentions and our actions, and is available beforethe action is evenmade, so it can informour sense of agency prospective-ly. These studies used subliminal priming tomanipulate action selectionin an agency task (Chambon & Haggard, 2012; Chambon, Moore, &Haggard, 2014c; Chambon, Wenke, Fleming, Prinz, & Haggard, 2013;Sidarus, Chambon, & Haggard, 2013; Wenke, Fleming, & Haggard,2010). Here, participants make left or right actions according to a targetarrow, which are followed by coloured circles – the action outcomes.Participants are then asked to judge how much control they felt overthese circles. Unbeknownst to the subject, a small arrow – a prime – isbrieﬂy ﬂashed before the target. When the prime is congruent withthe target, and points in the same direction, action selection is easy;butwhen the prime is incongruentwith the target, and points in the op-posite direction, action selection is impaired, leading to slower reactiontimes (RTs) and more errors (e.g. Wenke et al., 2010). Results showedthe CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).2 N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11that the sense of agency over action outcomes was higher followingcongruently primed actions, compared to incongruently primed actions.Importantly, outcomes could not be predicted by the action or theprime alone, but depended on the congruency between prime and tar-get. Further, the effects of action selection on sense of agency couldnot be explained by participants relying on a retrospective monitoringof RTs, as these were not correlated with agency judgements. Tellingly,a further experimentmanipulated the timing of stimuli to induce eithera normal priming effect or a “negative compatibility effect” (NCE; Eimer& Schlaghecken, 1998). In theNCE, congruent primes impair rather thanfacilitate motor performance. This manipulation reversed the effects ofprimes on RTs, as expected, but judgements of agency were alwayshigher for congruent priming, in both normal and NCE priming(Chambon & Haggard, 2012). The authors proposed a model in whichthe very initial action intention, triggered by the prime, could be com-pared with the executed action. Congruency between the initial inten-tion and action would facilitate a metacognitive signal about actionselection, and thus lead to a higher sense of agency. The later motor in-hibitory processes that caused NCE would occur downstream of thismetacognitive readout of initial intention.Since these primes were subliminal, participants were not awarethat selection ﬂuency was manipulated, and could not strategically de-cide to use ﬂuency as a cue to agency (Chambon & Haggard, 2012;Wenke et al., 2010). Fluency can be thought of as a continuum betweeneasy, or ﬂuent, perceptual or cognitive processing, to effortful, ordysﬂuent, processing (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2009). Response conﬂictis an instance of highly effortful processing (Botvinick & Braver, 2015).Although the experience of selection ﬂuency/dysﬂuency may be rela-tively weak, people may have a sense of “something going right/wrong” in congruent or incongruent trials respectively, without beingable to identify why they have this feeling (Chambon et al., 2014b;Pacherie, 2008). It has been shown that people can reliably introspecton their experience of ease/difﬁculty in action selection, using a similarsubliminal priming task (Desender, Opstal, & den Bussche, 2014), aswell as with conﬂicting supraliminal stimuli (Morsella et al., 2009).This feeling could then become associated with subsequent events,such as action outcomes (Fritz & Dreisbach, 2013; Winkielman,Ziembowicz, & Nowak, 2015). Interestingly, similar effects are foundwhen measuring agency at the end of a trial (e.g. Chambon &Haggard, 2012) and at the end of a block (Wenke et al., 2010). This sug-gests that the association between ﬂuency experiences and outcomescould build up over time. Alternatively, the learning of action-outcomerelations may be disrupted by dysﬂuent action selection.In fact, the studies that used subliminal priming tomanipulate selec-tion ﬂuency (e.g. Chambon et al., 2013; Wenke et al., 2010) differ con-siderably from previous research on the sense of agency, as they arefocused on the instrumental learning of the relation between speciﬁc ac-tions and a number of possible outcomes (Chambon, Filevich, &Haggard, 2014a). From this perspective, expertisewith a given environ-ment leads to a growing sense of ease, or ﬂow, in selecting an action,which becomes associated with more predictable outcomes. On theother hand, research on the sense of agency has often focused on the at-tribution of agency. In such studies, action-outcome associations areoften well known (Elsner et al., 2002), and may be violated (Kühnet al., 2011), and/or there may be ambiguity about “who” caused a spe-ciﬁc outcome, i.e. me vs. another agent (e.g.Wegner &Wheatley, 1999).Response conﬂict induced by conscious stimuli has been shown tolead to a reduced sense of agency over one's actions (Morsella et al.,2009). However, it remains unclear whether conscious stimuli that in-ﬂuence action selection might also alter the sense of agency over actionoutcomes. One suggestive study set out to manipulate the visibility ofprimes, while measuring judgements of agency over outcomes(Damen, van Baaren, & Dijksterhuis, 2014). Participants were aware ofsome primes, but not others. Prime words (“left” vs. “right”) were pre-sented for a short or long duration, producing subliminal or supralimi-nal priming, respectively. Participants freely chose whether to press aleft or right key once the following mask disappeared. Their action trig-gered a high or low tone after a variable delay, and participants judgedtheir agency over the tone. For the subliminal priming condition, judge-ments of agency followed the pattern previously reported, i.e. higherratings for trials in which the action was congruent with the prime, rel-ative to prime-incongruent actions. However, for supraliminal primes,the effects were reversed, and higher ratings were found for prime-incongruent actions. The authors argued that awareness that one'schoice might have been biased by external input would reduce one'ssense of freedom and, in turn, one's sense of agency.Importantly, Damen et al. (2014) study showed effects of priming onthe sense of agency, despite showing little or no effect of either sublim-inal or supraliminal primes on reaction times. Priming of choices wasonly found for supraliminal primes, in one of two experiments. Thus,there is little evidence that primes inﬂuenced action selection processesin their study. This contrasts with previous reports in which even sub-liminal primes reliably biased free choices (Kiesel et al., 2006; Klapp &Haas, 2005; Klapp & Hinkley, 2002; O'Connor & Neill, 2011;Schlaghecken & Eimer, 2004; Wenke et al., 2010). Instead, Damenet al. (2014) argued that action primes might inﬂuence agency judge-ments independently of inﬂuencing action selection, by affectinghigher-order, conceptual representations of action and agency.The present study aimed to clarify the contribution of action selec-tion processes to sense of agency, using supraliminal stimuli to manip-ulate action selection across 3 experiments. To additionally test thegeneralisability of these effects, a novel task was used – the Eriksenﬂanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974). This is widely used to induce re-sponse conﬂict, and assess cognitive control dynamics. The ﬂanker taskwas adapted and combined with the design from the aforementionedsubliminal priming studies (Chambon & Haggard, 2012; Wenke et al.,2010). Participants responded according to a target letter (e.g. left forS, right for H), which could appear ﬂanked by congruent (e.g.HHHHH) or incongruent ﬂankers (e.g. SSHSS). A coloured circle ap-peared after a variable delay, and participants judged their controlover that colour. In the incongruent ﬂanker condition, the presence ofﬂankers associated with the alternative action should lead to responseconﬂict, and thus an increase in RTs and errors.Experiment 1 aimed primarily to test how supraliminal stimuli rele-vant to action selection would affect the sense of agency in a situationwhere each action could produce one of a number of outcomes.Damen et al.'s results might suggest that the highest sense of agencywould be found in the incongruent condition, when participants hadto overcome conscious response conﬂict. However, if selection ﬂuencyhas a general effect on the sense of agency then the highest sense ofagency should be found in the congruent ﬂanker condition. Additional-ly, we included a neutral condition, with task-irrelevant ﬂankers (i.e.OOHOO) to try to distinguish facilitation and conﬂict effects on action(Kopp, Rist, & Mattler, 1996; Mansﬁeld, van der Molen, Falkenstein, &van Boxtel, 2013; Taylor, 1977), and on the sense of agency. Finally,some previous studies measured agency ratings at the end of eachtrial, while others measured agency ratings at the end of a block. Inthis study, we exploratorily tested half of the participants with eachmethod, though we did not have any strong prediction about interac-tions involving rating method.Importantly, free vs. instructed choice could modulate how aware-ness of priming stimuli would inﬂuence the sense of agency. For sublim-inal priming, having a higher or lower proportion of free choice trials,relative to forced choice, did not interact with the effects of action selec-tion on agency (Wenke et al., 2010). However, this may be different forconscious priming. A participant who consciously perceives a primemight recruit cognitive control resources to resist its inﬂuence, poten-tially increasing their sense of agency. This possibility was assessed inExperiment 2. Forced choice (i.e. instructed) trials were randomlyintermixed with free choice trials. A task-irrelevant target letterindicated a free choice trial, and appeared surrounded by task-relevant ﬂankers (e.g. HHOHH). Hence, actions could be congruent or3N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11incongruentwith theﬂankers, whether the actionwas instructed by thecentral, attended stimulus, or was endogenously chosen.Additionally, the timingof stimuli affecting action selection, and thusresponse conﬂict, could be important. A sufﬁcient amount of time maybe needed between the appearance of biasing information and aninstruction/go-signal to develop a clear awareness that one is either fol-lowing or going against that information. One might then come to havea stronger sense of agency for overcoming external biases. Similarly, ifthere is enough time, cognitive control processes can inhibit the auto-matic motor activation induced by primes or ﬂankers, thus abolishingtheir effects on motor performance (Flowers, 1990; Wascher,Reinhard, Wauschkuhn, & Verleger, 1999). In this case, choosing to goagainst the prime does not require any additional effort over choosingto go with the prime. Nonetheless, awareness of an external suggestioncould still inﬂuence one's sense of agency.To test the impact of the timing of conﬂicting stimuli, Experiment 3parametrically varied the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) betweenﬂankers and target. Flankers could precede the target by 500 ms(−500 SOA) or 100 ms (−100 SOA), be simultaneous with the target(0 SOA), or follow the target after 100 ms (+100 SOA). Maximal con-gruency effects on performance are found for−100 and 0 SOA condi-tions, but only small or no effects are found for the −500 and +100SOA conditions (Eriksen & Schultz, 1979; Flowers, 1990; Taylor, 1977;Wascher et al., 1999; Willemssen, Hoormann, Hohnsbein, &Falkenstein, 2004). We hypothesized that the −500 SOA conditionwould allow sufﬁcient time for suppression of the ﬂankers, and poten-tially alter effects of conﬂict on sense of agency. The−100 SOA condi-tion was expected to still show important effects on action selection,but the clear precedence of the ﬂankers to the target might alter thesubjective experience of conﬂict and agency. The 0 SOA conditionshould replicate our previous effects. In addition, the +100 SOA condi-tionwould serve to assesswhether the temporal precedence of ﬂankersor target might inﬂuence agency processing. If congruency between aﬁrst intention and the action performed is the important comparisonfor agency, as suggested by Chambon and Haggard (2012), then thiscondition should not affect agency even if it showed minor effects onperformance. Since choice did not interact with ﬂuency effects on agen-cy in Experiment 2, only forced choice trials were used.2. Experiment 12.1. Materials and methods2.1.1. ParticipantsThe study was approved by the UCL Research Ethics Committee.Twenty-ﬁve participants (13 female, mean = 23.62, SD = 3.98) wererecruited, based on an a priori power calculation. For this, we used pre-vious reports of prime compatibility on agency in ratings in operantreaction-time tasks (Chambon et al., 2013), since no previous study toour knowledge had investigated ﬂanker congruency effects on senseof agency over action outcomes. With a Cohen's dz of 0.66 (Chambonet al., 2013), power = 0.8, and alpha = 0.05, a minimum sample sizeof 21 was indicated, but a slightly larger number were recruited, in an-ticipation of possible attrition. Participants gave written informed con-sent to participate in the study and received payment of £7.5/hour. Allwere right-handed, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision, didnot suffer from colour blindness, and had no history of psychiatric orneurological disorders. There were two groups of participants: odd-numbered participants rated agency on every trial, while even-numbered participants rated agency at the end of each block. One par-ticipant in the block-wise rating group was excluded due to difﬁcultiesin distinguishing outcome colours.2.1.2. Apparatus and materialsParticipants were seated approximately 50 cm from a computerscreen. The experiment was programmed and stimuli delivered withPsychophysics Toolbox v3 (Brainard, 1997; Kleiner, Brainard, & Pelli,2007; Pelli, 1997), running on Matlab (MATLAB 8.1, The MathWorksInc., Natick, MA, 2013). During a trial, stimuli were presented in amono-spaced font, Lucida Console. A ﬁxation cross was presented in18 point font size. Target letters consisted of S's or H's, while ﬂankersconsisted of S's, H's or O's. These were presented in 30 point font size,with the 5 letter array subtending 3.2° visual angle. Participantsresponded by pressing one of two keys on a keyboard. Outcome stimuliconsisted of a circle of 2.8° presented in one of 6 colours (red, blue,green, yellow, orange and pink). Different colours were used in thetraining phase.All participants gave agency ratings on a 9-point Likert scale. Thetrial-wise ratings group completed the rating procedure on the comput-er. For the block-wise ratings, participantswere ﬁrst asked to rank orderthe coloured circles (cut-outs) on a sheet of paper, and then gave aLikert rating for each colour.2.1.3. Design and procedureThe task involvedmaking actions in response to targets, whichweresurrounded by distracting ﬂankers (see Fig. 1). The action triggered theappearance of a coloured circle – the action outcome. Participants wereinstructed to pay attention to the relation between their actions and theoutcomes that followed, as they were required to judge these relationsat the end of each trial or each block, for the respective group. Partici-pants had to respondwith a left or right key press according to a centraltarget letter (S or H, respectively). The assignment of target letters to aleft or right actionwas counterbalanced across participants. Participantswere instructed to ignore the ﬂankers and focus on the central letter.Flankers could be congruent with the central target – e.g. HHHHH, andthus with the required action; incongruent – e.g. SSHSS; or neutral –e.g. OOHOO (Matchock & Mordkoff, 2007; Taylor, 1977). Flanker-target congruency was randomly varied across trials.Outcome colours were dependent on both the congruency conditionand the action performed. Thus, each action (left vs. right) was associatedwith three outcomes, one for each congruency condition (cf.Wenke et al.,2010). The condition-to-colour mapping varied across the blocks, so par-ticipants had to learn the action-outcome relations anew in each block,and were informed of this. The six outcome colours were rotated in aLatin square across the 6 blocks, and the blockmapping was randomised.Each colour appeared once in each experimental condition, thus cancel-ling out any idiosyncratic colour preferences. To ensure that the frequencyof each coloured outcome was equal despite differences in error ratesacross ﬂanker-action congruency conditions, error trials were replacedat the end of a block. Additionally, the action-outcome intervalwas variedorthogonally to the congruency factor. This was not a variable of interest,but served as a dummy variable, ensuring that participants were exposedto a range of experiences, varying from low sense of agency (for delayedoutcomes) to high sense of agency (for less delayed outcomes; Haggard,Clark, & Kalogeras, 2002; Wenke et al., 2010).Participants were asked to judge how much control they felt overthe coloured circles that were triggered by their actions (Chambon &Haggard, 2012; Wenke et al., 2010). For the trial-wise rating group, a9-point Likert scale was presented at the end of each trial, where 1was labelled “No Control” and 9 was labelled “Total Control”. Theblock-wise ratings group completed a ranking and rating procedureon a paper sheet at the end of each block. Participants were instructedto rank order coloured circles on the sheet across 6 rankings, from“Most Control” to “Least Control”. After ranking, participants gave a rat-ing of their sense of control on the Likert scale described above.The study started with a training block of 24 trials, to allow partici-pants to get acquainted with the experiment and the agency ratingsprocedure. Participants were given a chance to ask questions and repeatthe training if desired. To avoid colour mapping repetitions, differentcolours were used during the training and experimental phases. At theend of the study, participants completed a short debrieﬁngquestionnaire.Fig. 1. Timeline of an example incongruent trial, for the trial-wise rating group. Participants responded according to a central target letter, surrounded by distractors. This triggered theappearance of a coloured circle, after a variable delay. Participants gave agency ratings at the end of each trial, for the trial-wise rating group; or completed a ranking/rating procedureat the end of each block, for the block-wise rating group.Fig. 2. Results for Experiment 1. Panel a) shows the mean reaction times across ﬂanker-action congruency conditions (collapsed across groups), and panel b) shows mean errorrates. Both facilitation and conﬂict effects can be seen in RTs and error rates. Yet, panelc) reveals that mean agency ratings show only an effect of conﬂict, such that agencyratings were signiﬁcantly reduced following incongruent relative to neutral andcongruent trials. Error bars show the within subjects 95% conﬁdence intervals for themain effect of congruency. *p b 0.05, **p b 0.001.4 N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–112.1.4. TimelineEach trial started with a ﬁxation cross presented for 500 ms. Theﬂankers and target array appeared for 100 ms (Gratton, Coles, &Donchin, 1992; Rodrı́guez-Fornells, Kurzbuch, & Münte, 2002). Partici-pants responded to the target within a 1.2 s window. If the responsewas correct, an outcome colour followed the response after a variabledelay of 100, 300 or 500 ms. Outcome duration was 300 ms. If an incor-rect response or no response was given, a black cross was presented for300ms. For the trial-wise rating group, the agency rating scale appearedafter 800 to 1200 ms, and remained on the screen until a response wasgiven. For both groups, the inter-trial interval varied randomly between1 and 1.5 s. Each block consisted of 72 trials, and there were 6 blocksoverall. At the end of each block, the block-wise rating group completedthe ranking/rating procedure. All participants were allowed to takeshort breaks between blocks.2.1.5. Data analysisFor the block-wise ratings group, rating sheets were coded and thedata computerised. Any blocks where mistakes were made in the rank-ing/rating procedure were excluded from analysis. Mistakes could in-volve mismatches between the ranking and rating, or the repetition ofa colour name. This resulted in the exclusion of 1 block in 2 participants,and 2 blocks in another participant.Reaction times (RTs), error rates and agency ratings were submittedto a 2 × 3 mixed-design analyses of variance (ANOVA). The between-subjects factor was group: trial- or block- wise ratings group; and thewithin-subjects factor was ﬂanker-action congruency: congruent, neu-tral or incongruent. Planned comparisons were used to test differencesbetween congruency levels. For the block-wise ratings group, agencyranks were submitted to a Friedman's non-parametric test to assessthe main effect of ﬂanker-action congruency. Wilcoxon pairwise testswere used for planned comparisons.Within subjects 95% conﬁdence in-tervals were obtained for the main effect of congruency (Loftus &Masson, 1994).2.2. Results2.2.1. Action selectionAnalyses of RTs showed a signiﬁcant effect of ﬂanker-action congru-ency (F(2, 44) = 64.46, p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.75; see Fig. 2.a), but no effect ofgroup nor interaction (Fs b 1). Planned comparisons revealed that RTswere signiﬁcantly slower (ps b 0.001) in the incongruent condition(mean = 514.78, SD = 67.84) compared to the neutral (mean =487.42, SD= 70.99) and congruent conditions (mean= 475.02, SD=65.25). RTs were also signiﬁcantly slower in the neutral compared tothe congruent condition (p= 0.004; see Fig. 1).Analyses of error rates revealed a signiﬁcant main effect of congru-ency (F(2, 44) = 18.55, p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.46, Greenhouse-Geiser correc-tion; see Fig. 2.b). Planned comparisons showed that participants madesigniﬁcantly more errors in the incongruent (mean = 9.82%, SD =8.39%) compared to neutral (mean= 5.79%, SD= 5.65%; incongruentvs. neutral: p = 0.001), and congruent conditions (mean = 4.29%,SD= 4.79%; incongruent vs. congruent: p b 0.001). The neutral condi-tion also led to signiﬁcantly more errors than the congruent condition(p= 0.017). Additionally, there was a signiﬁcant main effect of group(F(1, 22) = 5.73, p = 0.026, ƞp2 = 0.21), as the trial-wise ratings groupmade signiﬁcantly more errors than the block-wise ratings group. Thispresumably reﬂects higher task difﬁculty for the trial-wise ratinggroup, as they had to give agency ratings in each trial, which meantthey had to press different keys. In contrast, the block-wise ratinggroup could focus exclusively on responding to the target, and couldkeep their ﬁngers on the response keys throughout a block. Finally,there was no signiﬁcant interaction between group and congruency(F(1, 22) = 2.65, p = 0.10, ƞp2 = 0.11, Greenhouse-Geiser correction).However, this result should be interpreted with particular caution, be-cause our studymay not have had sufﬁcient statistical power to investi-gate interactions involving between-subjects effects of group.5N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–112.2.2. Agency ratingsThe ANOVA on agency ratings revealed a signiﬁcant main effect ofcongruency (F(2, 44) = 4.70, p=0.014, ƞp2 = 0.18; see Fig. 2.c). Plannedcomparisons conﬁrmed that the incongruent condition (mean= 5.13,SD=1.57) led to signiﬁcantly lower ratings compared to the congruent(mean= 5.66, SD= 1.74; incongruent vs. congruent: p= 0.013), andthe neutral condition (mean=5.42, SD=1.63; incongruent vs. neutral:p=0.039), whereas the congruent and neutral conditionswere not sig-niﬁcantly different (p= 0.21). There was no signiﬁcant effect of group(F(2, 44)= 1.29, p=0.29, ƞp2 = 0.013), nor a signiﬁcant group x congru-ency interaction (F(1, 22) = 0.30, p= 0.59, ƞp2 = 0.055).For the block-wise group, agency rankswere also analysed, and resultsshowed a signiﬁcant main effect of congruency (χ2 (2) = 8.73, p =0.013). Planned comparisons replicated the pattern of results seen forthe agency ratings: the incongruent condition (median = 3.25, SD =0.99) led to signiﬁcantly lower agency ranks than the congruent condition(median= 4.00, SD= 0.66; incongruent vs. congruent: Z=−2.57, p=0.010, r=−0.37), and the neutral condition (median=3.50, SD=0.50;incongruent vs. neutral: Z =−2.27, p = 0.024, r =−0.33); whereastherewas no signiﬁcant difference between congruent and neutral condi-tions (Z=−0.99, p= 0.32, r=−0.14).2.3. DiscussionExperiment 1 showed that ﬂanker-action congruency inﬂuenced ac-tion selection as predicted. The sense of agency over action outcomeswas signiﬁcantly reduced following dysﬂuent action selection, com-pared to ﬂuent selection. This replicates recent work demonstrating aprospective contribution of action selection processes to the sense ofagency (Chambon & Haggard, 2012; Chambon et al., 2013; Sidaruset al., 2013; Wenke et al., 2010), and generalises the ﬁnding across dif-ferent behavioural tasks. So far,most studies used subliminal priming tomanipulate action selection (cf. Chambon et al., 2014b), or assessedagency over the action (Morsella et al., 2009). To the best of our knowl-edge, the present study is the ﬁrst to show a reduction in the sense ofagency over action outcomes following dysﬂuent action selection, eventhough participants could consciously perceive the stimuli that inﬂu-enced action selection.Previous studies (Chambon & Haggard, 2012; Chambon et al., 2013;Sidarus et al., 2013;Wenke et al., 2010) used subliminal priming toma-nipulate action selection in order to preclude the explicit awareness thatone's action was manipulated. Additionally, this increased uncertaintyabout the outcomes, since they were contingent on both the actionand the congruency between the (invisible) prime and the action.That is, as the primes were not consciously perceived, the relation be-tween prime-action congruency and speciﬁc outcomes could not berepresented, hence outcomes were never fully predictable. In contrast,as participants were aware of the ﬂankers in the present study, theycould learn the full contingency schedule between the letter stringsand outcome colours. For example, in a given block, participants couldlearn that the letter array “SSSSS”was followed by a green circle, where-as “HHSHH” was followed by a red circle. Debrieﬁng conﬁrmed thatmost participants were aware of this relation. Moreover, the causes ofdifﬁculties in action selection, i.e. incongruent ﬂankers, were now clear-ly available to participants. Nevertheless, the same effects of action se-lection ﬂuency on agency ratings were found, irrespective ofperceptual awareness of the stimulus trigger.Moreover, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the ﬂuency effectson agency across the two rating procedures, i.e. trial- vs. block-wise rat-ings. While the same effects had been shown using both procedures,this was the ﬁrst study to combine them. Previous studies suggest thataction selection ﬂuency affects agency online (Chambon et al., 2014c;Chambon et al., 2013). Additionally, the association between differentﬂuency experiences and ensuing outcomes can be retained in memory,at least for long enough to accumulate over the course of a blockof trials,as seen here and in Wenke et al. (2010).The inclusion of a neutral condition allowed us to distinguish an en-hanced sense of agency due to facilitation of action selection, from a re-duction of agency due to response conﬂict. Only the effect of conﬂict inaction selection yielded a signiﬁcant modulation of agency ratings (seeFig. 2). When ﬂankers were congruent with the central target, partici-pantswere faster andmade less errors, thanwhen the ﬂankerswere neu-tral. Additionally, incongruent ﬂankers led to signiﬁcantly slower RTs andmore errors, compared to neutralﬂankers. However,while agency ratingswere signiﬁcantly lower following incongruent ﬂankers, compared toneutral and congruent ﬂankers, the trend for higher ratings followingcongruent compared to neutral ﬂankers was not statistically signiﬁcant.It should be noted that other baseline conditions, and different tasks,could yield a different pattern of facilitation/conﬂict (Jonides & Mack,1984). The present study used task-irrelevant stimuli as neutralﬂankers, which yielded both facilitation and conﬂict effects on perfor-mance. As congruency effects on agency ratings are smaller than con-gruency effects on RTs, the absence of a facilitation effect could resultfrom a lack of statistical power within-subjects. Additionally,between-subjects design resulted in a small sample in each group, giv-ing relatively low statistical power for investigating between-subjectseffects and interactions. These considerations mean that null between-subjects effects should be interpreted with particular care. Importantly,however, these between-subjects effects did not form the focus of ourpredictions. The key predictions, and therefore the key results, comefrom main effects of congruency on agency ratings. In our design,these are based on within-subjects comparisons. Further, our resultsare consistent with those obtained with the subliminal priming para-digm (Chambon & Haggard, 2012). There, the reduction in agency rat-ings following incongruent, compared to neutral primes, was largerthan the increase in ratings following congruent primes, though neitherwas statistically signiﬁcant. A positive sense of agencymay be a “defaultstate” (Blakemore et al., 2002; Sidarus et al., 2013). Reduced agencymaybe triggered by disruptions in the intention-action-outcome chain,which may produce a salient experience relevant to agency judgement(Chambon et al., 2014b).Our results contrast sharply with those of Damen et al. (2014). Thatstudy reported higher agency ratings when participants chose an actionincongruentwith a supraliminal prime, compared to when they chose aprime-congruent action. Importantly, free choice trials were used intheir study, whereas here participants had to follow the instruction ofa central ﬂanker. Experiment 2, therefore, investigated whether choicemay interact with the effects of ﬂanker congruency on sense of agency,when biasing stimuli are consciously perceived. Free and forced choicetargetswere randomly intermixed, such that actions could be congruentor incongruent with the ﬂankers, whether the action was instructed bythe central, attended stimulus, or was endogenously chosen.3. Experiment 23.1. Materials and methods3.1.1. ParticipantsParticipant recruitment and study approval was as in Experiment 1.Twenty-four participants were tested (13 female, mean= 21.50, SD=3.02).3.1.2. Design and procedureTesting conditions and stimuliwere the same as in Experiment 1, ex-cept that instead of a neutral ﬂanker condition, the letter O now servedas a neutral target in free choice trials. In free choice trials, the neutraltarget was surrounded by ﬂankers associated with a left or right action.For example, if the array “SSOSS” was presented, participants couldchoosewhether to act congruently with the ﬂankers andmake a left ac-tion, or act incongruently with the ﬂankers and choose a right action.Thus, ﬂanker-action congruencywas not related to the stimuli, but rath-er reﬂected the participants' action choice. In forced choice trials, theFig. 3.Results for Experiment 2. Panel a) shows themean reaction times for free and forcedchoice trials, andﬂanker-action congruency conditions. Congruency effectswere larger forforced choice trials, and RTs in incongruent trials were slower in forced choice conditions.Panel b) shows the percentage of trials in which participants chose the action that wascongruent or incongruent with the ﬂankers in free choice trials, revealing a bias towardsﬂanker-congruent choices. For forced choice trials, panel c) shows the mean errors ratesin ﬂanker-congruent or incongruent actions, with more errors being made inincongruent trials. Finally, panel d) shows that, for mean agency ratings, there was onlya main effect of ﬂanker-action congruency, with lower ratings following ﬂanker-incongruent actions, for both free and forced choice trials. Error bars show the pairwisewithin subjects 95% conﬁdence intervals, calculated separately for free and forced choicetrials. *p b 0.05, **p b 0.001.6 N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11congruent or incongruent conditions were as described in Experiment1. The new 2 (choice: free vs. forced) × 2 (congruency: congruent vs. in-congruent) design meant that 8 outcome colours were used, 4 associat-ed with each hand, 1 per choice × congruency condition. The colourswere Latin square rotated across 8 blocks of 64 trials, and thecondition-colour block mappings were randomised.All participants gave agency ratings at the end of each trial, thus thetrial timelinewas the same as the trial-wise group in Experiment 1. Only2 action-outcome intervals were used (200 and 400 ms), to reduce theoverall number of conditions. As in Experiment 1, the study began witha training block of 32 trials, and ended with a debrieﬁng questionnaire.3.1.3. Data analysisReaction times were submitted to a 2 × 2 ANOVA, with choice (freevs. forced) and ﬂanker-action congruency (congruent vs. incongruent)as within-subjects factors. Agency ratings were submitted to a similarANOVA, with action-outcome interval (200 vs. 400ms) as an additionalwithin-subjects factor. For free choice trials, the proportion of ﬂankercongruent choices was analysed with a one-sample t-test against a 0.5chance level. For forced choice trials, error rates were analysed with apaired-samples t-test comparing congruent and incongruent condi-tions. Within subjects 95% conﬁdence intervals for pairwise compari-sons were calculated separately for free and forced choice trials(Pﬁster & Janczyk, 2013).3.2. Results3.2.1. Action selectionAnalyses of RTs revealed no signiﬁcant main effect of choice (F(1,23)=1.65, p=0.21,ƞp2=0.067), a signiﬁcantmain effect of congruency(F(1, 23) = 20.76, p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.47; see Fig. 3.a), and a signiﬁcantchoice × congruency interaction (F(1,23) = 5.67, p = 0.026, ƞp2 =0.20). Simple effects t-tests showed a signiﬁcant congruency effect forforced choice trials, i.e. slower RTs for the incongruent (mean =544.28, SD = 88.73) than the congruent condition (mean = 513.09,SD=83.49), and a similar modest trend for free choice trials (free con-gruent:mean=515.27, SD=88.85; free incongruent:mean=525.50,SD = 96.85; one-tailed, free: t(23) = −1.72, p = 0.050, Cohen'sdz=−0.35; forced: t(23) =−4.68, p b 0.001, Cohen's dz=0.96). Addi-tionally, incongruent trials led to signiﬁcantly slower RTs in forced com-pared to free choice (t(23) = −2.18, p = 0.040, Cohen's dz = 0.44).Choice did not affect RTs in congruent trials (t b 1).In free choice trials, ﬂanker congruent choices were made in 57.47%(SD= 5.72) of trials (see Fig. 3.c). A one sample t-test showed that theproportion ofﬂanker-congruent choiceswas signiﬁcantly different fromchance (t(23)= 6.40, p b 0.001, Cohen's dz=1.31). For forced choice tri-als, a paired samples t-test on error rates showed that the incongruentcondition (mean=19.33%, SD=11.73) led to signiﬁcantly more errorsthan the congruent condition (mean = 14.85%, SD = 10.15;t(23) =−4.39, p b 0.001, Cohen's dz =−0.90; see Fig. 3.b).3.2.2. Agency ratingsAn ANOVA on agency ratings revealed a signiﬁcant main effect ofcongruency (F(1, 23) = 12.70, p = 0.002, ƞp2 = 0.36). Flanker-incongruent actions (mean=6.25, SD= 1.07) led to lower agency rat-ings than ﬂanker-congruent actions (mean= 5.80, SD= 1.23; see Fig.3.d). Critically, there was no signiﬁcant main effect of choice (F(1,23)=1.48, p=0.24,ƞp2=0.061), nor a signiﬁcant choice by congruencyinteraction (F(1, 23) = 2.32, p= 0.14, ƞp2 = 0.092).There was a marginal effect of action-outcome interval (F(1, 23) =3.65, p = 0.069, ƞp2 = 0.14), such that ratings for the long interval(400ms;mean=6.08, SD=1.10) were higher than for the short inter-val (200 ms; mean = 6.01, SD = 1.12). These results are inconsistentwith previous ﬁndings using other tasks (Chambon & Haggard, 2012;Chambon et al., 2014c; Haggard et al., 2002; Sidarus et al., 2013). In pre-vious studies, using a wider range of intervals, higher ratings werefound for shorter intervals, recalling Hume's concept of temporal conti-guity as a cue for causation (Hume, 1740). Importantly, action-outcomeinterval did not interactwith the factors of interest – choice and congru-ency (Fs b 1). Since action-outcome interval was not a factor of interest,this factor will not be discussed further.3.3. DiscussionExperiment 2 showed that action selection was inﬂuenced byﬂankers in both free and forced choice trials. Flankers biased choice,such that participants were ~7%more likely to ‘freely’ select actions cor-responding to the ﬂanker suggestion, compared to against it. Similarbiases have been found using subliminal priming (Mattler & Palmer,2012; Schlaghecken & Eimer, 2004; Wenke et al., 2010). Flanker-incongruent actions led to signiﬁcantly slower RTs in forced choice tri-als, with a similar trend in free choice trials. Additionally, incongruentforced choice trials led to signiﬁcantly slower RTs than incongruentfree choice trials. Hence, the cost on performance of freely choosing anaction incongruent with the ﬂankers was smaller than the cost of7N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11following an instruction with incongruent ﬂankers. Consistently, agreater ﬂexibility for changes of mind has been shown for free, com-pared to forced, choices (Fleming, Mars, Gladwin, & Haggard, 2009).Crucially, response conﬂict, induced by supraliminal ﬂankers, signiﬁ-cantly reduced the sense of agency over action outcomes for bothinstructed and freely chosen actions.Our results additionally show that the discrepancy between ourﬁndings and those of Damen et al. (2014) cannot be explained bywhether participants could freely choose which action to perform, orhad to follow an instruction. Although null effects should be interpretedwith care, the absence of an interaction between choice and congruencyseen here is consistent with a previous subliminal priming study(Wenke et al., 2010). In Wenke et al.'s (Wenke et al., 2010) study, freeand forced choice trials were intermixed, and free choices were effec-tively biased by subliminal primes, similarly to our results. On theother hand, Damen et al. (2014) found little effect of sub- or supralimi-nal primes on choice, possibly due to the exclusive use of free choice tri-als. This could have allowed participants to decidewhich action tomakebefore the beginning of a trial, and thus before the primewas presented.In fact, it has been shown that priming effects seen in blocks ofintermixed free and forced choice trials are abolished in blocks withonly free choice trials (Klapp & Haas, 2005; Schlaghecken & Eimer,2004).Nonetheless, Damen et al. (2014) did ﬁnd priming effects on agency.The authors argued that the observed reduction in the sense of agencywhen following a conscious prime could have been due to a reducedsense of freedom. Using only free choice trials could have potentially in-creased the overall sense of freedom experienced in the task, relative tomixed conditions, rendering a reduction in that perceived freedom, dueto conscious biases,more salient. This sense of freedommay affect agen-cy at a higher, conceptual level, and independently of action selection.Another relevant difference between the two studies, which is relat-ed to action selection, lies in stimulus timing. In Damen et al., the primepreceded the go signal by 250ms in the supraliminal priming condition,and there was no time limit for response. In contrast, in our study,ﬂankers and targets were presented simultaneously, speed wasemphasised, and a tight responsewindowwas imposed. Hence, a ‘sufﬁ-cient’ amount of time may be necessary for a realisation that one's ac-tions are being biased, and thus override the normal relation betweenselection ﬂuency and sense of agency. To assess whether the timing ofconﬂict stimuli may inﬂuence the sense of agency, the interval betweenﬂankers and target onset was parametrically varied in Experiment 3.4. Experiment 34.1. Materials and methods4.1.1. ParticipantsParticipant recruitment and study approval was as in Experiments 1& 2. Twenty-six participants were tested (13 female, mean age=23.08,SD=3.63). One participant was excluded as she did not follow instruc-tions, and sometimes used only one hand to press the left and right key.4.1.2. Design and procedureTesting conditions were the same as in Experiment 2, but with onlyforced choice trials. Additionally, theﬂanker-target stimulus onset asyn-chrony (SOA) was randomly varied across the trials. Flankers could ap-pear: 500 ms before target onset (−500 SOA); 100 ms before targetonset (−100 SOA), simultaneously with the target (0 SOA); or 100 msafter the target (+100 SOA). To accommodate the varying SOA condi-tions, target duration was now set to 150 ms (Wascher et al., 1999).Flankers were displayed until the target duration elapsed. Action-outcome intervals were also changed to 100 and 500 ms to enhancethe discriminability of the 2 intervals, while keeping the experimentalsession short.Each block included 4 outcome colours, one per action × congruencycondition, orthogonal to the ﬂanker-target SOA conditions. To obtain asimilar number of trials per SOA× congruency condition to the previousexperiments, 12 blocks of 64 trials were used. To ensure that each out-come colour appeared only once for each action x congruency condition,12 colours were used overall in the experiment. These were rotatedwith a Latin square across the 12 blocks, in groups of 4, and the blockmappings were randomised. The 12 colours were shown to participantsat the beginning of the study to conﬁrm that they could reliably distin-guish them. Participants were also instructed that the colours or the re-lation between action and colours could change across blocks, so theyneeded to learn them anew in each block. As in the previous experi-ments, the study began with a training block of 32 trials, and endedwith a debrieﬁng questionnaire.4.1.3. Data analysisRTs and error rates were submitted to a 4 × 2 repeated measuresANOVA with the factors ﬂanker-target SOA (−500, −100, 0, +100)andﬂanker-action congruency (congruent vs. incongruent). Agency rat-ings were submitted to a similar ANOVA that additionally included thefactor action-outcome interval (100 vs. 500 ms). Greenhouse-Geissercorrections were used whenever the sphericity assumption was violat-ed. Bonferroni adjusted post-hoc tests were used to probe the main ef-fect of SOA. The SOA × congruency interactions were investigated withpaired samples t-tests,with a Bonferroni adjustment, to test congruencyeffects across SOAs. Within subjects 95% conﬁdence intervals for thepairwise differences between congruency conditions were calculatedseparately for each SOA (Pﬁster & Janczyk, 2013).4.2. Results4.2.1. Action selectionAnalyses of RTs revealed signiﬁcant main effects of SOA (F(3, 72) =240.77, p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.91), and congruency (F(1, 24) = 60.40,p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.72), and a signiﬁcant SOA × congruency interaction(F(1, 24) = 9.28, p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.28). Post-hoc tests to explore themain effect of SOA showed that all pairwise comparisons betweenSOAs were signiﬁcant (ps b 0.001). As Fig. 4.a shows, RTs were fasterwith earlier presentation of the ﬂankers. Probing theSOA × congruency interaction revealed signiﬁcant congruency effectsat each SOA (ps b 0.001), except at −500 SOA (t(1, 24) = −1.04,p = 0.31, Cohen’s dz =−0.21).Analyses of error rates showed no signiﬁcant effect of SOA (F(1, 24)=1.08, p= 0.36, ƞp2 = 0.04), a signiﬁcant main effect of congruency (F(1,24) = 31.61, p b 0.001, ƞp2 = 0.57), and a signiﬁcant SOA × congruencyinteraction (F(1, 24) = 5.01, p = 0.003, ƞp2 = 0.17). Post hoc tests re-vealed signiﬁcant congruency effects for −100 and 0 SOA (−100SOA: t(1, 24) = −5.08, p b 0.001, Cohen's dz = −1.02; 0 SOA: t(1,24) = −3.54, p = 0.002, Cohen's dz = 0.71), but not for −500 or+100 SOA (−500: t(1, 24) =−0.39, p = 0.70, Cohen's dz =−0.078;+100: t(1, 24) =−1.58, p= 0.13, Cohen's dz =−0.32; see Fig. 4.b).4.2.2. Agency ratingsAnalyses of agency ratings revealed a marginal main effect of con-gruency (F(1, 24) = 3.99, p= 0.057, ƞp2 = 0.14), in the predicted direc-tion: incongruent ﬂankers (mean = 6.42, SD = 1.57) led to lowerratings compared to congruent ﬂankers (mean= 6.67, SD= 1.47; seeFig. 4.c). Notably, there was no main effect of SOA (F(3, 72) = 0.87,p=0.46, ƞp2 = 0.035), and no interaction between SOA and congruency(F(3, 72) = 0.40, p = 0.75, ƞp2 = 0.017). The absence of SOA effects onagency ratings can be clearly observed in Fig. 4.c.Finally, there was a trend towards a main effect of action-outcomeinterval (F(1, 24) = 3.27, p = 0.083, ƞp2 = 0.12), with long intervals(500 ms; mean = 6.57, SD = 1.47) leading to higher agency ratingsthan short intervals (100 ms; mean = 6.53, SD = 1.50). There wasalso a marginal interaction between congruency and action-outcomeFig. 4. Results for Experiment 3. Panel a) showsmean reaction times across ﬂanker-targetstimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs), and ﬂanker-action congruency conditions. Therewere congruency effects at all SOAs except−500 ms. On panel b) the mean error ratesper condition are shown, with larger congruency effects at −100 and 0 SOAs. Finally,panel c) depicts the mean agency ratings across conditions, and only reveals a maineffect of congruency, with incongruent trials leading to lower ratings than congruenttrials, regardless of ﬂanker-target SOA. Error bars show the within subjects 95%conﬁdence intervals for the congruency pairwise differences, for each SOA. * - p b 0.05,** - p b 0.001.8 N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11interval (F(1, 24) = 3.48, p=0.074, ƞp2 = 0.13), whichwas not a focus ofprediction, and so was not explored further. The remaining interactionswere not signiﬁcant (ps N 0.18). Both action-outcome interval resultsare inconsistent with previous priming studies (Chambon & Haggard,2012; Chambon et al., 2014c; Sidarus et al., 2013). Even though the dif-ference between the two intervals was increased, relative to Exp. 2,varying the ﬂanker-target SOA may have changed the perception ofthe subsequent action-outcome interval, and disrupted its normal ef-fects on agency. Since action-outcome interval was not a manipulationof interest, this will not be discussed further.4.3. DiscussionResults showed that ﬂanker effects on action selection were modu-lated by the ﬂanker-target SOA. As predicted, ﬂankers had no effect onaction selection at−500 SOA, but incongruent ﬂankers did lead to per-formance costs with the other SOAs (see Fig. 4.a and 4.b). Additionally,there was a gradual increase in RTs with increasing SOA, possibly dueto an alerting effect of early ﬂankers, also found in previous studies(Flowers, 1990; Taylor, 1977; Wascher et al., 1999; Willemssen et al.,2004). Critically, there was no signiﬁcant interaction between ﬂanker-target SOA and congruency on agency ratings. That is, incongruent con-ditions led to (marginally) lower agency ratings than congruentconditions, but did so similarly across ﬂanker-target SOAs (see Fig.4.c), including SOAs where ﬂankers had no performance effects.These results are inconsistent with the hypothesis outlined above ofan interaction between the timingof conﬂict during action selection andthe direction of ﬂuency effects on agency. That hypothesis suggestedthat SOAs favouring successful inhibitory cognitive control might leadto higher agency ratings for incongruent, rather than congruentﬂankers. At−500 SOA, we found efﬁcient inhibitory cognitive control,resulting in no congruency effect on RTs or error rates, yet sense of agen-cy was still higher for congruent than incongruent trials. Therefore, theresults of Damen et al. (2014) cannot be explained by a longer timedelay between a biasing inﬂuence and action allowing the recruitmentof cognitive control to efﬁciently overcome those biases.The dissociation seen here between congruency effects on motorperformance and on agency ratings is, however, consistent withDamen et al. (2014), where priming inﬂuenced agency but not actionselection. The authors argued that the effects were independent of se-lection ﬂuency, but rather due to priming of conceptual representationsof action, or to inﬂuencing the experience of freedom. A dissociation be-tweenmotor effects and agency was also found in a subliminal primingstudy, using NCE priming (Chambon & Haggard, 2012). It was proposedthat congruency between an initial prime's suggestion and the executedaction could serve as a ﬂuency signal that would increase the sense ofagency.However, neither of these proposals can fully account for our results,since they would predict that only congruency between the ﬁrst inten-tion and the action shouldmatter. Our results show that the appearanceof incongruent ﬂankers 100ms after the target still affected the sense ofagency, even though the action performed remained congruent withthe ﬁrst intention, which was presumably triggered by the target.Therefore, it seems that holding conﬂicting intentions is key for the ob-served reduction in the sense of agency, rather than the precise dynam-ics of the selection process. Importantly, this condition still led tocongruency effects on motor performance, consistent with earlier re-ports (Eriksen & Schultz, 1979; Taylor, 1977). Action selection processestake time, and will be susceptible to disruptions occurring within agiven time window. When using arrow stimuli in the ﬂanker task, noperformance effects were found with a + 100 SOA (Wascher et al.,1999). Thus, the window in which action selection can be disruptedmay vary depending on whether the stimulus is imperative in nature.Our results are compatible with a view of the sense of agency asresulting from an integration of information about conﬂict over awider time-window than the time-window of action selection. It hasbeen argued that ﬂuency/conﬂict signals are relatively non-speciﬁcwith respect to their sources, and have only a general inﬂuence(Winkielman et al., 2015). The temporal sensitivity of such signals,and of their integration in the sense of agency, may be low relative tothe precise temporal dynamics of action selection and execution. To bet-ter characterise this window of temporal integration, future studiescould include more ﬂanker-target asynchrony values. In particular,onemight askwhether ﬂankers continue to inﬂuence the sense of agen-cy even when presented so late that they no longer inﬂuence reactiontimes.5. General discussionOverall, our results suggest that the sense of agency over an actionoutcome is informedby cognitive processes occurringprior to action ex-ecution, particularly those processes involved in initiating a correctrather than an inappropriate action. In many situations, action controlrequires identifying an appropriate target, and then selecting and initi-ating the corresponding action, while avoiding the inﬂuence ofdistractors. The feeling of control over the consequences of action is in-ﬂuence by these processes. Part of the content of agency judgements ap-pears to derive frommonitoring processes that detect response conﬂictduring action selection.9N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11Interestingly, we found that sense of agency was insensitive to thespeciﬁc dynamics of conﬂict at the level of motor performance. Thus,the prospective, premotor signals that inﬂuence sense of agency appearto signal a disruption in action selection whenever conﬂict emerges, re-gardless of whether the conﬂict is successfully resolved, and of how per-formance is affected (cf. Chambon & Haggard, 2012). Additionally, thisputativemonitoring system can integrate information about action selec-tion in a timewindow that is broader than thatwhich affects selection at amotor level.Moreover, the effects of action selection on the sense of agen-cy can be independent of the effects of choice, and of the effects of beingaware of inﬂuences on one's action or choice. That is, regardless ofwheth-er we have a choice in what to do, and whether we are aware of stimulithat could bias our decisions, dysﬂuent or difﬁcult action selection canlead to a reduction in our sense of agency over action outcomes. Finally,we have shown that these effects generalise across tasks.Our results imply that the sense of agency depends on some internalsignal related to selecting between alternative actions. In that regard,our results are compatible with ‘metacognitive’ theories of agency(Metcalfe & Greene, 2007). Where might these internal signals befound within the motor system? The supplementary motor area(SMA) is necessary for triggering the automatic inhibition processesthought to underlie NCE priming, whereas upstream regions such asthe pre-SMA are not (Sumner et al., 2007). Such automatic inhibitionprocesses were not found to disrupt the sense of agency (Chambon &Haggard, 2012). The pre-SMAhas in turn been implicated inmonitoringresponse conﬂict, elicited both by conscious and unconscious stimuli(vanGaal, Scholte, Lamme, Fahrenfort, & Ridderinkhof, 2010). Relatedly,the premotor cortex, but not the primarymotor area, has been shown tocontribute to metacognitive judgements of perceptual conﬁdence(Fleming et al., 2014). More speciﬁc to the present ﬁndings, an fMRIstudy (Chambon et al., 2013) used the subliminal priming paradigm tostudy congruency effects on the sense of agency. This study showedthat the dorsolateral pre-frontal cortex was sensitive to response con-ﬂict, and was associatedwith the angular gyrus, wherein higher activitywas linked to a greater reduction in agency ratings. Together, thesestudies suggest that the metacognitive monitoring of action selectionthat informs the sense of agency,may rely on higher-order action repre-sentations in premotor and prefrontal areas, rather than low-levelmotor signals in the primary motor cortex.Importantly, the congruency effects on agency seen here are not dueto a retrospective inferential process, but rely on prospective signalsfrom action monitoring processes. As the ﬂankers were clearly visible,one might be tempted to think that the observed effects could resultfrom a retrospective comparison between the ﬂankers and the target,or action, namely at a conceptual level. However, this would implythat neutral ﬂankers would lead to a loss of agency, as they were visiblydifferent from the target. Instead, the effects seen here appear speciﬁcal-ly related to conﬂict in action selection. Experiment 1 showed no signif-icant difference between congruent and neutral ﬂankers, but only asigniﬁcant reduction in agency following incongruent ﬂankers. Al-though such null effects should be interpreted with care, especiallydue to potentially low statistical power, they suggest that a perceptualor conceptual mismatch may not be sufﬁcient to explain our results.Rather, an incongruent action plan should be triggered at some stage,for a reduced sense of agency. In fact, subliminal priming was used inprevious studies to manipulate action selection but preclude suchpost-hoc, conceptual inferences. This method showed a consistenttrend for a larger cost of conﬂict on agency ratings than a facilitation ef-fect (Chambon & Haggard, 2012). Our Experiment 3 is also consistentwith a prospective account: the presence of conﬂictingmotor plans dur-ing the trial led to a loss of agency, even when the interval betweenﬂankers and target was sufﬁcient to resolve the conﬂict. The subjectiveexperience of conﬂict may linger, even after themotor conﬂict has beenresolved. Conﬂict signals are especially motivationally signiﬁcant sincethey can indicate a need to adjust subsequent behaviour (Botvinick &Braver, 2015; Holroyd & Yeung, 2012). As such, theymay have a greaterimpact on the sense of agency than ﬂuency experiences. Additionally, apositive sense of agency may be a ‘default’, and thus we are especiallysensitive to disruptions to the normal ﬂow of voluntary action(Chambon et al., 2014b).Our results clearly contrast with some reports that effort or difﬁcultycan enhance sense of agency (cf. Damen et al., 2014;Demanet, De Baene,Arrington, & Brass, 2013). Why, then, do effort and conﬂict sometimesincrease sense of agency, and sometimes reduce it? The relation be-tween ﬂuency or effort and the sense of agency is complex and remainspoorly understood (Nahmias, 2005; Pacherie, 2008). Oftenwhen inten-tional actions unfold without any obstacles, the sense of ﬂuency can re-sult in a strong sense of agency, as “everything went according to plan”.Yet, effort can also enhance the sense of agency.When a need for cogni-tive control can be anticipated, some proactive conﬂict processing(Braver, 2012) may become part of the action plan. This may highlightthe sense of self, and of being engaged with task at hand. In contrast,when disruptions are unexpected, executive control will be triggeredreactively by conﬂict signals. We speculate that these two sources ofcognitive control may have different effects on sense of agency. In par-ticular, proactively embedding effort into the action planmay be associ-ated with an increase in the sense of agency (I knew it would be tricky,but I managed it), however, the unexpected or unwanted need foradded effort could instead lead to a reduction in our sense of agency(suddenly I had to deal with all these things).In addition, the context or the framing of a task couldmodulate howconﬂict inﬂuences agency. In Damen et al.'s study, each action triggereda speciﬁc outcome (a beep with a given pitch) after a variable delay (0–600ms). Participants were instructed that sometimes theywould causethe beep to occur (the outcome), but other times it would be caused bythe computer. Thus, the task and the agency question were framed interms of attributing the cause of the outcome to the self, or to another.Also, subliminal and supraliminal priming were randomised, so partici-pants presumably experienced wide variations in degree of inﬂuencefrom the primes. In contrast, our studies focused on the instrumental as-pect of agency, as participantswere asked to judge the strength of the re-lation between various actions and outcomes, rather than invokingalternative agents. That is, our study focused on ‘concomitant variation’between a single agent's different instrumental actions and their out-comes, rather than on attribution of outcomes to agents. Both processesare relevant to agency, but conﬂict between alternative actions mighthave different effects on each of them. Further research is needed toclarify the conditions under which conﬂict can enhance, rather than re-duce, the sense of agency.Our results are consistent with previous proposals that the sense ofagency integrates information from multiple sources (Synofzik et al.,2008), and over time (Chambon et al., 2014b; Farrer, Valentin, &Hupé, 2013). In addition to retrospective processes related to outcomemonitoring, there is also a prospective component related to action se-lection (see Fig. 5). Action selection monitoring can detect conﬂictingintentions and prospectively signal a loss of agency. After this, outcomemonitoring can assess action outcome intervals and outcome identityfor a mismatch with predictions or expectations, and retrospectivelysignal a loss of agency. If the smooth ﬂow between intention – action– outcome remains unperturbed, the sense of agency can remain at adefault level. Additionally, higher-order beliefs and contextual informa-tion can also inﬂuence the sense of agency (Moore & Fletcher, 2012;Synofzik et al., 2008). We found that choice, awareness of biases andtiming of conﬂict did not interact with the effects of selection ﬂuency.However, they may make independent contributions to the sense ofagency, depending on context, or other cues.6. ConclusionAcross the experiments reported here, the sense of agency was pro-spectively informed by monitoring the processes of action selection.When conﬂicting intentions were present, the sense of agency overFig. 5. Prospective and retrospective contributions to the sense of agency. The sense ofagency is prospectively informed by monitoring action selection. When this actionmonitoring system detects an intention that conﬂicts with the to-be-executed intention,it sends a signal indicating a loss of agency. Once the action outcome is known, this canbe compared with a prediction of the outcome, based on the executed action. Whenthere is a mismatch between the predicted and actual outcomes, an outcomemonitoring system can retrospectively signal a loss of agency. If the normal ﬂow fromintention, to action, to outcome is disrupted, the sense of agency is reduced.10 N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11action outcomes was reduced. The effect of conﬂict on the sense ofagency was independent of awareness of the causes of conﬂict, of freevs. instructed action selection, and of the timing of conﬂicting informa-tion during action selection. Finally, these effects generalised acrosstasks, from subliminal priming of actions, to the Eriksen ﬂanker task,thus revealing a new approach for further investigating prospectivecontributions to the sense of agency.These ﬁndings support the view that the sense of agency is especiallysensitive to a disruption in the normal ﬂow of intentional action, from anintention or goal to its corresponding action, to the desired/expected con-sequences (Chambon et al., 2014b; Haggard & Chambon, 2012). Impor-tantly, ﬂuency of action selection was independent of the actualstatistical contingency between actions and outcomes in these experi-ments. Selection ﬂuency does not guarantee successful agency: one canknow exactly what to do, and still fail to produce an intended outcome.However, selection ﬂuency may serve as a useful heuristic to guide oursense of agency, as it often predicts successful outcomes (Haggard &Chambon, 2012). Prospective agency processes based on action selectionmay thus help to bridge the time gap between action and outcome.AcknowledgementsNS was supported by UCL Impact Scholarship and the Belgian Sci-ence Policy Ofﬁce project “Mechanisms of conscious and unconsciouslearning” (IAP P7/33). PH was supported by an ESRC Professorial Fel-lowship, an ESRC/ESF ECRP Research Project, by ERC Advanced GrantHUMVOL, and by EU FP7 Project VERE, Work Package 1. We also wishto thankHun Choi and Ksenia Vinogradova for helpwith data collection.ReferencesAlter, A. L., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2009). Uniting the tribes of ﬂuency to form ametacognitive nation. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 13(3), 219.Blakemore, S. J., Wolpert, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2002). Abnormalities in the awareness ofaction. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(6), 237–242. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(02)01907-1.Botvinick, M. M., & Braver, T. (2015). Motivation and cognitive control: From behavior toneural mechanism. Annual Review of Psychology, 66(1), 83–113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015044.Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10(4), 433–436.Braver, T. S. (2012). The variable nature of cognitive control: A dual mechanisms frame-work. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 106–113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.010.Chambon, V., & Haggard, P. (2012). Sense of control depends on ﬂuency of action selection,not motor performance. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2012.07.011 Cognition.Chambon, V., Moore, J. W., & Haggard, P. (2014c). TMS stimulation over the inferior pari-etal cortex disrupts prospective sense of agency. Brain Structure and Function, 1–13.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00429-014-0878-6.Chambon, V., Sidarus, N., & Haggard, P. (2014b). From action intentions to action effects:How does the sense of agency come about? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 320.http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00320.Chambon, V., Filevich, E., & Haggard, P. (2014a). What is the human sense of agency, andis it metacognitive? In S. M. Fleming, & C. D. Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience ofmetacognition (pp. 321–342). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-45190-4_14Chambon, V., Wenke, D., Fleming, S. M., Prinz, W., & Haggard, P. (2013). An online neuralsubstrate for sense of agency. Cerebral Cortex, 23(5), 1031–1037. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs059.Damen, T. G. E., van Baaren, R. B., & Dijksterhuis, A. (2014). You should read this! Perceiv-ing and acting upon action primes inﬂuences one's sense of agency. Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology, 50, 21–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2013.09.003.Demanet, J., De Baene, W., Arrington, C. M., & Brass, M. (2013). Biasing free choices: Therole of the rostral cingulate zone in intentional control NeuroImage . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.01.052.Desender, K., Opstal, F. V., & den Bussche, E. V. (2014). Feeling the conﬂict the crucial roleof conﬂict experience in adaptation. Psychological Science, 25(3), 675–683. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797613511468.Eimer, M., & Schlaghecken, F. (1998). Effects of masked stimuli on motor activation: Be-havioral and electrophysiological evidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology,Human Perception and Performance, 24(6), 1737–1747.Elsner, B., Hommel, B., Mentschel, C., Drzezga, A., Prinz, W., Conrad, B., & Siebner, H.(2002). Linking actions and their perceivable consequences in the human brain.NeuroImage, 17(1), 364–372. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1162.Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the identiﬁcation of atarget letter in a nonsearch task. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(1), 143–149. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03203267.Eriksen, C. W., & Schultz, D. W. (1979). Information processing in visual search: A contin-uous ﬂow conception and experimental results. Perception & Psychophysics, 25(4),249–263. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03198804.Farrer, C., Valentin, G., & Hupé, J. M. (2013). The time windows of the sense of agency.Consciousness and Cognition, 22(4), 1431–1441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.09.010.Fleming, S. M., Maniscalco, B., Ko, Y., Amendi, N., Ro, T., & Lau, H. (2014). Action-speciﬁcdisruption of perceptual conﬁdence. Psychological Science, 0956797614557697.http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797614557697.Fleming, S. M., Mars, R. B., Gladwin, T. E., & Haggard, P. (2009).When the brain changes itsmind: Flexibility of action selection in instructed and free choices. Cerebral Cortex,19(10), 2352–2360. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhn252.Flowers, J. H. (1990). Priming effects in perceptual classiﬁcation. Perception &Psychophysics, 47(2), 135–148. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03205978.Fritz, J., & Dreisbach, G. (2013). Conﬂicts as aversive signals: Conﬂict priming increasesnegative judgments for neutral stimuli. Cognitive, Affective, & BehavioralNeuroscience, 13(2), 311–317. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13415-012-0147-1.Gallagher, S. (2012). Multiple aspects in the sense of agency. New Ideas in Psychology,30(1), 15–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2010.03.003.Gratton, G., Coles, M. G., & Donchin, E. (1992). Optimizing the use of information: Strate-gic control of activation of responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General,121(4), 480–506.Haggard, P., & Chambon, V. (2012). Sense of agency. Current Biology, 22(10), R390–R392.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.02.040.Haggard, P., & Tsakiris, M. (2009). The experience of agency. Current Directions inPsychological Science, 18(4), 242–246. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2009.01644.x.Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary action and conscious awareness.Nature Neuroscience, 5(4), 382–385. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn827.Holroyd, C. B., & Yeung, N. (2012). Motivation of extended behaviors by anterior cingulatecortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 122–128. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.008.Hume, D. (1740). A treatise of human nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Jonides, J., & Mack, R. (1984). On the cost and beneﬁt of cost and beneﬁt. PsychologicalBulletin, 96(1), 29–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.96.1.29.Kiesel, A., Wagener, A., Kunde, W., Hoffmann, J., Fallgatter, A. J., & Stöcker, C. (2006). Un-conscious manipulation of free choice in humans. Consciousness and Cognition, 15(2),397–408. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2005.10.002.Klapp, S. T., & Haas, B. W. (2005). Nonconscious inﬂuence of masked stimuli on responseselection is limited to concrete stimulus-response associations. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31(1), 193–209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.31.1.193.Klapp, S. T., & Hinkley, L. B. (2002). The negative compatibility effect: Unconscious inhibitioninﬂuences reaction time and response selection. Journal of Experimental Psychology:General, 131(2), 255–269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.131.2.255.Kleiner, M., Brainard, D. H., & Pelli, D. G. (2007). What's new in psychtoolbox-3?Perception, 36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1068/v070821 (ECVP abstract supplement).Kopp, B., Rist, F., & Mattler, U. (1996). N200 in the ﬂanker task as a neurobehavioral toolfor investigating executive control. Psychophysiology, 33(3), 282–294.Kühn, S., Nenchev, I., Haggard, P., Brass, M., Gallinat, J., & Voss, M. (2011). Whodunnit?Electrophysiological correlates of agency judgements. PloS One, 6(12), e28657.http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0028657.Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using conﬁdence intervals in within-subject de-signs. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1(4), 476–490. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03210951.Mansﬁeld, K. L., van der Molen, M.W., Falkenstein, M., & van Boxtel, G. J. M. (2013). Tem-poral dynamics of interference in Simon and Eriksen tasks considered within the11N. Sidarus, P. Haggard / Acta Psychologica 166 (2016) 1–11context of a dual-process model. Brain and Cognition, 82(3), 353–363. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2013.06.001.Matchock, R., & Mordkoff, J. T. (2007). Visual attention, reaction time, and self-reportedalertness upon awakening from sleep bouts of varying lengths - Springer.Experimental Brain Research, 178, 228–239. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-006-0726-x.Mattler, U., & Palmer, S. (2012). Time course of free-choice priming effects explained by asimple accumulator model. Cognition, 123(3), 347–360. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2012.03.002.Metcalfe, J., & Greene, M. J. (2007). Metacognition of agency. Journal of ExperimentalPsychology. General, 136(2), 184–199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.136.2.184.Moore, J. W., & Fletcher, P. C. (2012). Sense of agency in health and disease: A review ofcue integration approaches. Consciousness and Cognition, 21(1), 59–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2011.08.010.Morsella, E., Wilson, L. E., Berger, C. C., Honhongva, M., Gazzaley, A., & Bargh, J. A. (2009).Subjective aspects of cognitive control at different stages of processing. Attention,Perception & Psychophysics, 71(8), 1807–1824. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/APP.71.8.1807.Nahmias, E. (2005). Agency, authorship, and illusion. Consciousness and Cognition, 14(4),771–785. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2005.07.002.O'Connor, P. A., & Neill, W. T. (2011). Does subliminal priming of free response choices de-pend on task set or automatic response activation? Consciousness and Cognition,20(2), 280–287. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2010.08.007.Pacherie, E. (2008). The phenomenology of action: A conceptual framework. Cognition,107(1), 179–217. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003.Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: Transformingnumbers into movies. Spatial Vision, 10(4), 437–442.Pﬁster, R., & Janczyk, M. (2013). Conﬁdence intervals for two sample means: Calculation,interpretation, and a few simple rules. Advances in Cognitive Psychology, 9(2), 74–80.http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/v10053-008-0133-x.Schlaghecken, F., & Eimer, M. (2004). Masked prime stimuli can bias “free” choices be-tween response alternatives. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(3), 463–468. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03196596.Sidarus, N., Chambon, V., & Haggard, P. (2013). Priming of actions increases sense of con-trol over unexpected outcomes. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(4), 1403–1411.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.09.008.Sumner, P., Nachev, P., Morris, P., Peters, A. M., Jackson, S. R., Kennard, C., & Husain, M.(2007). Human medial frontal cortex mediates unconscious inhibition of voluntaryaction. Neuron, 54(5), 697–711. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.05.016.Synofzik, M., Vosgerau, G., & Newen, A. (2008). Beyond the comparator model: A multi-factorial two-step account of agency. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 219–239.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2007.03.010.Taylor, D. A. (1977). Time course of context effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology.General, 106(4), 404–426. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.106.4.404.Rodrı́guez-Fornells, A., Kurzbuch, A. R., & Münte, T. F. (2002). Time course of error detec-tion and correction in humans: Neurophysiological evidence. The Journal ofNeuroscience, 22(22), 9990–9996.van Gaal, S., Scholte, H. S., Lamme, V. A. F., Fahrenfort, J. J., & Ridderinkhof, K. R. (2010).Pre-SMA graymatter density predicts individual differences in action selection inthe face of conscious and unconscious response conﬂict. Journal of CognitiveNeuroscience, 23(2), 382–390. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21444.Wascher, E., Reinhard, M., Wauschkuhn, B., & Verleger, R. (1999). Spatial S-R compatibil-ity with centrally presented stimuli: An event-related asymmetry study on dimen-sional overlap. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(2), 214–229. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/089892999563346.Wegner, D. M., & Wheatley, T. (1999). Apparent mental causation. Sources of the experi-ence of will. The American Psychologist, 54(7), 480–492.Wenke, D., Fleming, S. M., & Haggard, P. (2010). Subliminal priming of actions inﬂuencessense of control over effects of action. Cognition, 115(1), 26–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2009.10.016.Willemssen, R., Hoormann, J., Hohnsbein, J., & Falkenstein, M. (2004). Central and parietalevent-related lateralizations in a ﬂanker task. Psychophysiology, 41(5), 762–771.Winkielman, P., Ziembowicz, M., & Nowak, A. (2015). The coherent and ﬂuentmind: Howuniﬁed consciousness is constructed from cross-modal inputs via integrated process-ing experiences. Consciousness Research, 6, 83. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00083.