ABSTRACT: 
The theory of &ldquo;symbolic annihilation&rdquo; or &ldquo;symbolic violence&rdquo; has been used in academic literature to describe the way in which sexual minorities have been ignored, trivialized, or condemned by the media. This article aims to de-center research from issues of media representation to consider the capacity for minority groups to proactively use new media and its various avenues for interactivity, social networking, and feedback to fight social exclusion. This work suggests that new media has become a space in which the nominally marginal in society may acquire &ldquo;social artillery&rdquo;&mdash;a term used to describe how sexual minorities utilize their expanding and more readily accessible social connections in digital space to combat instances of homophobia. The research draws on the results of an inquiry into the relation between media and a regional youth social justice group in Australia tackling homophobia. The research demonstrates that the group is becoming increasingly adept and comfortable with using a cross-section of media platforms to fulfill their own objectives, rather than seeing themselves as passive subjects of media representation. This article argues that this sets an example for other socially excluded groups looking to renegotiate their relation with the media in regional areas. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This study examines the concept of symbolic violence as it applies to advocacy groups in a new media context. The study focuses on how YUMCHA uses forms of media to advance its agenda. The study demonstrates that those in YUMCHA use cultural and social capital to their advantage in terms of their familiarity and competence with new media tools and digital spaces and a growing social network with shared values and ideals to harness the interactivity that online communication offers. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  KEYWORDS gay advocacy, news media, sexual minorities, symbolic violence Address correspondence to Kristy Hess, School of Communication and Creative Arts, Deakin University, Princes Highway, Warrnambool, Victoria 3280, Australia. E-mail: kristy.hess@deakin.edu.au 1539 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1540 P. Venzo and K. Hess In May 2011, a female goal umpire in a small rural Australian football league quit the sport, claiming she was tired of being subjected to a constant stream of abuse from spectators. The umpire said she was most appalled by remarks that she “was a lesbian.” The local daily newspaper reported the story under the headline “‘Lesbian’ Jibe Umpire Quits in Disgust” (Best, 2011). Although gays and lesbians in small regional areas are particularly vulnerable to issues of marginalization (Alexander & Losh, 2010; Cooper & Dzara, 2010; Hillier, 1998; Hillier, Horsley, & Kurdas, 2001), it is the way the local youth social justice group tackling homophobia responded to this story that highlights a shift in how minority groups advocate their cause in a new media envi- ronment. Not only did the group respond with a flurry of comments on the newspaper’s Web site, a chat forum was set up on Facebook ® to publicly condemn the newspaper’s coverage. Much academic scholarship has focused on queer issues through the lens of “symbolic annihilation” or “symbolic violence”; that is, the way in which gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, intersex, and queer (GLBTIQ) identifying have been ignored, trivialized, or condemned by the media (Bourdieu, 2001; Gerbner & Gross; 1976; Tuchman, 1978). More recently, building on Foucault’s (1985) notion that contemporary sexual identities are formed in the discursive interplay between culture and institutions, theo- rists such as Arthurs (2004) and Streitmatter (2009) investigated the relation between media and sexuality to deconstruct how the representation of sexual diversity is controlled and manipulated in popular culture. There is an increasing body of literature that highlights the role of the gay and lesbian movement in generating improved visibility or favorable coverage of their issues in the news media (Gross, 2001; Gross & Woods, 1999; Moritz, 2010; Sears & Williams, 1997), but less attention has been paid to the way queer people, particularly those in regional areas, use media in their advocacy practices, especially for the purpose of visibility, the pursuit of rights, and positive action against homophobia. This study follows on from researchers such as Pullen and Cooper (2010) and Johansson (2007), who argued that social embodiments of gender and sexuality can be born from active participation in new media culture. Expanding on the work of Pierre Bourdieu and Nancy Fraser, we suggest the term “social artillery” may be useful in describing how gay minorities draw on readily available social and cultural resources to fight instances of symbolic violence exerted via traditional media. As an exemplar, we highlight a youth-oriented community group in regional Australia, called YUMCHA (Youth United Making Change against Homophobic Attitudes), which is committed to issues around sexual diversity, and focus on how it uses forms of media to advance its agenda. We situate the group in the new media field to look in detail at a grassroots situation in which the use of media tools can be seen to have immediate effects in regional areas where GLBTIQ people are thought to be particularly marginalized (Alexander, 2004; Cooper & Dzara, 2010). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1541 SYMBOLIC ANNIHILATION AND “GENTLE” VIOLENCE The term symbolic annihilation was first coined by George Gerbner (1972) to describe the symbolic world created by television in which he argued, “rep- resentation in the fictional world signifies social existence, absence means symbolic annihilation” (p. 43). It has since been used to account for the imbalances and inequities of women and minority groups, including gays and lesbians, in mediated representation (Gerbner & Gross, 1976; Gross, 1991, 1994; Kielwasser & Wolf, 1992; Tuchman 1978). Scholars such as Gross (1991) and Gallagher (2001) argued that when minority groups or perspec- tives do attain visibility, the manner of that representation often reflects the biases and interests of those elites who define the public agenda. These elites can be described as predominantly White, middle-aged, and entirely heterosexual (Gross, 1994, p. 143). French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu (2001) argued symbolic annihilation was just one form of what he referred to as symbolic violence. He con- tended the “invisibilisation” comes through a refusal of legitimate, public existence, especially by legal institutions (p. 119). For example, gays and les- bians remain constitutionally “invisible” in those laws that govern marriage in Australia. He described symbolic violence as “gentle violence,” often imper- ceptible and invisible even to its victims, exerted, for the most part, through the purely symbolic channels of communication and cognition (p. 1). The media, in both its traditional and digital forms, is an obvious battleground for which symbolic violence may be both exerted and combated. Bourdieu (1991) argued the media has symbolic power, or the power to “construct reality” (p. 166), which he said is a power of constituting the given through utterances, of making people see and believe, of confirming or transforming the vision of the world and thus the world itself, an almost magical power which enables one to obtain the equivalent of what it obtained through force. (p. 170) There is, for example, scholarship that highlights how regional areas, in particular, rely on local media’s representation of their citizens’ char- acteristics, behaviors, values, public issues, and events as the main means for recognizing and knowing their communities (see Hess & Waller, 2012). Meadows (1998) described the regional media’s methods of constructing social norms as “consensus narratives” (p. 1), which not only convey these social codes to audiences, but also instruct them in how to respond to events. Meadows said the regional media can be understood as the glue that binds community members into a social collective or “media public” through its representation of these norms. Morley (2000) highlighted how this enables people to associate with those “like themselves” in a functionally separated, internally homogenous environment where the drawing of boundaries can D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1542 P. Venzo and K. Hess imply that the homeland may be profaned by the presence of strangers or outsiders (p. 143), such as, in this instance, sexual minority groups. However, the so-called gentle violence exerted via media across tra- ditional and digital platforms in regional areas is not, for the most part, subjected to academic discussion or empirical inquiry in queer literature. In 2001, Hillier et al. undertook a study of the relation between same-sex attracted youth in Australia and the Internet. Despite the vast geographic spread of people around Australia, only 3.9% of the respondents—eight young people in total—were drawn from a rural setting; 18.4%, or 38 respon- dents, were from regional centers (although this term is never precisely defined in the study: In Australia, the size of such a center might vary from 30,000–300,000 depending on the region). Hillier et al. (2001) were also responsible for a series of landmark surveys on the health and wellbe- ing of same-sex attracted and gender-questioning young people in Australia. In Hillier et al.’s (2010) most recent survey, despite the finding that 20% of all same-sex attracted youth came from rural and remote areas, only 2 pages of the 112-page report are specifically dedicated to this group (pp. 96–98). This survey also found that rural respondents felt “less safe” on the Internet, presumably in comparison to their metropolitan or suburban counterparts. The Internet, used by same-sex attracted young people in regional, remote, and rural areas, is, therefore, framed by this research as a tool to overcome isolation and construct relationships beyond the physical limita- tions of a geographic area, rather than as a tool used within and outside of a particular geographic space as a means for public dialogue and resistance to homophobia. For these reasons, assumptions that same-sex youth in a regional center are disadvantaged, especially in relation to social media, is questioned here. “VISIBILITY” AND “RECOGNITION” IN A NEW MEDIA LANDSCAPE Fraser (1997, 2000, 2003) highlighted how discourses of social justice tend to be either considered from the viewpoint of distribution/redistribution or claims for recognition. Fraser (2003) suggested that the gay movement, in particular, is an exemplar of the struggle for recognition as it requires chang- ing the order of status afforded to sexual identities, replacing them with patterns that express equal respect for gays and lesbians (p. 19). Fraser (2000, 2003) contended, however, that we cannot ignore economic structure—that is, the relation to the various resources any group or individual might mobi- lize. In any struggle for recognition and to bridge the divide between the two perspectives, she proposed treating discussions about recognition as a ques- tion of social status. Here, what requires recognition is not a group-specific D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1543 identity, but the status of individual group members as full partners in social interaction. Fraser (2000) contended: . . . The status model understands social justice as encompassing two analytically distinct aspects of social order. The recognition dimension corresponds to status order in society, and the distributive dimen- sion (economic structure) of society, distinguished by their differential endowments of resources. (p. 116) More important, Fraser (2000) said equal participation is impeded when some actors lack the necessary resources to interact with others as peers. Arguably, this is what makes the gay movement unique in the battle for recognition in a new media environment. Bourdieu (2001), for example, suggested that of all the minority groups, the gay and lesbian movement had been particularly successful in the fight against symbolic violence because it had brought together individuals who, although stigmatized, were relatively privileged, especially in terms of cultural capital—something that represented a considerable asset in their symbolic struggle (p. 121). Bourdieu viewed cultural capital as one of several resources useful to create or maintain positions of power in specific spaces of relationships or local contexts, which he referred to as “fields” (Bourdieu, 1986, 1989; Lawler, 2005; Neveu & Benson, 2005). Bourdieu (1986) outlined four types of capital: economic, cultural (embodied or objectified in the form of cultural goods, such as art work, and institutionalized, such as academic qualifica- tions), social (value of social networks), and symbolic (honor or prestige). Bourdieu (1977) also referred to the concept of “habitus” (or the structure of dispositions, tastes, practical know-how, and second sense), which equips social actors in a particular field (see also Lawler, 2004, p. 112). Field (2008) outlines that Bourdieu did not directly discuss online tech- nologies in his writings, the emergence of the Internet and social networking tools has been credited with helping to empower the gay and lesbian move- ment (Atwell, 2010; Cooper & Dzara, 2010). The ability to work adeptly in this new media environment is the cultural capital and emerging form of habitus of relevance here. THE NEW MEDIA FIELD AS A BATTLEGROUND TO FIGHT SYMBOLIC VIOLENCE The Internet and new technologies appears to have dramatically altered the level of agency minority groups have in the wider media field. Unarguably, the World Wide Web has revolutionized the way individuals across the globe communicate with one another, with social networking tools becoming the face of which convergence culture plays to a global audience (Conley & D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1544 P. Venzo and K. Hess Lamble, 2006; Dueze, 2010; Hirst, 2011; Moritz, 2010). In this way, the traditional “audience” has become both consumer and producer of news and information, particularly for generations who are familiar with laptops, mobile phones, and iPads ® —most notably, the younger generation (Bruns, 2005, 2008; Hirst, 2011; Moritz, 2010). Scholar Henry Jenkins (2006) stressed the democratic potential of blogging and other practices opened up by the digital age, whereas Rheingold (2007) argued new media tools, such as blogs, wikis, and podcasts, should be considered pillars of 21st-century curriculum for youth to ensure their voice is heard. Queer research indicates gay and lesbians in particular are more techno- logically savvy than other minority groups. For example, American research shows that in the online environment, gays and lesbians are known to com- prise a disproportionate number of Web surfers and spend more time on the Internet than non-LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender) users (Gudelunas, 2005; Riggle, Rostosky, Prather, & Hamrin, 2005). Although esti- mating the exact number of gay and lesbian Web users is, for many reasons, an impossible task, marketers have been aggressively courting what they feel is a large and lucrative audience (Wilke, 1998, as cited in Gudelunas, 2005). Atwell (2010) argued that gay males make up a disproportionate num- ber of Internet users, and the Internet has become an important avenue for marginalized populations to meet others without fear of face-to-face rejection or violence. Other research, conducted by Out-Proud and Oasis magazine, found that of a survey of LGBT youth aged 25 and under, many had admitted to “coming out” online before they did in “real life” (Gross, 2007, p. ix). SOCIAL STATUS AND SOCIAL CONNECTIONS IN A NEW MEDIA CONTEXT Literature is beginning to emerge on the value of social networks and con- nections in an online environment. This draws parallels to the theory of social capital (Bourdieu, 1986; Coleman, 1990; Field, 2008; Putnam, 2000), which Bourdieu (1986) defined as “the aggregate of the actual or poten- tial resources which are linked to possession of a durable network of more or less institutionalized relationships of mutual acquaintance or recognition” (p. 248). More important, Bourdieu (1986) viewed social capital as a resource of power available to individuals to build a position of advantage in a par- ticular field or social space and, like most theorists in this field, suggested that for social capital to be acquired, a network or group of some descrip- tion must first be formed. There are indications that social networking has potential to strengthen social capital, particularly among minority groups and those in regional areas (Davies, 2003; Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007; Fukuyama, 2001). Egan (2000) argued: D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1545 . . . [F]or homosexual teenagers with computer access, the Internet has, quite simply, revolutionized the experience of growing up gay. Isolation and shame persist among gay teenagers, of course, but now, along with the inhospitable families and towns in which many find themselves marooned, there exists a parallel online community—real people like them in cyberspace with whom they can chat (and) exchange messages. (p. 113) Further, Cooper and Dzara (2010) suggested social networking sites such as Facebook present GLBTIQ communities not only with opportunities to gain information and resources, but enable their causes to be promoted to sympathizers and gather group support. They suggested the potential for change in the battle against heteronormativity becomes greater as sites such as Facebook and new media narrows the gap between those traditionally empowered to enact change (p. 108). However, it should be acknowledged that social capital has its “dark side.” It is a resource that can also be considered profoundly dysfunctional and counterproductive (Adler & Kwon, 2000; Portes, 2000; Putnam, 2000), and be shown to promote inequality and antisocial behavior (Field, 2008, p. 79). It is not within the scope of this study to examine the potentially neg- ative effects of social capital on young GLBTIQ users and collectives. We do, however, acknowledge the research that investigates “hate online” generally (e.g., see the overview of prior research on this topic, as cited in Gerstenfeld, Grant, & Chiang, 2003, pp. 29–43; and Johansson, 2007, pp. 155–163). Such research sets out the terrain in which more specifically anti-gay vilification may arise in online settings. The various queer cyber cultures that emerge through online social networking can be potentially liberating, but also dan- gerous (Shernoff, 2006). Although the focus here is to consider the capacity for a minority group to proactively use new media to fight social exclusion, we do not assume that young, same-sex attracted people’s experiences of new media are always and invariably positive (see Cooper & Dzara’s, 2010, chapter on Facebook and LGBT identity and activism, “LGBT Identity and Online New Media”). METHOD As our primary aim is to revisit the concept of symbolic violence as it applies to advocacy groups in a new media context, we draw from Derek Layder’s (1998) adaptive theory approach, which rejects the traditional view that theo- rizing occurs at discrete stages in the research project (Blaikie, 2010, p. 146). Layder pointed out that “the notion of theorizing itself has to be understood as an integral part of the overall research process as well as organically connected to the wider literature and findings of previous research and scholarship” (p. 49). He went on to argue that this involves the use of general D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1546 P. Venzo and K. Hess and substantiative theory, as well as existing and emergent research data. Layder contended: . . . [A]daptive theory focuses on the construction of novel theory in the context of ongoing research by utilising elements of prior theory (both general and substantiative) in conjunction with theory that emerges from data collection and analysis. . . . Prior theoretical concepts and models suggest patterns and “order” emerging in data while being continuously responsive to the “order” suggested or unearthed by the data themselves. (p. 27) This research, therefore, draws on existing theoretical ideas—largely the conceptual tools afforded by Bourdieu’s (1977, 1984, 1990) field theory— and then applies them to the case of a youth-oriented community group in regional Australia. This group is YUMCHA, an organization of young people committed to tackling issues around sexual diversity in a regional community in southeastern Australia. In light of this, our study specifically focuses on how YUMCHA uses forms of media to advance its agenda. A semi-structured interview (see Bryman, 2008, p. 196), with the support worker responsible for coordinating YUMCHA, was undertaken to determine the group’s advocacy practices and its relation with news media. A qualitative content analysis of media coverage relating to YUMCHA was also under- taken. Examples of the group’s media activity during the past 12 months were obtained via publicly accessible sources such as traditional media (newspaper content) and Web sites. Ethics clearance was obtained from Deakin University’s ethics committee after meeting the requirements detailed in Australia’s National Ethics Form for scholarly research. YUMCHA: REGIONAL RAINBOW WARRIORS YUMCHA is a coalition of young same-sex attracted people and other inter- ested parties who tackle homophobia and issues relevant to the GLBTIQ community in the southwest region of the state of Victoria, with a pop- ulation of about 34,000 people (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2010).The region has been regarded in a Roy Morgan (Melbourne, Australia) research poll as particularly homophobic. The 2008 through 2010 poll showed that more than one-third of the people in the electorate of Wannon believe homosexuality is immoral (“I Believe Homosexuality Is Immoral,” 2010). According to its Facebook page, YUMCHA aims to “remove discrimination in all forms, focusing on homophobia in the Warrnambool community and surrounding areas. We also aim to improve the lives of Gay, Lesbian, Bi and Transgender youths in this community” (see http://www.facebook.com/ home.php?sk=group_77191072875&ap=1). YUMCHA functions as part of the activities offered by community welfare organization, Brophy Family and D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1547 Youth Services (see http://www.brophyweb.org.au). The group is guided by a part-time social worker and is funded by Brophy and philanthropic sup- port. It is further supported by a volunteer advisory committee called the Sexual Diversity Working Party. Members of YUMCHA are under the age of 25. The size of the member- ship group fluctuates as young people move into and out of the community and changes according to flows of need and interest among the young peo- ple themselves. As such, there may be as few as five and as many as twenty or more semi-regular attendees to the weekly meetings. In addition, a group of “alumni” and other adult volunteers are involved in supporting the group, and in so doing form a secondary membership who act with and on behalf of the central group of young people. To date, YUMCHA’s activities have included weekly meetings, school visits to advocate against homophobia and promote safe sex messages, the creation of short films about coming out and the experiences of local gay and lesbian people, attending gay pride events in the local community and further afield, social gatherings, fundraising events, attending workshops on sexual diversity, and information nights for supportive parents and friends. The group works in liaison with schools in the district who have identified students at risk of homophobic attacks and who may benefit from referral to a supportive social welfare group such as YUMCHA. CULTURAL CAPITAL AND ADVOCACY PRACTICES A semi-structured interview (see the model described in Bryman, 2008, p. 196) with the support worker responsible for coordinating YUMCHA was undertaken to determine the group’s advocacy practises in a new media envi- ronment. Examples of the group’s media activity during the past 12 months were also obtained via publicly accessible sources such as traditional media (newspaper content) and Web sites. The support worker believed that all members of YUMCHA had access to the Internet and were adept with social networking tools, more so than other minority groups in the area that battled social injustice, such as the local Aboriginal community. She said for most individuals who were mem- bers of YUMCHA, using the Internet and social networking tools was “second nature.” Indeed, the support worked declared that reading newspaper con- tent online and posting comments on Facebook was now part of her regular daily practices (and, as such, can be understood as a form of embodied cultural capital or habitus accumulated through regular practice): . . . I read stuff online everyday . . . it’s habit. You get up, have a look at Facebook on your phone and check out what’s [sic] the main news stories on the local newspaper. You wake up blurry eyed and the first thing you do is try to read the screen on your phone, I think a lot of people are like that these days. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1548 P. Venzo and K. Hess This practice, the support worker believes, is reflected by the degree to which the young people of the group used Facebook as a primary means to access, share, and disseminate information about YUMCHA per se, rather than via traditional media. However, she also indicated that the media activities of YUMCHA and its members involved a variety of traditional and new media environments and channels such as newspapers, radio, social networking sites, mobile phone communications, Web sites, blogging, short film, word of mouth, presenta- tions in schools, public events, fliers, posters, stickers, and e-mail. Traditional forms of advocacy such as newspaper coverage (including news Web sites), radio interviews, promotional material in shops and cafes and presentations in schools were used to advance their central goal to tackle homophobia and support same-sex attracted young people as these media channels continued to be most powerful in shaping wider public opinion. Events and activities organized by the group were given coverage in the local daily newspaper, The Standard. The support worker acknowledged the group’s ability to generate positive news coverage could, in part, be credited to her own understanding of the production requirements at the newspa- per (such as how to write a news story, editorial deadlines, etc.). In this way, her own institutionalized cultural capital (she has a formal professional writing qualification) and understanding of the journalistic field arguably assisted in generating this news coverage as stories about YUMCHA were often published only after the support worker submitted media releases she had personally compiled. One newspaper article, for example, covered a poster campaign planned by the group and linked the story to issues faced by same-sex attracted youth in local schools (Johnson, 2009). Another appeared in the newspaper about the group’s “Honk If You Hate Homophobia” event, and once again gave an overview of YUMCHA and its activities (Shaw, 2010). This campaign, which involved driving about their streets of their community in a bus decorated with gay pride banners, was seen as a novel way of alerting strangers to the aims of YUMCHA. The “Honk If You Hate Homophobia” event was timed to coincide with the “Wear It Purple” Facebook campaign set up in response to a spate of gay teen suicides in the United States of America (Shaw, 2010). SOCIAL CAPITAL, FACEBOOK, AND SOCIAL NETWORKS Alternatively, media content produced in social networking forums or via e-mail and mobile phone messaging between members and supporters was geared toward building social capital and group identity, organizing events and activities and formulating united responses to public discourse. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1549 The group’s Facebook site provides links to information and ser- vices available and also promotes upcoming events and achievements. General information about YUMCHA could be viewed anonymously online, for example from the Brophy Youth Services Web site (see http://www. brophyweb.org.au) or as a link from the Web sites of other regional same-sex attracted youth initiatives around Australia. The ability to post comments on this Facebook page is regulated by “friend requests,” so that the group retains control over the flow and content of comments and posts and is able to create a network in which social capital may be generated. The support worker noted the Facebook page is very important to the activities of YUMCHA. It has almost 160 members, and is linked to another associated group called the Warrnambool Gay and Lesbian Party Network, whose aim is to raise money to assist YUMCHA to attend gay rights rallies, pride marches, and workshops on sexual diversity. The YUMCHA Facebook page is also a space to encourage “friends” to sign petitions in support of gay rights. In particular, links posted on the site draw attention to the ongoing struggle for reform of marriage laws and the difficulties faced by school children identifying as same-sex attracted. Facebook has also been used as a site for the mobilization of mem- bers and supporters when issues around homophobia occurred in the local community. For instance, when a local church minister requested to join the group in order to proselytize an anti-gay religious viewpoint, there was debate across Facebook profiles linked to the “friends” of YUMCHA. Thus, the YUMCHA Facebook page functioned as a trigger for broader community discussion. There are examples of YUMCHA using its online social network to form a counterattack to instances of homophobia or symbolic violence exerted via traditional media spaces. Here, the group uses interactive por- tals associated with the local newspaper’s online site, along with letters and mobile phone text messages to the editor, and via online comments spaces. In relation to the story where a football umpire described being called a lesbian as “disgusting” (Best, 2011), the group gathered sup- porters on Facebook before posting their concerns on the newspaper’s Web site. The group’s Facebook site (http://www.facebook.com/home. php?sk=group_77191072875) included comments such as the following: They went overboard on “abuse” “quits in disgust” etc. Then there was the “trying to move on” being a “nervous wreck” and “maybe I’m a bit of a softie, but I have morals.” I dunno if it was supposed to sound the way it did but I was expecting something about it to pop up on Facebook and here it is! D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1550 P. Venzo and K. Hess I don’t think there has been a positive gay article in The Standard to date . . . every single one seems to have undertones of disapproval in the writing. The support worker stressed it was important that homophobic attitudes were aired in public discourse to highlight underlying sentiment in the com- munity because YUMCHA’s wide social network and its ability to navigate digital spaces meant it was able to respond quickly to negative comments and fight instances of homophobia in a visible way, through powerful symbolic channels such as the newspaper: . . . [T]he local newspaper asked the question in one of its online polls “what do you think of same-sex marriage?” . . . Someone wrote “same-sex marriage is a sure fire way to spread Aids.” I like that type of comment being out there because it shows the general population that that narrow- mindedness is still there, that it’s still prevalent and in our community. . . . When there is negativity though it is vital it is challenged and we are in a fortunate position to do that. The support worker did, however, acknowledge a downside to the Internet as an avenue for some to air their homophobic views, particularly when there was no organized collective ready who can be called to arms to fight back: The internet is a double edged sword. In one sense young people have more access to those of their ilk, yet there are huge issues with homophobia on the net . . . the best part [about the Internet] is that they (regional [GLBTIQ] youth) can link up. I find a lot of new members this way and [it’s] a great way of keeping touch with the group when we only meet once a week and some drop off and stop attending. In several instances when issues affecting the GLBTIQ community have been reported in the local newspaper and other media, YUMCHA has been called on for comment. Bourdieu (1986) highlighted how social capital can generate significant symbolic capital for groups and individuals; and, indeed, the support worker was able to consistently use the collective social capital of YUMCHA to speak on the group’s behalf in media coverage. The most recent story showing YUMCHA active in its local com- munity was a story in The Standard newspaper focusing on footballers helping to tackle homophobia in southwest Victoria (Pech, 2011). The majority of the article was comprised of direct quotes from a YUMCHA representative and a supporter from another organization aimed at sup- porting same-sex attracted youth. Although the tone of this story is undoubtedly positive, a negative comment made by a reader on The Standard Web site (http://www.standard.net.au/news/local/news/general/ footballers-to-help-tackle-southwest-homophobia/2161077.aspx) in response D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1551 to the article highlights that homophobic attitudes still infiltrate traditional media: . . . [T]here is nothing to celebrate, making the event a pointless exercise. . . . One can only hope that the problem might breed itself out of existence over successive generations. DISCUSSION Bourdieu (2001) used militaristic terms in his discussion of symbolic violence, arguing that the gay and lesbian community was particularly “well armed,” and the challenge was to “invent and impose forms of collective organiza- tion and action and effective weapons, especially symbolic ones, capable of shaking the political and legal institutions which play a part in perpetuating their subordination” (p. ix). Our research shows symbolic violence continues to be exerted through traditional media, in this instance a local newspaper. However, YUMCHA’s capacity to generate media, to have a degree of control over their pub- lic image and to respond quickly and decisively to situations where they see homophobia existing, highlights a shift from invisibility to visibility in regional media discourse. In particular, YUMCHA’s familiarity with and strategic use of new media and its capacity for interactivity and feedback has meant we must now re-conceptualize the idea that GLBTIQ people are subjects of media rep- resentation, rather than capable of engaging in active combat with it. Our observations of YUMCHA’s online materials suggest the group recognize the “good and bad” of what the Internet has to offer them, but they identify its centrality to furthering their cause and use it accordingly. They are also active in creating and responding to media of various kinds. Bourdieu’s (1984) “thinking tools” (Grenfell, 2009, p. 18) of “capital” and “field” are useful in situating GLBTIQ advocacy in the new media con- text where this shift is occurring. Our research demonstrates that those in YUMCHA use cultural and social capital to their advantage in terms of their familiarity and competence with new media tools and digital spaces and a growing social network with shared values and ideals to harness the inter- activity that online communication offers. Whereas Fraser (2000) argued her “social status” model cannot be reduced to a question of identity, we should not ignore that YUMCHA’s march toward a social equilibrium depends on some level of identity formation. A sense of group identity, fostered both by “gay pride” and drawing connection to a particular geographic loca- tion where members live, work, or have some social affiliations, helps to foster the collective social capital needed to fight instances of symbolic vio- lence exerted via media. Combined with the group’s understanding of digital D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1552 P. Venzo and K. Hess space and its ability to access resources and support online beyond the immediate geographic region it serves bolsters individuals’ ability to level the playing field. The many and varied ways that YUMCHA responds to homophobia using the speed and interactivity of online communications represents what we call “social artillery.” In this way, YUMCHA draws on a sym- bolic armoury—a fusion of cultural and social capital—from which they can deploy messages and ideas and activities within media to shape discourse and fight instances of symbolic violence. The group uses this social artillery to target their responses to situations where they see homophobia existing, as a form of “return fire” to a community from which they have been tradi- tionally socially excluded. Their barrage of online comments on traditional media and social networking Web sites in response to instances of symbolic violence is akin to the persistence of soldiers who mobilize when under attack. Our research shows that in this case, it is new media that is instrumental in providing the platform to draw together a supportive social network and fight instances of homophobia. For example, the number of “friends” of YUMCHA on Facebook now far outweighs the number of young people that actually attend a physical meeting of the members on any given occasion. The group’s developing social capital means that traditional media calls on YUMCHA as spokespeople for regional Victorian GLBTIQ youth and the group is seen as a nexus for allied support services. That we ourselves represent YUMCHA, through the findings of this research, as media-savvy “rainbow warriors” is not to suggest that they are immune to homophobia or that they are now in control of discrimination around sexuality. Although the channel or medium itself does not choose sides, it is a field or terrain that Cooper and Dzara (2010) argued is somewhat “levelling” (p. 108). The idea that social networking sites such as Facebook present a “double-edged sword” requires us to recognize new media as a field in which homophobia both exists and is combated. It could be argued, for example, that social artillery may also be utilized by those intent on perpetuating homophobic views online, but to respond to this idea fully is beyond the scope of this article. As we have noted, there continues to be instances of symbolic vio- lence exerted through traditional media in a regional setting. It is tempting to assume that a regional group such as YUMCHA, invested as it is in tackling homophobia and supporting same-sex attracted young people, is likely to remain socially excluded due to the conservative nature of the envi- ronment in which it operates and the physical isolation from metropolitan communities where greater numbers of supportive people might be thought to congregate. However, there is clear evidence, drawn from this research, that YUMCHA’s communications strategies have gained them ground in their ongoing battle against homophobia and discrimination targeting GLBTIQ D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1553 youth. Ultimately, their determination to configure a relation with the media toward a position of power sets a potentially compelling example for other socially excluded groups seeking to do the same. REFERENCES Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S. W. (2000). Social capital: The good the bad and the ugly. In E. L. Lesser (Ed.), Knowledge and social capital (pp. 89–109). Woburn, MA: Butterworth–Heinemann. Alexander, J. (2004). In their own words: LGBT writing the world wide Web. New York, NY: GLAAD Centre for the Study of Media and Society. Alexander, J., & Losh, E. (2010). “A YouTube of one’s one?”: “Coming out” videos as rhetorical action. In C. Pullen & M. Cooper (Eds.), LGBT identity and online new media. (pp. 37–50). New York, NY: Routledge. Arthurs, J. (2004). Television and sexuality: Regulation and the politics of taste. Maidenhead, England: Open University Press. Atwell, A. F. (2010, November). Let’s talk about sex baby: Gay males’ use of the Internet to broaden their sexual networks. Paper presented at the annual meet- ing of the National Communication Association 94th annual convention, San Diego, CA. Retrieved from http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p271056_index. html Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2010). National regional profile. Warrnamboool: Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved September 2, 2013 from http://www. abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/215016730Main%20Features12004- 2008?OpenDocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=215016730&issue=2004- 2008& I believe homosexuality is immoral. (2010, November 15). Brisbane Times. Retrieved from http://images.brisbanetimes.com.au/file/2010/11/15/2045177/ immoral.pdf?rand=1289799771462 Best, G. (2011, May 14). “Lesbian” jibe umpire quits in disgust. The Standard, p. 1. Blaikie, N. (2010). Designing social research, 2nd edition. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press. Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. G. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education (pp. 241–258). New York, NY: Greenwood. Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory, 7 , 14–25. Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Bourdieu, P. (2001). Masculine domination. Cambridge, England: Polity Press. Bruns, A. (2005). Gatewatching: Collaborative online news production. New York, NY: Peter Lang. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1554 P. Venzo and K. Hess Bruns, A. (2008). Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life and beyond: From production to produsage. New York, NY: Peter Lang. Bryman, A. (2008). Social research methods (3rd ed.). Oxford,England: Oxford University Press. Coleman, J. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Conley, D., & Lamble, S. (2006). The daily miracle: An introduction to journalism (3rd ed.). Melbourne,Australia: Oxford University Press. Cooper, M., & Dzara, K. (2010). The Facebook revolution: LGBT identity and activism. In C. Pullen & M. Cooper (Eds.), LGBT identity and online new media (pp. 100–112). New York, NY: Routledge. Davies, W. (2003). You don’t know me but . . . social capital and social software. London, England: Work Foundation. Dueze, M. (2010). Journalism and convergence culture. In S. Allan (Ed.), The Routledge companion to news and journalism (pp. 265–275). London, England: Routledge. Egan, J. (2000, December 10). Lonely gay teen seeking same. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2000/12/10/magazine/lonely- gay-teen-seeking-same.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook friends: Social capital and college students’ use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12, 1143–1168. Field, J. (2008). Social capital. Abingdon, England: Routledge. Foucault, M. (1985). The history of sexuality. New York, NY: Vintage. Fraser, N. (1997). Justice interruptus. London, England: Routledge. Fraser, N. (2000, May–June). Rethinking recognition. New Left Review, 3. Retrieved from http://newleftreview.org/II/3/nancy-fraser-rethinking-recognition Fraser, N. (2003). Social justice in the age of identity politics: Redistribution, recog- nition and participation. In N. Fraser & A. Honneth (Eds.), Redistribution or recognition: A political philosophical exchange (pp. 9–48). London, England: Verso. Fukuyama, F. (2001). Social capital civil society and development. Third World Quarterly, 22(1), 7–19. Gallagher, M. (2001). Gender setting: New agendas for media monitoring and advocacy. London, England: Zed Books. Gerbner, G. (1972). Violence and television drama: Trends and symbolic functions. In G. A. Comstock & E. Rubenstein (Eds.), Television and social behaviour, Vol. 1: Content and control (pp. 28–187). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Gerbner, G., & Gross, L. (1976). Living with television: The violence profile. Journal of Communication, 26 , 172–199. Gerstenfeld, P. B., Grant, D. R., & Chiang, C. P. (2003). Hate online: A content analysis of extremist internet sites. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, 3(1), 29–43. Grenfell, M. (2009). Applying Bourdieu’s field theory: The case of social capital and education. Education, Knowledge, and Economy, 3(1), 17–34. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 Rethinking Media and Sexual Minorities 1555 Gross, L. (1991). Out of the mainstream: Sexual minorities and the mass media. Journal of Homosexuality, 21(1–2), 19–46. Gross, L. (1994). What is wrong with this picture? Lesbian women and gay men on television. In R. J. Ringer (Ed.), Queer words, queer images. Communication and the construction of homosexuality (pp. 143–156). New York, NY: New York University Press. Gross, L. (2001). Up from invisibility: Lesbians, gay men, and the media in America. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. Gross, L. (2007). Foreward. In K. O’Riordan & D. Phillips (Eds.), Queer online; technology and sexuality (pp. vi–x). New York, NY: Peter Lang. Gross, L., & Woods, J. D. (1999). Being gay in American media and society. In The Columbia Reader: On lesbians and gay men in media, society, and politics (pp. 297–301). New York, NY: Columbia University Press. Gudelunas, D. (2005). Online personal ads: Community and sex, virtually. Journal of Homosexuality, 49(1), 1–33. Hess, K., & Waller, L. (2012). The Snowtown we know and love: Small newspapers and heinous crimes. Rural Society, 21, 116–125. Hillier, J. (1998). Writing themselves in: A national report on the sexuality, health and well-being of same-sex attracted young people. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: La Trobe University, Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health, and Society. Hillier, L., Horsley, P., & Kurdas, C. (2001). “It’s just easier”: The Internet as safety-net for same sex attracted young people. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: La Trobe University, Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health, and Society. Hillier, L., Jones, T., Monagle, M., Overton, N., Gahan, L., Blackman, J., & Mitchell, A. (2010). Writing Themselves in 3 (WTi3). The third national study on the sex- ual health and wellbeing of same sex attracted and gender questioning young people. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: La Trobe University, Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health, and Society. Hirst, M. (2011). News 2.0: Can journalism survive the Internet? Crows Nest, New South Wales, Australia: Allen & Unwin. Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York, NY: New York University Press. Johansson, T. (2007). Transformation of sexuality: Gender and identity in contem- porary youth culture. Abingdon, England: Ashgate. Johnson, A. (2009). Closed minds open door to understanding. The Standard. Retrieved April 8, 2013; from http://www.standard.net.au/story/739255/closed- minds-offered-open-door-to-understanding/ Kielwasser, A., & Wolf, M. A. (1992). Mainstream television, adolescent homosexuality, and significant silence. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 9, 350–373. Lawler, S. (2004). Rules of engagement: Habitus, power and resistance. Sociological Review, 52, 110–128. Lawler, S. (2005). Introduction: Class, culture and identity. Sociology, 39, 797–806. Layder, D. (1998). Sociological practice: Linking theory and social research. London, England: Sage. Meadows, M. (1998). Making journalism: The media as a cultural resource. Australian Journalism Review, 20 (2): 1–23. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 1556 P. Venzo and K. Hess Moritz, M. (2010). Getting it straight: Gay news narratives and changing cultural values. In S. Allan (Ed.), The Routledge companion to news and journalism (pp. 320–330). London, England: Routledge. Morley, D. (2000). Home territories: Media, mobility and identity. London, England: Routledge. Neveu, E., & Benson, R. D. (2005). Bourdieu and the journalistic field. Cambridge, England: Polity. Pech, J. (2011, May 11). Footballers help to tackle south-west homophobia. The Standard. Retrieved from http://www.standard.net.au/news/local/news/ general/footballers-to-help-tackle-southwest-homophobia/2161077.aspx Portes, A. (2000). The two meanings of social capital. Sociological Forum, 15(1), 1–12. Pullen, C., & Cooper, M. (2010). LGBT identity and online new media. New York, NY: Routledge. Putnam, R. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. Rheingold, H. (2007). Civic life online: Learning how digital media can engage youth. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Riggle, E., Rostosky, S., Prather, R., & Hamrin, R. (2005). The execution of legal documents by sexual minority individuals. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 11, 138–163. Sears, J., & Williams, W. (1997). Overcoming heterosexism and homophobia: Strategies that work. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. Shaw, A. (2010, October 26). Warrnambool youth does the main drag. MCV . Retrieved from http://gaynewsnetwork.com.au/news/warrnambool-yumcha- does-the-main-drag-008107.html Shernoff, M. (2006). The heart of a virtual hunter. Gay and Lesbian Review, January- February, 20–27. Streitmatter, R. (2009). From “perverts” to “fab five”: The media’s changing depiction of gay men and lesbians. New York, NY: Routledge. Tuchman, G. (1978). Symbolic annihilation of women by the mass media. In G. Tuchman, A. Kaplan Daniels, & J. Benit (Eds.), Hearth and home: Images of women in the mass media (pp. 3–38). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ], [P au l V en zo ] a t 2 0:2 4 2 9 O cto be r 2 01 3 