ABSTRACT: 
This article uses a new database of subscribers to the New York Philharmonic to explore how high culture became a form of socially valuable capital in late-19th-century America. The authors find support for the classic account of high culture?s purification and exclusiveness, showing how over the long Gilded Age the social elite of New York attended the Philharmonic both increasingly and in more socially patterned ways. Yet they also find that the orchestra opened up to a new group of subscribers hailing from an emerging professional, managerial, and intellectual middle class. Importantly, the inclusion of this new audience was segregated: they did not mingle with elites in the concert hall. This segregated inclusion paved a specific way for the constitution of cultural capital. It meant that greater purity and greater inclusiveness happened together, enabling elite cultural participation to remain distinctive while elite tastes acquired broader social currency. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article uses a new database of subscribers to the New York Philharmonic to explore how high culture became a form of socially valuable capital in late-19th-century America. The authors find support for the classic account of high culture's purification and exclusiveness, showing how over the long Gilded Age the social elite of New York attended the Philharmonic both increasingly and in more socially pat-terned ways. Yet they also find that the orchestra opened up to a new group of subscribers hailing from an emerging professional, managerial, and intellectual middle class. Importantly, the inclusion of this new audience was segregated: they did not mingle with elites in the convent hall. This segregated inclusion paved a specific way for the constitution of cultural capital. It characteristic that greater purity and greater inclusiveness happened together, enabling elite cultural participation to remain distinctivewhile elite tastes acquired broader social currency. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 How cultural capital emerged in Gilded Age America: musical purification and cross-class inclusion at the New York PhilharmonicLSE Research Online URL for this paper: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/100167/Version: Published VersionArticle:Accominotti, Fabien, Khan, Shamus R. and Storer, Adam (2018) How cultural capital emerged in Gilded Age America: musical purification and cross-class inclusion at the New York Philharmonic. American Journal of Sociology, 123 (6). pp. 1743-1783. ISSN 0002-9602 https://doi.org/10.1086/696938lseresearchonline@lse.ac.ukhttps://eprints.lse.ac.uk/ ReuseItems deposited in LSE Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws. The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of the full text version. This is indicated by the licence information on the LSE Research Online record for the item.How Cultural Capital Emerged in Gilded AgeAmerica: Musical Purification and Cross-ClassInclusion at the New York Philharmonic1Fabien AccominottiLondon School of EconomicsShamus R. KhanColumbia UniversityAdam StorerUniversity of California, BerkeleyThis article uses a new database of subscribers to the New York Phil-harmonic to explore how high culture became a form of socially valu-able capital in late-19th-century America. The authors find supportfor the classic account of high culture’s purification and exclusiveness,showing how over the long Gilded Age the social elite of New Yorkattended the Philharmonic both increasingly and inmore socially pat-terned ways. Yet they also find that the orchestra opened up to a newgroup of subscribers hailing from an emerging professional, manage-rial, and intellectual middle class. Importantly, the inclusion of thisnew audience was segregated: they did not mingle with elites in theconcert hall. This segregated inclusion paved a specific way for theconstitution of cultural capital. Itmeant that greater purity and greaterinclusiveness happened together, enabling elite cultural participationto remain distinctivewhile elite tastes acquired broader social currency.Edith Wharton’s classic Gilded Age novel, The Age of Innocence, begins atthe opera. The opening paragraphs describe the excitement throughoutNew York society at hearing the Swedish soprano Christine Nilsson sing1 This project would not have been possible without the support of the AndrewW. Mel-lon Foundation or the guidance of BarbaraHaws and her team at theNewYork Philhar-monic archives. Too many scholars commented on earlier drafts to directly thank each© 2018 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.0002-9602/2018/12306-0005$10.00AJS Volume 123 Number 6 (May 2018): 1743–83 1743This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).the role of Marguerite in Gounod’s Faust. With an air of refinement, thenarrator dismisses the crass culture ofNewYorkers and praises the “sophis-ticated countenance” of Nilsson as she sings the emotional peak of the op-era, “Il m’aime! Il m’aime! Quel trouble en mon coeur!” The protagonist,NewlandArcher, enters his box just in time to hear these lines. Yet we neverquite learn what Archer thinks of the soprano, for his attention quicklymoves away from the stage to the rest of those sitting in the hall itself. Scan-ning the seats, his eyes settle on his fiancée’s family box. A cousin, recentlyseparated from her husband, sits among them. This minor scandal sets intomotion a series of events that mark, forWharton, an end of New York’s in-nocence.In this article we transport our reader into aNewYork concert hall in thelate Gilded Age, andwe use that setting to explore the emergence of culturalcapital during this critical moment of American social history. Like mostscholars of culture in that era, we are interested in what was being playedon stage. But likeWharton, we suggest that the action of these cultural per-formances was also in the seats that enveloped the hall.A long sociological tradition outlines how the consumption of culture canhelp groups define themselves socially and symbolically demarcate them-selves from other groups in society (Bourdieu 1984; Lamont and Lareau1988; Lamont and Fournier 1992). Scholars also note that the commandof legitimate cultural references can grant access to other social resources.Yet sociology has been comparatively quiet on the question of the emer-gence of cultural capital—that is, on how high culture and its consumptionbecame resources endowing social status in the first place. This article takesa provisional step toward asking how, in the American context, high culturewas constituted as a form of socially valuable capital.Existing accounts of the emergence of cultural capital focus on the coreidea of an alignment between classes of objects and classes of people. Whatkind of people and what kind of cultural objects “go together” helps delin-eate classificatory boundaries that endow certain objects with the power toconvey social status. One usually thinks of the mechanisms behind thesealignments between objects and people as mechanisms of purification andexclusion (DiMaggio 1982a, 1982b; Levine 1988). As a set of cultural objectsis purified from other, less “highbrow” objects, the set of people associatedwith these objects is narrowed and more starkly defined, through the ex-one, but we would like to particularly acknowledge the outstanding AJS reviewers, aswell as Peter Bearman, SvenBeckert, AmyBinder, Paul DiMaggio, IvanErmakoff, HerbGans, Fletcher Haulley, Victoria Johnson, Bill Weber, and our team of undergraduate re-search assistants. Direct correspondence to Fabien Accominotti, London School of Eco-nomics, Houghton Street, London, WC2A 2AE, United Kingdom. Email: f.accominotti@lse.ac.ukAmerican Journal of Sociology1744This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).clusion of others. Purification in the realm of objects breeds social closurein the realm of groups (Weber 1978; Parkin 1979), and the distinctivenessof culture allows it to become a resource for social status: its value comesfrom the fact that it is not shared.Within the scholarship on the United States, accounts of the emergence ofhigh culture as a resource for elite status also have a common empirical foun-dation: they argue that this process happened in the Gilded Age (DiMaggio1982a, 1982b; Levine 1988; Beckert 2000; Benzecry 2014). It was during thismoment that the American upper class took strength in the distinctivenessof its cultural endeavors, helping to define a new regime of social inequality.This article focuses on a dominant cultural institution during the GildedAge. Using a new database of subscribers to the New York Philharmonic,we examine attendance data to complement traditional accounts of howculture emerged as a resource for elite status in that era. Our analyses aremade possible by the existence of a remarkable set of business records, fromwhich we are able to reconstruct who subscribed to the Philharmonic,where they sat in the concert hall, and where they lived in the city through-out our period of interest. We find that over time attending the Philhar-monic became both increasingly distinctive and increasingly inclusive. Ata time when elite culture in the United States is thought to have becomemore distinctive through processes of purification and closure, we show thatone of New York’s main cultural institutions began to include a new groupthat did not share the attributes of more elite patrons.By documenting changes in participation to one of the oldest and mostprestigious orchestras in the United States at a key moment in the insti-tutionalization of high culture, this article makes two contributions. First,it provides empirical evidence for a previously underemphasized processwhereby culture emerged as a resource for elite status. Specifically, we showthat in the Gilded Age the Philharmonic was remarkably successful at en-listing a rising, educated middle class among its audience members. Whilethis does not disprove traditional accounts insisting on mechanisms of pu-rification and exclusion, it highlights how the transformation of elite cul-ture into a form of socially valuable capital also happened through processesof cross-class inclusion. Our account here factors in the growing differen-tiation of U.S. society in the Gilded Age: beside the consolidation of anAmerican bourgeoisie, that period was witness to the emergence of a profes-sional, managerial, and intellectual class of individuals who did not sharethe wealth or ancestry of the social elite (Chandler 1977; Gouldner 1979;Beckert 2000).The inclusion of that educated class into elite-sponsored institutions of-fered a particularly apt answer to the challenges of turning high culture intoa form of socially valuable capital. As students of culture have observed,privileged access to elite culture sustains the status of elites only to the extentCultural Capital1745This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).that other social groups are also willing to participate in it (Bourdieu 1984).Thus, while some cultural exclusivity can convey upper-class distinction,a fully unshared culture comes at the risk of irrelevance: it threatens thebroader currency of elite cultural endeavors. In Gilded Age New York, theemergence of a professional and intellectual middle class meant that eliteculture could be shared and legitimized while remaining exclusive of lessersocial groups.2It is important to note that the inclusion of middle-class, educated sub-scribers within the audience of the Philharmonic was not complete integra-tion. Instead—and this is our second contribution—we show that inclusionwas segregated. By analyzing the evolution of sitting patterns in the concerthall, we find that throughout the Gilded Age the elite increasingly distin-guished themselves by sitting in seats that differed from those of newly in-cluded subscribers. This is what we refer to as segregated inclusion—a formof inclusion in which new types of boundaries emerge between previouslyseparate groups. In our case, the way in which elites enjoyed culture—asopposed to the culture that they enjoyed—increasingly demarcated themfrom middle-class newcomers, delineating a new dimension of distinctionfor an otherwise more inclusive environment.Although this article focuses on New York City, the processes we de-scribe were likely present elsewhere. They may have been more consequen-tial in New York because of the specific circumstances of elites in that city.In particular, New York’s upper class was generally more fragmented, lesseducated, and less culturally authoritative than its counterpart in Boston(Jaher 1982; DiMaggio 1991). One might therefore argue that just as Bos-ton’s uniquely cohesive and highly educated upper class made it the exem-plary case of the constitution of cultural capital through powerful elite cul-tural entrepreneurship (DiMaggio 1982a, 1982b), New York’s uniquelyfluid elite made it the exemplary case of the constitution of cultural capitalthrough processes of cross-class inclusion. These differences aside, how-ever, we believe that the formation of a professional and intellectual middleclass in U.S. cities in the Gilded Age was central to the constitution of a spe-cifically American version of cultural capital.We proceed by first outlining processes of cultural purification and exclu-sion in greater detail and by elaborating how in a context of social differen-tiation the constitution of cultural capital could follow from inclusion ratherthan exclusion. As backgroundwe describe how in theGildedAge the socialelite of New York departed from its Boston counterpart in its makeup, co-hesiveness, and education. We then introduce the New York Philharmonic2 Beckert (2000, pp. 325–26) describes a similar alliance between the urban elite and theeducated middle class as a response to the broader “crisis of legitimacy” of economic andpolitical elites in the early 20th century. This alliance, he argues, was at the root of Amer-ican progressivism.American Journal of Sociology1746This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).and our data sources. The second half of the article uses these data to de-scribe transformations in the population of subscribers in the late GildedAge, and shifting sitting patterns in the concert hall, reflecting the segre-gated inclusion of an educated middle class. We discuss the identity of thesenewly included subscribers and how they demand we think anew abouthow culture emerged and worked as a resource for elite status in late 19th-century America.THEORY AND BACKGROUNDPurification, Exclusion, and the Emergence of Cultural Capital in GildedAge AmericaDuring the second half of the 19th century, the United States rapidly indus-trialized and urbanized; it experienced massive immigration from Europe;and it witnessed the rise of large and powerful corporations and the accu-mulation of unprecedented fortunes built on the profits of the second indus-trial revolution (Chandler 1977; Trachtenberg [1982] 2007; Licht 1995; Roy1999). These transformations presented major challenges to the establishedAmerican elite. As Levine (1988, p. 176) vividly conveys, “In an industrial-izing, urbanizing nation absorbing millions of immigrants from alien cul-tures and experiencing an almost incomprehensible degree of cultural changeand spatial mobility, with anonymous institutions becoming ever larger andmore central and with populations shifting from the countryside and smalltown to the city, from city to city, and from one urban neighborhood to an-other,” the old elite was seized with a sense “of anarchic change, of loomingchaos, of fragmentation, which seemed to imperil the very basis of the tradi-tional order.”Historians and sociologists argue that as a response to these threats, theAmerican elite in the Gilded Age consolidated into an upper class by closingranks spatially, socially, and culturally. Through neighborhood closure, thecultivation of distinctive tastes, and participation in exclusive social clubsand institutions, elites insulated themselves from an increasingly tumultu-ous society and became a more coherent class by coalescing along a rangeof social and cultural dimensions (Almond [1939] 1998; Baltzell 1958; Story1980; Jaher 1982; Beisel 1997; Beckert 2000).33 A version of this argument was already articulated in Thorstein Veblen’s Theory of theLeisure Class ([1899] 2009), which as early as 1899 satirized the old American elite for itswithdrawal into the realm of etiquette and refined culture. The obsession of old patricianfamilies with form and manners is also central to Edith Wharton’s Gilded Age novels.BothWharton and Veblen, however, regarded these trends as increasing the irrelevanceof the traditional elite and precipitating its unseating by a rising group of newly moneyedindustrialists.Cultural Capital1747This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).This account of theGildedAge has often served as an empirical backdropfor theorizing the constitution of culture into cultural capital. While a longsociological tradition shows how the consumption of highbrow cultural goodshelps elites to draw social and symbolic boundaries between themselves andother groups (Bourdieu 1984; Lamont and Lareau 1988; Lamont and Four-nier 1992), scholars have also documented the mechanisms whereby elite cul-ture emerged and acquired its distinctive status.4 In the United States, thishappened through the gradual separation between high and popular culture,a process that took place in the Gilded Age (Green 1966; Horowitz 1976;DiMaggio 1982a, 1982b; Levine 1988; for a similar movement in Europe,see Weber [2001, 2008]). Described by Levine as the sacralization of high cul-ture and by DiMaggio as its purification from popular elements, that processaffectedmuseums’ collections aswell as the repertoires of theaters and orches-tras. While prior to the 1870s culture was ordinarily consumed in venues of-fering a mixing of genres, toward the end of the century such mixing had vir-tually disappeared from elite cultural institutions. This purification of highculture resulted in the exclusion of working-class groups from these institu-tions and in the greater distinctiveness of high-culture consumption.In Boston in particular, that shift was made possible by the control of acohesive upper class over the boards ofmajor cultural institutions (DiMaggio1982a, 1982b). Thus, as early as the 1880s the Boston elite had established anart museum (the Boston Museum of Fine Arts) and an orchestra (the BostonSymphony Orchestra) that enabled them to maintain a distinctive culturalstyle. Boston’s cohesive and highly educated upper class, however,was fairlyunusual in that period (e.g., Jaher 1982). It contrasted most remarkably withthe New York elite, which in the wake of the Civil War had been more per-meable to emerging industrial entrepreneurs, and where old merchant fam-ilies whose prestige rested primarily on ancestry were increasingly threat-ened by the clout—and fortunes—of newly moneyed capitalists (Jaher1972, 1982; Hammack 1982; Beisel 1990, 1997; Beckert 2000).Scholars have argued that the divided nature of elites in New York de-layed the establishment of a coherent corpus of high culture and therebythe emergence of cultural capital as a source of status for the city’s elite(DiMaggio 1987, 1991; Dowd et al. 2002; Benzecry 2014). In the case of mu-sic, for example, DiMaggio notes that in New York “shifting coalitionswithin [a] fragmented elite created numerous orchestras, none of them suf-4 This is an analytically different issue from understanding how culture reinforces theelite by unifying it around a set of shared practices, as illustrated by Beckert (2000) inhis history of bourgeoisie formation in Gilded Age New York. High-culture venues herework alongside elite social clubs, select schools, and marriage alliances to generate thesocial networks that ultimately transform those who share a privileged position into a so-cial class with a sense of its collective interests (e.g., DiMaggio 1987; Ostrower 1998;Lizardo 2006).American Journal of Sociology1748This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).ficiently successful to define a single canon of fine-arts music. Competingorchestras sought public favor through public differentiation, light program-ming, novelties, and extravaganzas long after Boston’s symphonic reper-toire had become limited and austere” (1991, p. 136; see also Mueller 1951).While we agree that the lack of cohesion of New York’s upper class hin-dered the emergence of cultural capital through elite-driven processes of pu-rification and closure, in the analysis to follow we find that purification stillhappened inNewYork.We further argue that the city illustrates a differentmechanism that helped to turn elite culture into a form of socially valuablecapital. Specifically, we show that one of the foremost elite cultural institu-tions in the city increasingly included an emerging, educated middle classamong its audience members. Understanding that dimension of the consti-tution of cultural capital matters not only because of New York’s subse-quent role as a dominant cultural center in the country. It is also analyticallyimportant, as it factors in the evolution of the United States toward a moresocially differentiated and modern society.5Social Differentiation, Cultural Legitimacy, and the Segregated Inclusionof an Educated Middle ClassTransformations ofU.S. society in theGildedAgewent beyondmassmigra-tion, the rise of an American working class, and the emergence of powerfulcorporate interests. They also involved an increased differentiation ofAmerican society. The deepening of the division of labor meant that theeconomy pulled away from the household and the local community (Wiebe1967; Bender 1978); that new spheres of activity—such as politics or theprofessions (Dawley 2005)—emerged around new areas of expertise; andthat the day-to-day management of sprawling corporations was no longerassumed directly by entrepreneurs and industrialists (Chandler 1977).This growing differentiation entailed the rise of an educated middle classof professional and intellectual individuals who were neither owners of eco-nomic capital nor the descendants of prestigious lineages, but who pos-sessed expertise in specific domains (Gouldner 1979; Beckert 2000). Thisnew group of professionals worked across the economy and in the natural,humanistic, and social sciences. Johnson and Powell (2017, p. 213) thus ob-serve that, “in the early nineteenth century, the fields of law and medicinehad seen an increase in expertise via the introduction of educational re-forms, the establishment of board exams and licenses, and the diffusion5 The mechanism that we describe was likely at work in Boston too. As noted byDiMaggio (1982a, p. 40), “While we have all too little information about the nature ofthe visitors to Boston’s Museum or of the audiences for the Symphony, it seems certainfrom contemporary accounts (and sheer arithmetic) that many of them were middleclass.”Cultural Capital1749This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).of local, state, and national professional associations.” In the realm of busi-ness, too, by the 1870s transformations in the organization of knowledgehad led to the emergence of “disciplinary specialists and professional man-agers to whose expertise Gilded Age industrialist-philanthropists deferred”(Johnson and Powell 2017, p. 200; on the professions, see Bledstein [1976];Abbott [1988]; on science and social science, see Reingold [1976], Haskell[1977], Olenson and Voss [1979], and Sloan [1980]).A key dimension of the constitution of high culture into a capital capableof sustaining the status of elites is that it be regarded positively by other so-cial groups—in other words, that it be legitimate. As DiMaggio (1982a,p. 48) puts it, in the Gilded Age “a secret and esoteric culture could not haveserved to legitimate the status of American elites; it would be necessary toshare it, at least partially.” Striking the right balance between exclusivityand legitimation was at the core of efforts to transform elite culture into aform of socially valuable capital. Against this backdrop, the emergence ofan educated middle class offered an obvious opportunity for elites’ culturalenterprises. InNewYork in particular, where the upper class was generallyless educated than it was in Boston, a professional, managerial, and intellec-tual group provided a natural audience with whom to share elite culture. Inthe analysis to follow, we show that at the New York Philharmonic eliteswere not driven away by the gradual inclusion of this emerging group.Quite to the contrary, they seemed to welcome an audience featuring moreeducated, middle-class individuals and minimizing “socially fashionabletypes.” Thus, while Boston’s cohesive and highly educated elite may makeit the exemplary case of the formation of cultural capital through elite entre-preneurship and cultural purification, New York, with its fragmented andless dignified upper class, stresses how the constitution of high culture into aform of capital also rested on processes of cross-class inclusion.Inclusion rarely appears in accounts of the constitution of cultural capitalinsisting on purification. These accounts typically relate the valorization ofhigh culture to the correspondence between its content and the social stand-ing of those who enjoyed it. While we concur that this is a key dimension ofthe emergence of cultural capital, we argue that the association of elite andnonelite groups in the consumption of high culture also contributed to thattransformation.At the New York Philharmonic this was facilitated by the stratified na-ture of the concert hall, which meant that the elite could continue to distin-guish themselves by consumingmusic from seats that differed from those ofother, newly included groups. This was particularly important at a timemarked by the increasingly public character of cultural consumption (Di-Maggio 1991). The evolution of sitting patterns in the hall,we argue, reflectedthe increased salience of a form of distinction centered less on the contentof the culture elites consumed and more on the way they enjoyed it. MoreAmerican Journal of Sociology1750This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).broadly, it is an example of what we refer to as segregated inclusion—a formof inclusion that comes with new ways for a dominant group to demarcateitself from newcomers, thereby preserving its purity and specialness.Hence, in a differentiating society and in the absence of a strongly educatedelite, cultural capital could be constituted through the inclusion of a risingprofessional, managerial, and intellectual group within elite-sponsored insti-tutions. That process entailed new ways of consuming culture, with moresubtle elements of distinction taking over—ultimately resulting in a form ofsegregated inclusion.GILDED AGE NEW YORK AND THE NEW YORK PHILHARMONICIn the final decades of the 19th century millions poured into lower Manhat-tan and Brooklyn, fundamentally transforming social and class relations inNew York City. Most of these migrants were poor; many spoke differentlanguages and had different religions. In response to the influx of working-class immigrants, elites moved away from their homes in lower Manhattanto what is nowMurrayHill, Midtown East, and, eventually, the Upper EastSide.The immigrant influxwas not the only change to the class structure, how-ever. At the top, too, New York society evolved toward something muchmore divided and diverse. As Hammack (1982, p. xv) describes, “Between1880 and 1910 Greater New York became the first American metropolisto assume a modern character. Nineteenth-century New York had been agreat mercantile center; by 1895 corporate managers were displacing mer-chants and the city’s economywas demandingmore specialists, morewhite-collar workers, more semiskilled laborers. New York had always been re-markable for its social heterogeneity; by the 1890s its Anglo-Protestantsocial elite was both internally divided and challenged by competing Ger-man Christian and German Jewish social elites.”6Culture helped the elite address the twin challenges of a growingworkingclass and a fragmenting upper class. By making the content and places oftheir cultural activities distinct from those of working-class groups, elitesgradually built a “class-segmented public sphere” (Beckert 2000, p. 267)and added a layer of cultural distance to the geographic distance they wereachieving by moving uptown. In part this meant founding or sponsoring a6 Hammack further emphasizes the continual differentiation of these groups: “By the1890s New York City’s lawyers as a group were losing the near-monopoly over munic-ipal expertise they had so long enjoyed. . . . In the last decade of the century, lawyers werefurther crowded aside by graduates of the new university programs in public law and ad-ministration, economics, social welfare, and education who were taking positions in thecity’s universities, welfare agencies, and editorial boards and developing their own policyideas there” (1982, p. 54).Cultural Capital1751This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).set of high-culture institutions such as theMetropolitanMuseum of Art, theMetropolitanOpera, theNewYork Symphony, and theNewYork Philhar-monic (Kolodin 1966; Shanet 1975; Cone 1983; Martin 1983; Eisler 1984;Tomkins 1989). These institutions also contributed to clarifying what elitetastes were and thus helped to consolidate the fractured upper class aroundshared understandings, shared practices, and shared experiences. As Beck-ert argues, “Cultural identifications would increasingly provide the glue thatkept an expanded bourgeoisie together” (2000, p. 254).Rivalries within the elite, on the other hand, impeded alliances behind asingle institution in each cultural field. In the realm of music, for example,competing factions divided their support between such organizations as theNew York Philharmonic and the New York Symphony (Mueller 1951;Dowd et al. 2002). Diluted patronage prevented any particular faction fromwresting control from the orchestras’ commercial entrepreneurs, and this inturn made it difficult to impose a clear set of canonical standards throughmere elite entrepreneurship (DiMaggio 1991).The NewYork Philharmonic was emblematic of that situation. Foundedin 1842, it is one of the oldest symphonic orchestras in the world, and it haslong been a beacon of American cultural life.7 The orchestra was initially amusicians’ cooperative, with players owning shares and splitting the pro-ceeds from ticket sales. Members appointed a board of directors (almostexclusively musicians at first) who managed the operations of the coopera-tive. Demographically, the orchestra was overwhelmingly German. At itsfirst concert in 1842, 42% of the orchestra’s members were ethnically Ger-man, and by 1855 this number had risen to an astonishing 79% (Shanet1975, p. 109). The audience, on the other hand, wasmade up of NewYork’s“good” society.By the orchestra’s second seasonGeorgeTempletonStrong—a famed diarist and then a 23-year-old music enthusiast—noted a “greatcrowd: all the aristocracy and ‘gig respectability’ and wealth and beautyand fashion of the city there on the spot an hour beforehand” (cited in Shanet[1975], p. 99). Those elite NewYorkers includedmenwhose names would beimprinted on the city ofNewYork:WilliamB.Astor,HenryBrevoort, GooldHoyt, or Peter Schermerhorn.The Philharmonic Society struggled for space in New York’s crowdedorchestral field. In its early years it competed with conductor TheodoreThomas, whose Theodore Thomas Orchestra was enormously popularamong New Yorkers (Russell 1927). The Philharmonic eventually dealtwith this competition by hiring Thomas to replace its conductor Leopold7 Shanet’s (1975) Philharmonic: A History of New York’s Orchestra provides a thoroughoverview of the institution from its founding to the early 1970s. Scholarly readers willfind far more relevant Mauskapf’s (2012) organizational analysis in “Enduring Crisis,Ensuring Survival: Artistry, Economics, and the American Symphony Orchestra.”American Journal of Sociology1752This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Damrosch in 1877—only to see Damrosch create a rival orchestra, theNew York Symphony, one year later (the two orchestras would merge in1928). Intracity competition was not the only challenge. Soon after itsfounding in 1881, the Boston Symphony Orchestra started traveling regu-larly to New York to give concerts, and audiences tended to prefer its qual-ity over that of any local orchestra.In that environment the Philharmonic needed to satisfy the demands ofits wealthy patrons lest they abandon it for other institutions (Shanet1975; Mauskapf 2012). Through their role as benefactors, between 1860and 1910 elites slowly gained de facto control over the cooperative and itsartistic direction. After 1867 the orchestra’s president would never be amu-sician again. AndrewCarnegie assumed that role in 1902, and in 1909MarySheldonwas finally successful at transforming a failing players’ cooperativeinto a nonprofit enterprise employing salaried musicians and governed by aboard of wealthy philanthropists.8Long before that shift, however, the content of culture at the Philharmonichad evolved toward greater purity, despite the lack of strong cultural entre-preneurship by a cohesive and highly educated elite (Block 2012). Here weprovide evidence of that purification by looking at the evolution of the or-chestra’s repertoire over the period. Whether a choice of conductors andmusicians themselves, a reflection of elites’ growing influence, or a responseto the programming of rival institutions, in the 1860s and 1870s the Philhar-monic gradually turned into a sanctuary for the music of a small number ofconsecrated composers.9 By 1892, music critic Henry Krehbiel described arepertoire of purified, great works:If I were to attempt an interpretation of the record I should say that [the orches-tra] has conceived its duty primarily to be the conservation of musical compo-sitions which the judgment and taste of the cultured would have admitted ofthe first rank. Only secondarily has it made propaganda for new and progres-sive composers who have widened the boundaries of the art. . . . The [Philhar-8 The transformation was facilitated by a large gift from Joseph Pulitzer, who donated$500,000 to the orchestra in his will, and another half million on the condition that thePhilharmonic change its organizational model (these gifts were delivered in 1912). Shel-don was also instrumental in hiring prestigious conductor Gustav Mahler to lead the or-chestra in 1909.9 The conductor of the Philharmonic in the late 1870s and 1880s, Theodore Thomas, ex-plicitly decided to limit his repertoire and was celebrated for it. He noted in an interviewin 1882 that he wished to perform “only standardworks, both of the new and oldmasters,and to be thus conservative and not given to experimenting with the new musical sensa-tions of the hour” (quoted in Shanet [1975, p. 167]). On the broader historical shift ofWestern orchestras in that period away from the programming of miscellany and towarda focused and finite canon, see Burkholder (1986) and Weber (2001); on the role of con-ductors in channeling that shift, seeDowd et al. (2002), Kremp (2010), and Santoro (2010).Cultural Capital1753This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).monic] Society is also enjoined to exercise the greatest care in the admission ofnew compositions into its lists. A work that has been played at a Philharmonicconcert is, by virtue of that circumstance, looked upon as bearing themost validstamp of excellence which the New World can bestow. (Krehbiel 1892, p. 9)A systematic look at what was played at the Philharmonic confirms thatmovement toward purification. The full record of programs, available fromthe Philharmonic archive, makes it possible to compute the number ofunique composers played every season between the 1850s and the early20th century. Figure 1 displays the evolution of that number, adjusted forthe changing number of concerts in a musical season. In the mid-19th cen-tury, audience members could expect to hear the work of up to 30 differentcomposers played in a single season. In fact, Philharmonic musicians didnot hesitate to program music they had composed themselves, as well aspieces by contemporary American composers. By 1880, however, the num-ber of unique composers programmed in a season declined by half to about15, where it roughly remained through the rest of the Gilded Age. The Phil-harmonic increasingly focused on a small range of canonical composers,most of them German, and most of them dead.A second, more subtle indicator of the purification of the repertoire canbe found in the way programs were organized and musical pieces were ac-FIG. 1.—Number of unique composers played in a season, adjusted for number of pro-grams, seasons 1850–51 to 1906–7 (dotted line: five-year moving average).American Journal of Sociology1754This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).tually performed. Figure 2 shows the average number of pieces in onenight’s program. That number decreased sharply through the mid-1880s,dropping from around seven to around four pieces a concert. Less diverseprograms not only meant that each concert was now more focused on afew, carefully chosen musical works. It also made it possible to performpieces that were played in their entirety. Thus, while early on only about40% of the music given by the orchestra consisted of full pieces—the rest be-ing made of a miscellanea of excerpts such as famous opera arias or singlemovements taken from symphonies—that percentage gradually rose toabout 70% in the 1880s (fig. 3). The repertoire, in other words, was not justpurified from the music of composers deemed unworthy of its stamp of ex-cellence. The music itself also achieved greater sacredness, as it became in-creasingly unlikely that the orchestra would disregard the composer’s com-plete vision by cutting his work to feature only popular excerpts.The evolution of music at the Philharmonic in the second half of the19th century seems to support previous findings of purification and sacraliza-tion. A closer look at the timing of that evolution, however, complicates thepicture. The bulk of the purification occurred between in the 1860s and 1870s.The three indicatorswe introduced—number of composers in a season, num-ber of pieces on an average night, and percentage of full pieces—all displaysharp changes until 1880 yet remain stable through the 1900s. The consoli-FIG. 2.—Average number of pieces per program, seasons 1850–51 to 1906–7 (dottedline: five-year moving average).Cultural Capital1755This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).dation of high culture at the Philharmonic, in other words, happened longbefore elites had gained full control of the institution. While we cannot ad-judicate how this happened, we observe that culture could purify in the ab-sence of strong cultural entrepreneurship by a cohesive and educated elite.In the remainder of this analysis we turn away fromwhat was happeningon the stage to study the Philharmonic audience in the period that immedi-ately followed this purification of the repertoire. We show that attendingthe orchestra remained an elite practice after 1880. Yet we also find that theaudience kept evolving significantly well after the music had been purified.Because changes in the music provide limited insight into audience dynam-ics, we rely on data that directly record who attended the Philharmonic inthe late Gilded Age. We use these data both for descriptive ends and to re-fine our understanding of how high culture was constituted as cultural cap-ital in late 19th-century New York.10FIG. 3.—Proportion of full pieces in a season’s program, seasons 1842–43 to 1906–7(dotted line: five-year moving average).10 Not only is who attended these concerts of interest to the authors of this article; it was amatter of public scrutiny and reporting. Most New York Times reviews during that eracommented on the audience. The New York Times report of April 15, 1882, thus noted,“The audience yesterday afternoon was one of the best and most intelligent that has ap-peared at any concert or rehearsal of the society.”Decade by decade this continued: “To-day the Philharmonic audience represents, nay more, it actually is, the genuine musicalpublic of New York” (April 25, 1892); “[The Philharmonic] is still the highest musicalcourt in New York, and its Saturday night audiences are the flower of the refinementAmerican Journal of Sociology1756This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).DATAPrimary Data SourcesTo understand how the structure of high-culture participation evolved atthe New York Philharmonic, we draw on complete subscription recordsfor all Philharmonic subscribers from the late 1880s to the late 1900s. The pri-mary data are contained in the orchestra’s subscriber and seating books,which respectively report the names and addresses of subscribers and thenames of the tenants of each subscribed seat.As part of a collaborative project with the Philharmonic we compiled adata set of all subscribers to the orchestra, in all seasons wherein subscriberand seating bookswere available between the founding of the Philharmonicin 1842 and the present day.11 For all subscribers we recorded the addressthey reported to the Philharmonic, the number of seats they held, and thelocation of these seats in the concert hall. Over the period this article focuseson, a Philharmonic season included between six and eight different pro-grams. Each program was given twice, as a public rehearsal on Friday af-ternoon and as the actual concert on Saturday night. Both the rehearsalseries and the concert series were open to subscription, and we have infor-mation on subscribers to both.It is important to note that we do not have data on all attendees to Phil-harmonic performances. Our information is restricted to those who sub-scribed to entire seasons of the orchestra’s concerts and therefore ignoressingle-ticket holders. We believe that these data are relevant nonetheless,as subscribers were those who had not only an interest in the music but alsoa symbolic commitment to the orchestra itself, making them a meaningfulgroup to look at. While the Philharmonic archive does not retain informa-tion on the number of single tickets sold for each concert, we know that sub-scribed seats accounted for about 27% of the seats in the hall in 1889–90 and43% in both 1897–98 and 1906–7.Historical Focus and Contextual DataIn order to contextualize subscribers within the broader social life of the city,we selected three specific seasons, roughly nine seasons apart, to focus on inand culture in the city. . . . Approbation from this audience is applause indeed” (April 6,1902).11“Subscribers to theNewYork Philharmonic, 1842–Present,” supported by the AndrewW.Mellon Foundation Scholarly Communications program (grant no. 31200640). Whilesubscriber and seating information was available for almost every season after 1950,there are significant gaps in the data in earlier periods. Thus the Philharmonic archivedoes not retain any substantial data on subscribers prior to season 1882–83 and betweenseasons 1906–7 and 1950–51. Our subscriber data are available for download at the Phil-harmonic website: http://archives.nyphil.org.Cultural Capital1757This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).greater detail: 1889–90, 1897–98, and 1906–7. These seasons span the periodwe are interested in. They are also among the ones for which we have com-plete Philharmonic information. We have no reason to believe that the com-pleteness of the data in these years relates to the explanations that we pro-vide. Importantly for our argument, prices and pricing schemes for seasontickets did not evolve significantly over these three years: prices increasedby about 20% in all sections of the Philharmonic’s hall between our firsttwo seasons and then remained constant through the third.There were 918 unique subscribers to the Philharmonic in 1889–90, 1,323in 1897–98, and 1,297 in 1906–7. In any of these years a recorded subscribercould hold more than one seat and on average held around two.12While wecan expect that subscribers generally attended the concerts they subscribedto, we do not knowwho occupied the additional seats that they held. As thevast majority of subscribers weremarried women, however, we can reason-ably assume that a number of these extra seats were held by their husbandsor children. In line with this interpretation the analyses presented in this ar-ticle are conducted at the family level, and we treat married subscribers asrepresenting their larger household in the halls of the Philharmonic.With our three focal years in mind, we collected supplemental materialsto contextualize subscribers within the population of NewYork and withinthe city’s upper class in particular. We use the New York Social Register, adirectory of predominantly white Anglo-Saxon Protestant families, as an in-dex of the city’s social elite (Higley 1995). The Social Register was created inNew York in 1886, initially as a compilation of old elite families. By 1889 ithad grown into a full-fledged directory of New York “good” society, listingaround 12,000 prominent families, or 1% of the city’s population. In orderto be included in the Social Register one had to either be born to listed par-ents, marry a listed member, or be proposed and supported by letters fromcurrent members, before being voted on by an advisory board. Marryinginappropriately, being subject to a scandal, or considerable downward mo-bility could be grounds for exclusion. Colloquially, the register was referredto as the “stud book,” used as a way to identify men eligible for marriagefrom “good” families.13For every subscriber to the Philharmonicwe checkedif he or she was listed in the Social Register. When subscribers were marriedwomen we reported the details of their husbands, essentially using men’s12 Specifically, each recorded subscriber held an average of 2.1 seats. That average re-mains constant over our three years of interest, as does the variance in the number of seatsheld by recorded subscribers. Every year a small proportion of subscribers (about 4%)held seats for both the rehearsal and the concert series. They may have attended bothor subscribed on behalf of someone else for one of the series.13 This is why we prefer the Social Register to Who’s Who in America. Who’s Who isbased on meritocratic selection criteria that make it less representative of the social elite.American Journal of Sociology1758This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).status as a proxy for that of their household.We also collected a 10% sampleof the Social Register for 1889, 1897, and 1906. This sample reports thenames, addresses, alma maters, and club affiliations of about 1,800 individ-uals in each of the three years.Occupational data taken from the census are relatively sparse in this pe-riod. We therefore used additional sources to gather information on the oc-cupations of Philharmonic subscribers. The first—ClubMen of NewYork—is a registry based on the full membership lists of about 100 clubs located inand aroundNewYorkCity. Itwas published three times, in 1892, 1897, and1902. Besides addresses and club affiliations, it reports the occupation of theindividuals it lists as club members. Using the website Ancestry.com, wealso garnered occupational information fromother administrative and busi-ness archives, such as city directories. Through a careful combing of ClubMen and a systematic search of the census and Ancestry, we were able toretrieve occupational data on about 52% of subscribers in 1889, 50% in1897, and 43% in 1906.14Finally, we augment our quantitative data with the commentary of con-temporary cultural critics.We draw on thewritings of the dominant culturalnewspaper of the day, theNew York Times. We read every article publishedin the Times pertaining to the Philharmonic from the period of 1870–1910.To verify that the Times reporting was representative we also read the re-views of the Nation and the Tribune of every classical concert during thissame period.We begin our analysis by sketching the changing participation of NewYork’s social elite to the Philharmonic over the final decades of the GildedAge. We then turn to other social groups to show that the Philharmonic be-came more inclusive over time, and we describe newly included audiencesin greater detail. Finally, we use seating data to analyze patterns of atten-dance and to ask how the location of various groups in the space of the con-cert hall related to their broader position in the city’s social landscape. Weshow that these changes are consistent with a specific pathway toward theconstitution of elite culture into cultural capital, marked by the segregatedinclusion of an educated middle class whose presence could help to signalthe worth of elites’ cultural endeavors.14 The drop in the final year likely arises from a greater temporal mismatch between ouryear of interest at the Philharmonic (1906–7) and the edition of ClubMenwe compared itto (1902). Because part of our information comes from Club Men and clubs were oftenelite pastimes, the social elite may be overrepresented in the group for which we have oc-cupational information. Club Men, however, lists a large number of individuals who be-longed to various clubs but were not part of the social elite—as defined by inclusion in theSocial Register. An analysis of the home addresses of a sample of individuals listed inClub Men shows that their residential backgrounds differed quite sharply from thoseof the social elite and matched those of the general New York population better.Cultural Capital1759This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).ENDURING DISTINCTIVENESS: THE SOCIAL ELITEAT THE PHILHARMONICThroughout the end of the Gilded Age attendance of New York Philhar-monic concerts was and remained a distinctive elite practice. To approachthe participation of the social elite we first focus on individuals listed in theNewYork Social Register. Table 1 presents the proportion of Philharmonicsubscribers who were listed in the register in, respectively, 1889, 1897, and1906.That proportionwas fairly high throughout the period: though the reg-ister listed only around 1% of the population of the city in those years, aboutone in five Philharmonic subscribers were part of it.What is more, while thenumber of subscribers increased over time, the number of subscribers fea-tured in the Social Register rose at a faster pace, bringing the proportion ofsubscribers in the register from 15.7% in 1889 to 19.8% in 1897 and 21.3%in 1906.15That Philharmonic attendance remained an elite practice is further sug-gested by the geographic spread of subscribers in the city, as displayed infigure 4, which focuses on the borough ofManhattan.16Throughout the lateGilded Age subscribers’ homes clustered in the city’s most prestigious andless populated areas, such as the administrative wards that contained sec-tions of Fifth Avenue on the East and Upper East Sides of Manhattan.An even more striking view is provided by a look at subscriber rates—the proportion of subscribers in an area’s population—at the tract levelin 1906 (fig. 5). We here extrapolate tract-level population information in1906 from the 1910 population census, as the tract system replaced therougher-grained ward system at that later date only. Tracts with the highestrates of Philharmonic subscriptions in 1906 clustered around Fifth Avenue,where as much as 3% of the population of certain tracts could be subscribers. Ifone keeps in mind that an average subscriber subscribed to two seats, thismeans that 6% of the people living in these tracts held seats to the Philhar-monic on a given evening (assuming that subscribers were going with fam-ily members).The turnover of subscribers with various social backgrounds from oneseason to the next comes as a third piece of evidence for the enduring special15 The percentage of Social Register families that held at least one subscription to thePhilharmonic remained around 1.4% from 1889 to 1897 and then declined slightly, to1.1% in 1906. The late decline reflects a growth in the Social Register population un-matched by a rise in the numbers of Social Register subscribers. The growth of the SocialRegister was even steeper between 1889 and 1897, but it was matched by an equivalentinflux of Social Register subscribers.16 Manhattan supplied the bulk of Philharmonic subscribers, though it is difficult to es-tablish an exact proportion. Some subscribers who lived in Manhattan for most of theyear provided the Philharmonic with the addresses of only their summer homes out ofthe city. Of subscribers who reported an address in one of the five New York City bor-oughs, 99% came from Manhattan in 1889, 98% in 1897, and 96% in 1906.American Journal of Sociology1760This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).relationship of the social elite with the Philharmonic. Throughout the lateGilded Age subscribers listed in the Social Register were more likely to re-new their commitment to the orchestra over successive musical seasons.They formed a core of stable, dedicated patrons. Table 2 displays the Phil-harmonic’s retention rates of subscribers between seasons 1889–90 and1897–98, broken down by subscribers’ social background. It shows that20% of 1889 subscribers without a social elite background—as approachedthrough membership in the Social Register—remained subscribers in 1897.Over the same timewindow social elite subscribers weremore than twice aslikely to stick with the Philharmonic: 45% of 1889 subscribers listed in theSocial Register held a subscription to the orchestra in 1897. If anything, thisdifference in long-term commitment across social groups grew wider in thefollowing decade, suggesting that the social elite did not loosen its grip overthe institution. While only 12% of non–social elite subscribers in 1897 re-mained subscribers in 1906, social elite subscribers were now almost threetimes as likely to stay: 30% of those who held seats in 1897 still did in 1906.The overall decline in retention rates from one timewindow to the next likelyarises from the mere difference in the length of these windows (eight to nineseasons), as well as from the organizational and artistic turmoil at the Phil-harmonic in the early 1900s. Yet the growing gap in retention rates betweensocial elite and non–social elite subscribers is the pattern we would expect ifthe social elite increasingly distinguished itself from other social groupsthrough its sustained participation in high culture.Changing Patterns of Elite ParticipationFocusing on social elite members who subscribed to the Philharmonicshows not only that socially elite members were more likely to attend con-certs but also that the very way subscribers attended the orchestra’s con-certs evolved toward greater stratification around the turn of the century.Not all seats were equally desirable. Seats in first- and second-tier boxeswere more desirable that those in the parquet, which was more desirableTABLE 1New York Philharmonic Subscribers in the Social Register1889–90Season1897–98Season1906–7Season% subscribers listed in theNew York Social Register . . . . . . . . . . . . 15.7 19.8 21.3% Social Register listees subscribing tothe New York Philharmonic . . . . . . . . . . 1.4 1.4 1.1Total number of subscribers. . . . . . . . . . . . . 918 1,323 1,297Cultural Capital1761This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).FIG. 4.—Philharmonic subscribers in Manhattan and population density by Manhat-tan ward, 1889–90, 1897–98, and 1906–7 (densities, in population per square mile, arecalculated using a linear extrapolation of each ward’s population based on census datain 1890, 1900, and 1910).This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).than the dress circle; and balcony seats were the least desirable of all—a hi-erarchy that was reflected in the seat pricing scheme.17 Even though thatscheme remained unchanged over the period, figure 6 shows a strong pat-tern in the evolution of the proportion of subscribed seats held by the so-cially elite in various sections. Throughout, seats located in better sectionswere more likely to be subscribed by patrons listed in the Social Register.FIG. 5.—Philharmonic subscription rates byManhattan census tract, 1906–7 (rates arecalculated using a linear extrapolation of each tract’s population based on tract-leveldata in 1910 and ward-level data in 1900).17 While the Philharmonic moved halls in 1892, the seating charts of the old Met Houseand the new Carnegie Hall had comparable structures. The old Met had a larger seatingcapacity, however. It could fit an audience of about 3,600, against only around 3,200 atCarnegie Hall.Cultural Capital1763This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).But while only about 40% of first-tier boxes were held by members of thesocial elite in 1889, one in two were in 1897, and almost 70% in 1906. Asmaller uptick is observed in other good areas of the hall (second-tier boxesand parquet). Less desirable sections (dress circle and balcony) in contrastexperience a drop in their proportion of social elite subscribers. Over timethe socially elite can be seen as having increasingly used the orchestra asa means of distinction not only by going more but also by going in more dis-tinctive ways, deserting less desirable seats and concentrating in first- orsecond-tier boxes.TABLE 2Retention Rates of Subscribers from Various Social BackgroundsSocial EliteSubscribersOtherSubscribers% back from 1889–90 to 1897–98 . . . . . . . . 45.4 20.2% back from 1897–98 to 1906–7 . . . . . . . . . 30.4 11.7NOTE.—Formula for two time periods (v21889–90 to 1897–98 5 40.7, p < .0001; v21897–98 to 1906–7 5 53.3,p < .0001).FIG. 6.—Proportion of subscribed seats held by Social Register listees, broken down byseating section.American Journal of Sociology1764This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Within the social elite itself, the status of subscribers also became increas-ingly predictive of the quality of their concert seats. To capture prominencewithin the elite we use the number of club affiliations individuals reportedin the Social Register—now focusing on Social Register listees who werealso Philharmonic subscribers. We then examine this measure’s correlationwith a subscriber’s seat quality, rated on a scale of one to five, where onestands for a seat in the balcony and five for a seat in a first-tier box. If a sub-scriber held multiple seats in various sections, we measure the quality of thebest of her seats. We report the results in figure 7. In 1889 a subscriber’snumber of club affiliations was not statistically associated with the positionof her seats in the concert hall. Prominence in the social elite in contrast issignificantly correlated with seat quality in 1897 (Spearman’s rank correla-tion between the two variables is around .33). And the magnitude of the re-lationship is even larger—at around .39—in 1906.For subscribers with social elite backgrounds, prominence in the elitewas thus increasingly associated with sitting inmore desirable areas, so thatby the end of the Gilded Age sitting patterns did not record only differencesFIG. 7.—Spearman’s rank correlation between the number of club affiliations and theseat quality of social elite subscribers.Cultural Capital1765This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).between the elite and the rest. In fractal fashion, hierarchy within the eliteitself was also reflected in the hall, in the way more or less prominent elitemembers occupied the seats of various sections. This evolution at the fine-grained level of seats held by subscribers buttresses the notion that partici-pation in high culture increasingly served social distinction purposes. Inthe late GildedAge, attending the orchestrawas not only away for the socialelite to distance itself from other groups in the city. Holding specific seats inthe concert hall also became ameans for themost prestigiousmembers of thesocial elite to draw even subtler boundaries between themselves and lessprominent counterparts who also attended the orchestra’s performances.18The enduring distinctiveness of the Philharmonic was not lost on thecommentators of the day. In their eyes the audience’s overall commandof high culture contributed to attendees’ social value. In “The PhilharmonicAudience” on April 25, 1892, the Times’s leadmusic critic noted, “to the gloryofmusic it can be said that the Philharmonic audience represents an elementof the highest general culture in the city. It is composed of persons whoseknowledge ofwhat is excellent extends to literature, tofine arts, and todrama,whose social character and refinement are beyond a moment’s question.”This view of a correspondence between a refined repertoire and the socialstanding of those who enjoyed it mirrors the idea that the content of cultureis at the root of its social value. Indeed, from reports like this we can see whyhistorians and sociologists identified the distinction of high culture as one ofthe conditions of its transformation into cultural capital during the GildedAge. Focusing on the social elite and its relationship to high culture, how-ever, obscures what else was going on in the hall in that period. A greaterdistinctiveness of elite culture did not have to happen at the expense of othergroups’ cultural participation. Our next section examines who else attendedPhilharmonic performances and how this supports the notion that, in NewYork, elite culture was constituted as cultural capital through a process ofcross-class inclusion.18 Not surprisingly, the changing relationship we report here occurs only for Saturdayconcerts. At the Philharmonic, Saturday night concerts always carriedmore prestige thandid Friday afternoon rehearsals. Social elite subscribers were in particular always morelikely than others to subscribe to Saturday over Friday performances. By this measurethe relative prestige of concerts also increased over time. In 1889, 36% of social elite sub-scribers and 34% of non–social elite ones chose concerts over rehearsals. By 1906, socialelite subscribers were twice as likely to choose concerts over rehearsals, while the rest ofsubscribers divided about equally between the two. Logics of distinction through seatchoices within the population of social elite subscribers thus became more salient atevents whose prestige was itself increasing. At Friday performances, elite prominencewas predictive of seat quality throughout the period, but the magnitude of the relation-ship decreased over time.American Journal of Sociology1766This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).INCREASING INCLUSIVENESS: THE EMERGENCEOF A NEW AUDIENCELooking at the spread of Philharmonic subscribers in the city shows thatnew subscribers gradually joined the orchestra’s ranks even though theydid not share the residential choices of more elite patrons. Figure 8 plots sub-scribers’ home addresses, distinguishing between subscriberswith andwith-out a Social Register background.Over time new areas in the city, most notably the northern part of theUpper West Side, Morningside Heights, and Harlem, started sending sub-scribers to the Philharmonic. These neighborhoods were typically not thedwelling areas of the social elite—as suggested by a map of the geographicclustering in Manhattan of our 10% sample of the Social Register (fig. 9).Figure 8 shows that few subscribers from these areas were Social Registerlistees.19 We thus observe the emergence of a geographically clustered groupthat subscribed to the Philharmonic yet that departed from the more tradi-tional elite as far as their residential choices were concerned.Figure 10 supports that view by measuring the residential clustering ofsocial elite and non–social elite subscribers. Clustering is here approachedthrough the spatial autocorrelation of subscribers’ Social Register represen-tation with the Social Register representation of their 25 nearest subscriberneighbors in the city.20As evidenced in the top panel, spatial autocorrelationrises significantly between 1889 and 1906, indicating that Philharmonicsubscribers in and out of the social elite increasingly came from different ar-eas in the city. The bottom panel, based on a local indicator of autocorrela-tion, or local Moran’s I, decomposes the increase and shows that through-out the period residential clusters of social elite subscribers remainedlocated on the East Side around Fifth Avenue, while clusters of non–socialelite subscribers emerged in the Upper East, UpperWest, andHarlem areasof Manhattan.This new group of audiencemembers did not just make different residen-tial choices from the social elite. Their occupational backgrounds also de-parted significantly from those of Social Register subscribers. Throughoutthe late Gilded Age, the lion’s share of subscribers belonged to occupationalgroups that owned economic capital or organized its flows. Almost half ofthe subscribers for whom we have occupational information were mer-chants, manufacturers, bankers, brokers, or corporate lawyers in 1889, andwhile that proportion declined, it was still around 40% in 1906.19 The last names of these subscribers, together with their absence from the Social Reg-ister, suggest that they were not just scions of the social elite who had relocated to moreaffordable, uptown neighborhoods.20 Alternative definitions of neighborhoods yield similar findings.Cultural Capital1767This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Against this backdrop, figure 11 shows how the occupational back-ground of non–social elite subscribers diverged over time from that of theirsocial elite counterparts. Early on, subscribers in and outside of the socialelite were about as likely to come from occupational groups involved inthe organization of economic capital. Rapidly, though, subscribers withouta Social Register background departed from more elite patrons in terms oftheir occupational profile. They were not just less social elite; they were alsosignificantly less likely to partake in the conduct of corporate affairs. Only44% of them did in 1897, and no more than 35% in 1906—against 55% and47% of social elite subscribers in these respective years.21The growing occupational gap between social elite and non–social elitesubscribers can be observed in reverse if we focus on a second series of oc-cupations. While they formed a more heterogeneous cluster than those as-sociated with the possession or organization of economic capital, teachersand professors, clerks and managers, engineers, architects, designers, art-ists, and writers shared a common feature: they were occupations involvingan important educational background. In fact, they formed the bulk of theprofessional, managerial, and intellectual middle class that emerged in theFIG. 8.—Philharmonic subscribers’ home addresses in Manhattan, 1889–90, 1897–98,and 1906–7 (red dots5 subscribers listed in the Social Register; black dots5 other sub-scribers).21 Chi-squared tests for the three years confirm that within the population of subscribers,being involved in the organization of economic capital and belonging to the social elitebecame significantly associated over time.American Journal of Sociology1768This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).country around that time (Chandler 1977; Haskell 1977; Gouldner 1979).Figure 12 shows that in the late Gilded Age non–social elite subscriberswere always more likely to come from these well-educated occupations. Italso evidences how the difference between this group and social elite pa-trons became more sizable over time. A mere 8% of social elite subscribershad a background in one of these occupations in 1889, and even though thatproportion rose to almost 14% in 1906, it remained limited. This contrastswith the strong rise in the prevalence of these occupations for non–elite sub-scribers: from 13% in 1889 to almost 30% in 1906.22While social elite subscribers continued to be predominantly character-ized by occupations associated with the possession or organization of eco-nomic capital, subscribers outside of the social elite increasingly came frombackgrounds involving professional and intellectual skills. Possessors ormanagers of economic capital outside of the social elite, in otherwords, wereincreasingly replaced by a professional and intellectual class of educated,non–social elite subscribers.FIG. 9.—The social elite inManhattan, 1889, 1897, and 1906: home addresses of a 10%sample from the Social Register.22 Again here a series of chi-squared tests substantiate the growing departure between so-cial elite and non–social elite subscribers. The departurewas actuallymore pronounced ifwe focus on teachers and professors, architects, designers, artists, and writers, reflectingthe diversity of the emerging managerial and intellectual middle class and the greaterproximity of managers or engineers to the economic and social elite.Cultural Capital1769This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).FIG. 10.—Overall residential clustering (Moran’s I, with 95% confidence interval, toppanel) and residential clusters of Philharmonic subscribers with (red dots) and without(light blue dots) Social Register representation (bottom panel), 1889–90, 1897–98, and1906–7.This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Not surprisingly, the areas of residence of this emerging, educated groupof subscribers largely overlappedwith those of new, non–social elite joiners.Figures 13 and 14 report the residential clustering of subscribers whose oc-cupations were associated with, respectively, the organization of economiccapital and a strong education (what we refer to, followingGouldner, as “in-tellectual” occupations). Again here, clustering is approached as the spatialautocorrelation of subscribers’ type of occupation with that of their 25 near-est subscriber neighbors. In both cases that clustering grew from 1889 to1906: subscribers from different occupational backgrounds were increas-ingly coming from different city neighborhoods. In fact, while subscriberswith economic occupations continued to concentrate on theEast Side aroundthe central section of Fifth Avenue, a cluster of educated subscribers gradu-ally emerged in the northernmost areas of the Upper West Side and in Har-lem—the same neighborhoods that around that time were sending non–social elite subscribers to the Philharmonic.In the late 19th century, parts of Harlem started to become predomi-nantly populated by German immigrants—many of them Jewish (Rischin1962; Gurock 2016). Because these groups were typically excluded fromthe WASP social elite, the emergence of an educated audience hailing fromthat area may have reflected, not the inclusion of an intellectual and man-agerial middle class, but the appeal of a very German orchestra to the mem-FIG. 11.—Proportion of merchants, manufacturers, bankers, brokers, and corporatelawyers among Philharmonic subscribers, 1889–90, 1897–98, and 1906–7.Cultural Capital1771This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).bers of a growing German community. Several observations challenge thatinterpretation. First, Harlem’s German population, and German Jews inparticular, concentrated in East Harlem and around the northern parts ofFifth Avenue, which are not the parts of Harlem where new subscriberstypically came from (Gurock 2016, pp. 31–36). Second, an analysis of thenames of subscribers suggests that the proportion of German subscribersin fact declined between 1889 and 1906. To perform that analysis, we com-pared subscribers’ last names to the last names of the members of theDeutscher Liederkranz, an organization dedicated to the promotion of Ger-man culture in the city that also served as a social outlet for New Yorkersof German origin.23 Twenty-one percent of Philharmonic subscribers hadFIG. 12.—Proportion of teachers, professors, clerks, managers, engineers, architects,designers, artists, and writers among Philharmonic subscribers, 1889–90, 1897–98, and1906–7.23 Between 1889 and 1906 the Liederkranz had around 1,400 members, the overwhelm-ing majority of whom were of German descent. It was an elite society: the relatively ex-pensive dueswere a barrier toworking-class GermanAmericans, and the number of Jew-ish members remained limited (Mosenthal 1897; Nadel 1990). Still, it offers a list ofGerman family names that we can compare to the names of Philharmonic subscribersin various years to gauge the evolution of the share of German subscribers. Importantly,we do not look at subscribers who also belonged to the Liederkranz, but at those whosename was represented in the Liederkranz membership. Geographically, Liederkranzmembers came from various parts of town, including a strong group from North andEast Harlem in the 1890s and 1900s.American Journal of Sociology1772This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).FIG. 13.—Overall residential clustering (Moran’s I, with 95% confidence interval, toppanel) and residential clusters of Philharmonic subscribers with economic (red dots) andnoneconomic (light blue dots) occupations (bottom panel), 1889–90, 1897–98, and 1906–7.This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).FIG. 14.—Overall residential clustering (Moran’s I, with 95% confidence interval, toppanel) and residential clusters of Philharmonic subscribers with intellectual (red dots)and nonintellectual (light blue dots) occupations (bottom panel), 1889–90, 1897–98,and 1906–7.This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).names also found in the membership of the Liederkranz in 1889. That per-centage dropped to 16.5% in 1897 and to 14.3% in 1906.While these figuresprobably capture only a fraction of subscribers of German descent, they donot suggest a strong influx of German subscribers in the Philharmonic au-dience after 1889.Writers from that period in fact confirm that largeGerman audiences hadalready joined in the early 1880s—that is, immediately after the purificationof the repertoire we observe in our data. They noted that in the early days(from the 1840s to the 1870s), attendees to the Philharmonic had not been a“musical crowd.” Looking back at this period, the Times’s main musicalcritic, Richard GrantWhite, observed, “The Philharmonic became fashion-able among the younger part of the rich and ‘elegant’ people who began tothrongNewYork; and the result was that, although rehearsals and concertswere crowded, the seats were filled with a gossiping, gabbling, flirtingcrowd of finely dressed girls and youths who made it difficult for othersto enjoy the music.”Yet by 1880 this had changed: “The majority of the au-diences,” White continues, “are neither New-York nor American by birthand breeding, but chiefly German. When I first attended the rehearsalsand the concerts of the Philharmonic Society, no speech was heard amongthe audience but English—with, of course, such rare exceptions asmight oc-cur in London or Liverpool or any large town. Now at these concerts . . .there is a spraching of German all around me, in my in-going, in my down-sitting, in my out-coming” (December 26, 1880).Finally, and further strengthening the notion that new educated subscrib-ers were not in fact German subscribers, we could find no evidence that sub-scribers with German names had disproportionately managerial or intellec-tual occupations in our later years. If we also note that in 1906 in particular,educated subscribers chiefly clustered in the northern part of theUpperWestSide (fig. 14)—a neighborhood that was not predominantly German—it ap-pears that these new subscribers formed a genuinely new audience, definedby its education and middle-class status rather than by its ethnicity.The opening of the Philharmonic to this new, educated audience did notgo unnoticed. Andrew Carnegie was already celebrating it in his sixtieth-anniversary address to the orchestra in 1902: “It is gratifying to look overits lists [of subscribers] and see how from generation to generation, the Phil-harmonic has been supported by those most devoted to music, many of thebest known names being found; so it is also to see the number of new faceswhich appear” (quoted in the New York Times, April 6, 1902). Three yearslater theTimeswaswriting of “wideningmusical interest” inNewYork andnoting that “the public for all sorts of music and the public appetite for itseem to increase as the population of the city increases” (October 22, 1905).And later that year the Times’s critic celebrated the reception of classicalCultural Capital1775This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).music by the “wage-earners of the city,” noting that this was important,since “it is from their ranks that the best students come” (November 5, 1905).The trend we observe is one of inclusion of an educated, managerial, andintellectual class of non–social elite subscribers. While in the early periodthe social elite itself never monopolized the concert hall, they tended to besurrounded by others like them. By 1906, however, nonelite subscriberswere increasingly diverging from the elite: they tended to live in differentneighborhoods and to work in different occupations. This new group, how-ever, did not drive the social elite away from the Philharmonic; if anything,the elite went at higher rates. This makes sense if we consider that the open-ing of the audience involved educated, middle-class subscribers whose pres-ence testified to the relevance of Philharmonic concerts to social groupsoutside of the elite. Through the inclusion of these subscribers, high culturebecame evenmore of a socially valuable capital. Next, we suggest one furtherreason thatmay explainwhy the social elite stayed: the inclusion of new, non-elite subscribers was segregated.FROM CULTURAL PURITY TO SEGREGATED INCLUSIONIn the late Gilded Age subscribing to the Philharmonic remained sociallydistinctive while it also became inclusive of a new group of audience mem-bers. To better understand this process we now turn to how these groupsattended the Philharmonic. Our hypothesis is that the fine-grained structureof the sitting in the hall explains how enduring distinctiveness was possiblein the presence of greater inclusiveness. The transformation of the sitting,we argue, reflected the emergence of a new form of cultural distinction, cen-tered on the way elites consumed culture rather than on the type of culturethey consumed.In a first step we contrast the geographic origin in the city of subscribersof high-quality and low-quality seats. Figure 15 displays how these originschanged over the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It shows that while sub-scribers of first-tier seats continued to come from the most prestigious ad-dresses, over time subscribers in balcony seats increasingly came fromHar-lem and the Upper West Side of Manhattan. One’s seat location within thespace of the hall was increasingly reflecting one’s residential location in thespace of the city.To further substantiate this view, we measure whether sitting close by inthe hall was associated with living close by in the city and how this associ-ation evolved over time. We compute the spatial autocorrelation between asubscriber’s seat quality and the quality of the seats held by the 25 subscrib-ers who lived closest to that focal subscriber in the city. The top panel in fig-ure 16 shows this autocorrelation going up consistently over time, meaningAmerican Journal of Sociology1776This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).that living close by in the city was increasingly associated with sitting closeby in the concert hall. The pattern of sitting within the hall indeed became amirror of the pattern of living in the city.Local indicators finally make it possible to observe in greater detail theprecise dynamics that drove that evolution toward greater spatial associa-tion in seat quality. In the bottom panel of figure 16, bright red dots are in-dividuals who sat in a good seat andwhose seat quality correlated positivelywith that of their subscriber neighbors in the city. Conversely, light bluedots represent individuals who sat in less desirable seats and whose seatquality was positively associated with that of their city neighbors.Throughout the period the growing association between residential andseat proximity was due in part to East Side subscribers sitting in the hall’smore desirable locations. These were typically social elite subscribers. Yet alarge chunk of the increase in spatial autocorrelation is explained by sub-scribers sitting in less desirable sections and who lived on the Upper WestSide and in Harlem. A comparison with figures 13 and 14 shows that clus-ters of subscribers in low-quality seats overlapped with clusters of individ-uals whose occupations did not pertain to the organization of economic cap-ital. They also encompassed clusters of educated subscribers in managerialand intellectual professions. New members of the audience, in other words,were welcome, but their place in the hall was clearly separated from that ofthe social elite—whose distinction continued to be read in the location fromFIG. 15.—Home addresses of Philharmonic subscribers in first-tier and balcony seatsCultural Capital1777This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).FIG. 16.—Overall residential clustering (Moran’s I, with 95% confidence interval, toppanel) and residential clusters of Philharmonic subscribers holding more desirable (reddots) and less desirable (light blue dots) seats, 1889–90, 1897–98, and 1906–7.This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).which they enjoyed concerts.24 The evolution of sitting patterns at the Phil-harmonic therefore offers a striking example of segregated inclusion: whilethe opening of the elite cultural institution to a new, middle-class group wasreal, it was accompanied by new ways for the elite to demarcate itself fromnewcomers, thus preserving its specialness and distinction.CONCLUSIONOn October 24, 1909, theNew York Times outlined a plan put into place bythe Philharmonic’s new conductor, Gustav Mahler, to provide tickets tothose who could not afford them:It is only right, Mahler is quoted as saying, that those who feel they cannot af-ford to pay the sum necessary to secure a seat at the regular symphony concertsshould have the opportunity to hear good music well played at prices withintheir incomes. . . . Students at the universities, music pupils, working peopleof all sections of this great city are entitled to hear the best classical andmodernprogrammes of orchestral music just as much as others who can easily affordsuch a privilege. The aim of the Philharmonic concerns will be to education.We do not want to give the public music it does not desire, yet we hope thatwhat we offer will be not only suitable to their tastes, but that it will broadentheir musical understanding.In the late 1900s one of the Philharmonic’s goals was to attract and edu-cate an audience beyond the wealthy elite now in charge of its destinies. Aswe have shown, however, by that time the opening of the concert hall tononelite patrons was already well under way. The fact and structure of thatopening were emblematic of processes that helped to constitute elite cultureinto a form of socially valuable capital in the Gilded Age. In particular,greater distinctiveness and greater inclusiveness co-occurred at the Philhar-monic, enabling the type of culture sponsored by elites to remain sociallydistinctive while also acquiring broader social currency.This dual shift toward inclusiveness and distinction happened throughthe segregated inclusion of an educated middle class—a class that firstemerged in American cities in the late 19th century. The uniqueness of thatclass, we believe, paved a specific pathway for the formation of cultural cap-ital in the United States: in contrast to other contexts, the value of high cul-ture was built not on the cultural authority of the state (Benzecry 2014) buton culture’s ability to circulate across social groups while remaining dis-tinctive. Segregated inclusion was central to that phenomenon. It resur-faces later on, asMahler’s plan to broaden the audience of the Philharmoniccontinues: “Naturally, these concerts [intended to attract working people]24 This tightening of the relationship between social position and seat location could alsobe noted within the elite itself, as shown above in fig. 7.Cultural Capital1779This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).would have to be separate from the regular series.” Sharing high culturewidely was essential to establishing its currency, but it should not comeat the expense of elite distinctiveness. Inclusion was important, but segrega-tion was necessary.There are three broader implications of our argument. First, we showedthat cross-class inclusion was a core feature of the formation of cultural cap-ital in New York—which went on to become a dominant cultural center inthe United States. Our approach here joins prior research in suggesting thatthe constitution of high culture as a form of capital took different paths indifferent places and that scholars seeking to explain that process shouldbe attentive to its scope conditions—such as the local elite’s greater or lesserfragmentation or their overall level of education. Second, an important as-pect of our story is that people could pay for their seats at the Philharmonic.Unlike social clubs—into which one had to be accepted—or marriages—which families typically had to approve—cultural institutions operated onthemarket, making themuniquely suited for the kinds of inclusion dynamicsthat we observe. Most importantly, we showed that while exclusive culturaltastes may have helped elites to strengthen their standing in society, the cap-ital on which they garnered advantages from these tastes was built and sus-tained through interclass participation. This suggests that dynamics of inclu-sion can play an important role in periods of upper-class consolidation andincreasing inequality—such as the Gilded Age.REFERENCESAbbott, Andrew. 1988. The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of ExpertLabor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Almond, Gabriel A. (1939) 1998. Plutocracy and Politics in New York City. Boulder,Colo.: Westview.Baltzell, EdwardDigby. 1958.Philadelphia Gentlemen: TheMaking of aNational UpperClass. New York: Free Press.Beckert, Sven. 2000. The Monied Metropolis: New York City and the Consolida-tion of the American Bourgeoisie, 1850–1896. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Beisel, Nicola. 1990. “Class, Culture, and Campaigns against Vice in Three AmericanCities, 1872–1892.” American Sociological Review 55:44–62.———. 1997. Imperiled Innocents: Anthony Comstock and Family Reproduction in Vic-torian America. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Bender, Thomas. 1978. Community and Social Change in America. New Brunswick,N.J.: Rutgers University Press.Benzecry, Claudio. 2014. “An Opera House for the ‘Paris of South America’: Pathwaysto the Institutionalization of High Culture.” Theory and Society 43:169–96.Bledstein, Burton J. 1976. The Culture of Professionalism: The Middle Class and the De-velopment of Higher Education in America. New York: Norton.Block, Adrienne Fried. 2012. “Thinking about Serious Music in NewYork, 1842–1882.”Pp. 435–50 in American Orchestras in the Nineteenth Century, edited by John Spitzer.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.American Journal of Sociology1780This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste. Cam-bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.Burkholder, J. Peter. 1986. “The Twentieth Century and the Orchestra as Museum.”Pp. 409–32 in The Orchestra: Origins and Transformations, edited by Joan Peyer.New York: Scribner’s Sons.Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in Ameri-can Business. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.Cone, JohnFrederick. 1983.First Rival of theMetropolitanOpera. NewYork: ColumbiaUniversity Press.Dawley, Alan. 2005. “TheAbortive Rule of BigMoney.”Pp. 149–80 inRuling America: AHistory of Wealth and Power in a Democracy, edited by Steven Fraser and GaryGerstle. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.DiMaggio, Paul. 1982a. “Cultural Entrepreneurship in Nineteenth-Century Boston: TheCreation of an Organizational Base for High Culture in America.”Media, Culture andSociety 4:33–50.———. 1982b. “Cultural Entrepreneurship in Nineteenth-Century Boston, Part II:The Classification and Framing of American Art.” Media, Culture and Society 4:303–22.———. 1987. “Classification in Art.” American Sociological Review 52:440–55.———. 1991. “Social Structure, Institutions, and Cultural Goods: The Case of the UnitedStates.” Pp. 133–55 in Social Theory for a Changing Society, edited by Pierre Bourdieuand James S. Coleman. Boulder, Colo.:Westview;NewYork: Russell Sage Foundation.Dowd, Timothy J., Kathleen Liddle, Kim Lupo, and Ann Borden. 2002. “Organizing theMusical Canon: The Repertoire of Major U.S. Symphony Orchestras, 1842 to 1969.”Poetics 30:35–61.Eisler, Paul E. 1984.Metropolitan Opera: The First Twenty-Five Years, 1883–1908. NewYork: North River Press.Gouldner, AlvinW. 1979. The Future of Intellectuals and the Rise of the NewClass. NewYork: Seabury.Green, Martin. 1966. The Problem of Boston: Readings in Cultural History. New York:Norton.Gurock, Jeffrey S. 2016. The Jews of Harlem: The Rise, Decline, and Revival of a JewishCommunity. New York: New York University Press.Hammack, David C. 1982.Power and Society: Greater New York at the Turn of the Cen-tury. New York: Columbia University Press.Haskell, Thomas L. 1977. The Emergence of Professional Social Science: The AmericanSocial Science Association and the Nineteenth-Century Crisis of Authority. Urbana:University of Illinois Press.Higley, Stephen R. 1995. Privilege, Power, and Place: The Geography of the AmericanUpper Class. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.Horowitz, Helen. 1976. Culture and the City: Cultural Philanthropy in Chicago from the1880s to 1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Jaher, Frederic Cople. 1972. “Nineteenth-Century Elites in New York and Boston.”Journal of Social History 6:32–77.———. 1982. The Urban Establishment: Upper Strata in Boston, New York, Charleston,Chicago, and Los Angeles. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.Johnson, Victoria, and Walter W. Powell. 2017. “Organizational Poisedness and theTransformation of Civic Order in Nineteenth-Century New York City.” Pp. 179–230 in Organizations, Civil Society, and the Roots of Development, edited by Naomi R.Lamoreaux and John Joseph Wallis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Kolodin, Irving. 1966. The Metropolitan Opera, 1883–1966. New York: Knopf.Krehbiel, Henry E. 1892. The Philharmonic Society of New York: A Memorial. NewYork and London: Novello, Ewer.Cultural Capital1781This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Kremp, Pierre-Antoine. 2010. “Innovation and Selection: Symphony Orchestras and theConstruction of the Musical Canon in the United States (1879–1959).” Social Forces88:1051–82.Lamont, Michèle, and Marcel Fournier, eds. 1992. Cultivating Differences: SymbolicBoundaries and the Making of Inequality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Lamont, Michèle, and Annette Lareau. 1988. “Cultural Capital: Allusions, Gaps andGlissandos in Recent Theoretical Developments.” Sociological Theory 6:153–68.Levine, Lawrence W. 1988. Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchyin America. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.Licht, Walter. 1995. Industrializing America: The Nineteenth Century. Baltimore: JohnsHopkins University Press.Lizardo, Omar. 2006. “How Cultural Tastes Shape Personal Networks.” American So-ciological Review 71:778–807.Martin, George. 1983. The Damrosch Dynasty: America’s First Family of Music. Boston:Houghton Mifflin.Mauskapf, Michael G. 2012. “Enduring Crisis, Ensuring Survival: Artistry, Economics,and the American Symphony Orchestra.” Ph.D. dissertation. University of Michigan,Department of Musicology.Mosenthal, Hermann. 1897.Geschichte des Vereins deutscher Liederkranz in New York.New York: Ringler.Mueller, John H. 1951. The American Symphony Orchestra. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-versity Press.Nadel, Stanley. 1990. Little Germany: Ethnicity, Religion and Class in New York City,1845–1880. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.Olenson, Alexandra, and John Voss, eds. 1979. The Organization of Knowledge in Mod-ern America, 1860–1920. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.Ostrower, Francie. 1998. “TheArts as Cultural Capital amongElites: Bourdieu’s TheoryReconsidered.” Poetics 26:43–53.Parkin, Frank. 1979.Marxism and Class Theory: A Bourgeois Critique. New York: Co-lumbia University Press.Reingold, Nathan. 1976. “Definitions and Speculations: The Professionalization of Sci-ence in America in the Nineteenth Century.” Pp. 33–69 in The Pursuit of Knowledgein the Early American Republic, edited by Alexandra Oleson and Sanborn C. Brown.Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.Rischin, Moses. 1962. The Promised City: New York’s Jews, 1870–1914. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.Roy, William G. 1999. Socializing Capital: The Rise of the Large Industrial Corporationin America. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Russell, Charles E. 1927. The American Orchestra and Theodore Thomas. Garden City,N.Y.: Doubleday, Page.Santoro,Marco. 2010. “Constructing anArtistic Field as a Political Project: Lessons fromLa Scala.” Poetics 38:534–54.Shanet, Howard. 1975. Philharmonic: A History of New York’s Orchestra. New York:Doubleday.Sloan, Douglas. 1980. “Science in New York City, 1867–1907.” Isis 71:35–76.Story, Ronald. 1980. The Forging of an Aristocracy: Harvard and the Boston UpperClass, 1800–1870. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press.Tomkins, Calvin. 1989.Merchants andMasterpieces: The Story of theMetropolitanMu-seum of Art. New York: Holt.Trachtenberg, Alan. (1982) 2007. The Incorporation of America: Culture and Society inthe Gilded Age. New York: Hill & Wang.Veblen, Thorstein. (1899) 2009. The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study ofInstitutions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.American Journal of Sociology1782This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.Weber,William. 2001. “FromMiscellany toHomogeneity in Concert Programming.”Po-etics 29:125–34.———. 2008. The Great Transformation of Musical Taste: Concert Programming fromHaydn to Brahms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Wiebe, Robert H. 1967. The Search for Order, 1877–1920. New York: Farrar, Straus &Giroux.Cultural Capital1783This content downloaded from 158.143.037.162 on February 04, 2020 03:03:42 AMAll use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).