ABSTRACT: 
In this paper, three theories of progress and the aim of science are discussed: the theory of progress as increasing explanatory power, advocated by Popper in The logic of scientific discovery ; the theory of progress as approximation to the truth, introduced by Popper in Conjectures and refutations ; the theory of progress as a steady increase of competing alternatives, which Feyerabend put forward in the essay “Reply to criticism. Comments on Smart, Sellars and Putnam” and defended as late as the last edition of Against method. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationism—which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s—must be explained by taking into account not only Feyerabend's very peculiar view of the aim of science, but also Popper's changing account of progress. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper argues that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationismd which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationismd which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationismd which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationismd which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationism which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationism which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationism which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyerabend's changing attitude towards falsificationism which he often advocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980s. It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholars have predominantly assumed, Feyer 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 lable at ScienceDirectStudies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e41Contents lists avaiStudies in History and Philosophy of Sciencejournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/shpsaA tale of three theories: Feyerabend and Popper on progress and theaim of scienceLuca TamboloDepartment of Humanistic Studies, University of Trieste, c/o via Casona, 7, 40043 Marzabotto, Italya r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 3 November 2014Received in revised form14 February 2015Available onlineKeywords:Feyerabend;Popper;Scientific progress;Aim of science;Theoretical pluralism;Approximation to the truthE-mail address: ltambolo@gmail.com.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2015.02.0050039-3681/ 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.a b s t r a c tIn this paper, three theories of progress and the aim of science are discussed: (i) the theory of progress asincreasing explanatory power, advocated by Popper in The logic of scientific discovery (1935/1959); (ii) thetheory of progress as approximation to the truth, introduced by Popper in Conjectures and refutations(1963); (iii) the theory of progress as a steady increase of competing alternatives, which Feyerabend putforward in the essay “Reply to criticism. Comments on Smart, Sellars and Putnam” (1965) and defendedas late as the last edition of Against method (1993). It is argued that, contrary to what Feyerabend scholarshave predominantly assumed, Feyerabend’s changing attitude towards falsificationismdwhich he oftenadvocated at the beginning of his career, and vociferously attacked in the 1970s and 1980sdmust beexplained by taking into account not only Feyerabend’s very peculiar view of the aim of science, but alsoPopper’s changing account of progress. 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.When citing this paper, please use the full journal title Studies in History and Philosophy of Science1. IntroductionPaul Feyerabend’s changing attitude towards falsificationism is amuch debated issue within the historiography of the Popperianschool in philosophy of science. As is well-known, Feyerabendmade a name for himself by passionately advocating the Popperianoutlookda pretty remarkable instance being his lectures entitledKnowledge without foundations (1962a), which repeat (in somepassages almost verbatim) large parts of Karl Popper’s famousessay “Back to the Presocratics” (1959). At some point in the 1960s,however, Feyerabend turned his back on his former mentor, and inthe 1970s and 1980s he became a vociferousdperhaps the mostvociferousdcritic of falsificationism.Conflicting accounts of such turndand of the later Feyerabend’srageful replies to thosewho dared tomention his previous embraceof Popper’s ideasdhave been offered (see Collodel, forthcoming, fora state-of-the-art discussion of the issue). To name but two ex-amples, John Watkins has suggested that the later Feyerabend’sderogatory remarks on falsificationism were due to his desire tocover up an “unwanted indebtedness to Popper” (2000, p. 49),while Eric Oberheim has forcefully argued that, although Feyer-abend used very freely some of Popper’s ideas, he rejected falsifi-cationism as early as the beginning of the 1960s and he “was nevera member of the Popperian school” (2006, p. 78; see alsoHoyningen-Huene & Oberheim, 2000). As these examples show,there is a continued disagreement between, on the one hand, in-terpreters who view the early Feyerabend as someone striving tocontribute to the development of Popper’s research program and,on the other hand, interpreters who argue that as early as in thefirst half of the 1960s he aimed at proposing a theory of sciencewhich would eventually displace falsificationism. In what follows,we shall remain neutral with respect to such debate: the main aimof the present paper is, more modestly, to point out that in-terpreters have oftentimes taken falsificationism to be a kind offixed anchorage in the reconstruction of Feyerabend’s trajectory. Toput it differently, it has often been assumed that Popper’s philos-ophy provides a gooddif not the idealdbackground against whichto reconstruct Feyerabend’s work, among other things in view ofthe fact that falsificationism is a fixed system of ideas to which indifferent moments Feyerabend reacted, not without idiosyncrasies,in different ways.1 Besides openly acknowledging the prescriptive character of his methodologicalrules, Popper insisted on the descriptive adequacy of the method of conjectures andrefutations, i.e., on the fact that it captures the best practice of great scientists. For adiscussion of some problems facing Popper’s view of methodology, see e.g., Preston(1994).L. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e4134There is, of course, a clearly identifiable set of ideas constitutingthe hardcore of falsificationism that Popper never relinquished,among which the view that the method of conjectures and refu-tations, capturing the essence of good science, promotes progress.Nevertheless, Feyerabend scholars seem to have generally under-estimated an important change which took place within Popper’sphilosophy between the end of the 1950s and the early 1960s, andwhich concerned axiological matters. More specifically, in The logicof scientific discovery Popper had defended a theory of science inwhich, as he remarked, “it is possible to avoid using the concepts‘true’ and ‘false’” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 273), and progress isviewed as a matter of finding corroborated theories exhibitingincreasing explanatory and predictive power. Subsequently, inChapter 10 of Conjectures and refutations (1963) he defended theview that scientific progress can be accounted for in terms of theincreasing approximation to the truth of our theories, and was thefirst to put forward a formal explication of the notion of verisi-militude (or, equivalently, truthlikeness). Feyerabend was neverwilling to embrace Popper’s second theory of progress, whichconflicts with the theory of progress as a steady increase ofcompeting alternatives that do not converge towards the truthdatheory that he put forward in the seminal essay “Reply to criticism.Comments of Smart, Sellars and Putnam” (1981c [1965]) anddefended as late as the last edition of Against method (1993). As weshall argue, when the attempt is made to explain Feyerabend’schanging attitude towards falsificationism, an accurate accountought to include not only Feyerabend’s move away from Popper’sideas, but also Popper’s move away from his own originary view ofthe aim of science.The focus of our discussion will then be on the three theories ofprogress and the aim of science alluded to in the title of this paper.In Section 2, after a cursory recap of the basic tenets of falsifica-tionism, Popper’s two theories of progress will be introduced. InSection 3, as a way of preparation for the analysis of Feyerabend’stheory of progress, his pluralistic model of theory testing, revolvingaround the claim that a severe test of a theory T requires to take intoconsideration not only the available evidence, but also alternativesto T, will be illustrated. A special emphasis will be put on the mixedstanding of Feyerabend’s views on theory testing and proliferation,which although showcasing his Popperian ancestry (as recentlyemphasized by Bschir, forthcoming), also led him, by the mid-1960s, outside the falsificationist orthodoxy. In Section 4, Feyer-abend’s theory of progress as a steady increase of competing al-ternatives, wedded to his views on theory testing and proliferation,will be analyzed. In Section 5, some brief concluding remarks willbe offered.2. Popper’s two theories of progressThe issue of scientific progress always played a central rolewithin the philosophy of Popper, who famously took the growth ofknowledge to be the most important problem of epis-temologydone which, he claimed, “can be studied best by studyingthe growth of scientific knowledge” (2002a [1935/1959], p. XIX). Aswe shall see, in different moments he put forward two differenttheories of progress and the aim of science; nevertheless, Popperalways maintained that scientific inquiry ought to proceed ac-cording to the principles of his proposed alternative to the induc-tivist view of scientific method, i.e., the method of conjectures andrefutations.According to Popper, the inductivist claim that scientific inquirytakes off with the accumulation of observations, from which the-ories are then inductively inferred, is plainly wrong: all life isproblem solving, and inquiry in science, not unlike in everyday life,arts, politics, etc., is triggered by the researcher’s attempt to solvesome problem by putting forward a theory, hypothesis, or conjec-ture. However, there is one feature that distinguishes the theoriesbelonging to the domain of empirical science: scientific theoriescan conflict with experience in such a way that experience canprove them false. The basic tenet of falsificationism is then the viewthat the falsifiability of theories provides a criterion of demarca-tiondthe falsifiability criteriondwhich allows one to tell sciencefrom non-science.More precisely, let a basic-statement be a statement describing asingular fact, for instance, the fact that a certain swan is black.According to Popper’s criterion of demarcation, a theory Tdforinstance, the theory according to which all swans are whitedisscientific iff there are basic-statements with which T is incompat-ible, or equivalently, that are forbidden by T, and such that, if theywere true, T would be false. Such basic-statements are called byPopper the ‘potential falsifiers’ of T, and constitute its ‘empiricalcontent’dthat is, the amount of information concerning the worldconveyed by T. The greater the empirical content of a theory T, themore interesting T is: a theory which is incompatible with manybasic-statements and which, besides explaining already knownfacts, also makes surprising predictions, runs the risk of beingfalsified because it says many things about the world, and thereforequalifies, in Popper’s jargon, as a bold conjecture.Another basic tenet of falsificationism is that, once a theory hasbeen proposed, scientists ought to severely test it, aiming at itsrefutation. The tests are performed by deducing from Tdinconjunctionwith theso-called ‘backgroundknowledge’dpredictionsthat are then confronted with the basic-statements accepted by thescientific community, which describe the available evidence (that is,basically, the observations and the results of experiments). If thepredictions deduced from T are compatible with such basic-statements, T is said to have been corroborated by experience.However, according to Popper one can never attribute a positiveprobability to a universal theory, no matter how well corroborated:scientists embrace a corroborated theory as a satisfactory solution tothe problem at hand only provisionally and tentatively, and proceedto subject such solution to further, more severe, tests. If the pre-dictions deduced from T are incompatible with the accepted basic-statements, T is said to have been falsified, and it should bereplaced by some new conjecture providing scientists with an as yetuntested, but presumably more satisfactory solution to the problemthat they are investigating.The method of conjectures and refutations revolves, unsur-prisingly, around the falsifiability criterion, which Popper charac-terized as the “supreme rule” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 33) of hismethodology: all the other rules that he devised follow from it,although not in a strictly logical or deductive way, but rather in thesense that, taken together, they are aimed at guaranteeing that noscientific statement will be protected against falsification.1 Thefalsifiability criterion is, Popper claimed, “a proposal for an agree-ment or convention” which ought to guide the activity of those whohold dear such values as critical discussion and freedom fromdogmatism, and are therefore moved by the desire to tackle “newand unexpected questions, challenging us to try out new andhitherto undreamed-of answers” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 15).Therefore, in The logic of scientific discovery Popper put forward hisfirst theory of progress, according to which science pursues an“infinite yet attainable aim: that of ever discovering new, deeper2 Notoriously, Popper downplayed the differences between his two theories ofprogress, claiming that Tarski’s theory of truth contributed to clarify his views onscience and its philosophy but did not change them significantly (2002a [1935/1959], p.273, fn. *1). Nevertheless, as our discussion here shows, the theory ofprogress as increasing approximation to the truth, anything but implicit in The logicof scientific discovery, makes claims concerning the aim of scientific inquiry thatPopper’s first theory of progress does not make and faces problems that cannotarise within the context of the theory of progress as increasing explanatory power,such as that of the alleged link between corroboration and verisimilitude. For aclassical discussion of the problems facing Popper’s second theory of progress seeDilworth (2007), esp. chap. 5.L. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e41 35and more general problems, and of subjecting our ever tentativeanswers to ever renewed and ever more rigorous tests” (2002a[1935/1959], p. 281). Or, as he more concisely put it in “The aimof science,” scientific inquiry is after “satisfactory explanations, ofwhatever strikes us as being in need of explanation” (1957, p. 24).Scientific progress is thus a matter of finding better and betterexplanations, that is, corroborated theories of ever greater gener-ality, exhibiting increasing explanatory and predictive power: “atheory that has been well corroborated can only be superseded byone of a higher level of universality” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 276).This means that, within a progressive series of theories, each suc-cessive theory is better testabledit has more empirical contentd,deals with deeper problems than the previous one, and “containsthe old, well corroborated theorydor at least a good approximationto it” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 276).As mentioned above Popper maintained that, based on the testswhich it survived, an unfalsified theory can be viewed as the bestamong its competitors, and therefore worth of selection for furthercritical discussion, but in spite of a theory’s success inwithstandingsevere tests, one can never conclude that it is true: once the ideal ofdemonstrably certain knowledge has been dispensed with, and athoroughly fallibilist stance has been embraced, all scientificstatements come to be viewed as “tentative for ever” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 280). In fact, the test of a theory consists in the comparisonof the predictions deduced from it with a set of basic-statements,which the scientific community tentatively accepts as de-scriptions of certain aspects of the world; therefore a theory thathas passed a test is said to be corroborated not in any absolutesense, but only with respect to the relevant set of basic-statements.Consequently, what Popper called the ‘degree of corroboration’ of atheory is to be viewed as nothing but a summary of the currentstate of the critical discussion concerning the merits of the theory,which comes with a subscript attached, characterizing “the systemof basic statements towhich the corroboration relates (for example,by the date of its acceptance)” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 275). In thisregard, Popper openly remarked that within his theory of science,the concepts ‘true’ and ‘false’ are dispensable (2002a [1935/1959],p. 273)dand indeed, until “The aim of science” (1957), he studi-ously avoided talk of truth when discussing axiological issues.Popper would later claim that it was only thanks to the work ofAlfred Tarski that his hesitation to speak of ‘truth’ and ‘falsity’ wasswept away. If Popper’s recollections in this regard can be reliedupon, not long after the completion of the German edition of Thelogic of scientific discovery, Tarski explained to him “(in the Volks-garten in Vienna) the idea of his definition of the concept of truth”as correspondence to the facts, and he immediately “realized howimportant it was, and that he had finally rehabilitated the muchmaligned correspondence theory of truth” (2002b [1974], p. 112;see also 2002a [1935/1959], p. 273, fn. *1). However, it was onlybetween the end of the 1950s and the beginning of the 1960s thatPopper put forward his second theory of progress, i.e., the theory ofprogress as increasing approximation to the truth. More specif-ically, in Conjectures and refutations he devised an explication of thenotion of verisimilitude, or equivalently, truthlikeness (see 1963,pp. 231e234 and 391e397). Based on such explication, he declaredthat “we simply cannot do without something like this idea of abetter or worse approximation to truth” (1963, p. 232), since whatwe want to say when a theory T2 replaces a theory T1 is that T2corresponds to the facts better than its predecessor. For instance,such a theory-change as the transition from Newton’s to Einstein’stheory can be regarded as progressive because, although the newtheory is, strictly speaking, presumably false (if only because itinvolves the use of idealizing assumptions), it is, by our lights,closer to the truth than the superseded one. As Popper later put it inObjective knowledge, “while we can never have sufficiently goodarguments in the empirical sciences for claiming that we haveactually reached the truth, we can have strong and reasonably goodarguments for claiming that we may have made progress towardsthe truth” (1972, pp. 57e58). The main cognitive aim of scientificinquiry is then characterized, within Popper’s second theory ofprogress, as increasing approximation to the truth: “In the searchfor knowledge, we are out to find out true theories, or at leasttheories which are nearer than others to the truth” (1963, p. 226),where following Tarski, truth is construed as correspondence to thefacts.2Popper hastened to add that one has to distinguish between thelogical problem of verisimilitude, which consists in providing adefinition of verisimilitude such that a comparison of any twotheories with respect to their closeness to the, supposedly known,truth is possible, and the epistemic problem of verisimilitude,which consists in devising a method to assess the degree of veri-similitude of theories based on the available evidence. Concerningthe former problem, Popper believed that his explication solved it;concerning the latter, he claimed to have already solved it in Thelogic of scientific discovery: the method of conjectures and refuta-tions, he argued, constitutes “the proper methodological counter-part” (1963, p. 235) to the idea of verisimilitude.For our present purposes it needs to be noted, first of all, thatalthough Popper claimed that his old methodology remained inplace unaltered, following the introduction of his new theory ofprogress, the rules of the method of conjectures and refutationsrequired at least some reinterpretation. In fact, according to Pop-per’s first theory of progress, a scientific community that aims atfinding corroborated theories of ever greater explanatory andpredictive power ought to select for further critical discussion,among competing unfalsified theories, the more corroboratedtheory exhibiting the greater explanatory and predictive power. Inother words, according to the theory of science defended in Thelogic of scientific discovery, merely playing the game of science by itsrules suffices, in a sense, to reach the aim of the game, given thatone cannot draw any sharp distinction between the aim pursuedand the means used to pursue it. Not that coming up with con-jectures possessing the desired features is a mechanical task: quiteon the contrary, Popper declared that “every discovery contains ‘anirrational element,’ or ‘a creative intuition,’ in Bergson’s sense”(2002a [1935/1959], p. 8), and acknowledged that good theories areanything but easy to come by. In any case, when in Conjectures andrefutations Popper put forward his second theory of progress, thequestion arosewhether the falsificationist rules of method are goodmeans for pursuing the aim of approximation to the truth, andmore specifically, whether a link between a theory’s high degree ofcorroboration and its possessing a high degree of verisimilitude canbe shown to obtain (a question that Imre Lakatos, 1978 [1974] andAdolf Grünbaum, 1976, among others, answered in the negative).While relentlessly defending his methodology, Popper sometimesissued contradictory statements in this regard. To mention but twoexamples, in a 1972 Addendum to The logic of scientific discovery heemphatically denied that the degree of corroboration is a measureL. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e4136of verisimilitude (2002a [1935/1959], p. 282), while in the reply tocritics that he prepared for the volume of The library of living phi-losophers devoted to his work he admitted: “I did suggest in Con-jectures and Refutations, Chapter 10, that the degree ofcorroboration may be taken as an indication of verisimilitude”(1974, p. 1011).Secondly, despite Popper’s confidence, in 1974 his explication ofverisimilitude was proven inadequate: based on it, a false theorycan never be closer to the truth than another (true or false) theory,so that the Popperian notion of verisimilitude turned out to beinapplicable to the comparison between false theories (see Miller,1974; Tichý, 1974)dthat is, in the scientifically most interestingcases. Indeed, such an inadequacy of Popper’s explication put onceagain under the spotlight what Lakatos always took tobedindependently of the problems of Popper’s notion of ver-isimilitudedthe major weakness of the methodology of conjec-tures and refutations, that is, its inability to account for the fact thatscientists deal all the time with already falsified theories. When atheory shows enough promise, Lakatos argued, the scientificcommunity behaves in a clearly non-falsificationist way and, con-trary to Popper’s recommendations, does not treat known coun-terexamples as reasons to get rid of it: “Some of the researchprogrammes now held in highest esteem by the scientific com-munity progressed in an ocean of anomalies” (Lakatos 1978 [1974],p. 147).3The issues that arose following the introduction of Popper’ssecond theory of progress, however, need not concern us further.What matters here is, rather, that in spite of the technical diffi-culties encountered by his approach to verisimilitude, Poppercontinued to stress the importance of the intuitive idea ofapproximation to the truth as the regulative ideal of scientific in-quiry. As we shall see in Section 4, Popper’s intuitions in this respectclashed with those of Feyerabend, who from 1965 onwardsembraced the very peculiar view that knowledge is “an ever-increasing ocean of alternatives” (1981c [1965], p. 107) which donot converge towards the truth; as we shall show, such a view goeshand in hand with Feyerabend’s defense of theoretical pluralism,which originated within the context of Popper’s views on theorytesting.43. Feyerabend on theory testing and proliferationThroughout all of his career, Feyerabend passionately advocatedtheoretical pluralism, which he supported by means of variousstrategies. For instance, one of his favorite lines of argument alwayswas to insist that the proliferation of alternatives to the acceptedpoint of view is desirable since it promotes the full flourishing ofhuman faculties, and he often contrasted such an advantage ofpluralism with the narrow-mindedness resulting from the exclu-sive commitment to one paradigm that characterizes, amongothers, the Kuhnian scientist (see, e.g., 1970, as well as Lloyd’s 2000[1997] insightful discussion). Moreover, especially from the 1970s3 Since 1975, various theories of verisimilitude based on explications of thenotion that avoid the flaws of Popper’s approach have been proposed (see, e.g.,Kuipers, 1987, 2000; Niiniluoto, 1987; Oddie, 1986; and see Oddie, 2014 for a surveyof these post-Popperian theories of verisimilitude). Post-Popperian verisimilitudetheorists as Kuipers and Niiniluoto have developed non-falsificationist methodol-ogies based on the insight that a falsified theory may well be the closest to the truthamong the available alternatives.4 As pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, Feyerabend seems to have explicitlydenied any link between corroboration and verisimilitude as early as 1962, in apassage of “Explanation, reduction and empiricism” which was removed in the1981 reprint of this essay in his Philosophical papers: “Even the stability of a testablehypothesis cannot be regarded as a sign of factual truth. [.] There is no sign bywhich factual truth may be recognized” (1962b, p. 70, fn. 86).onwards, he forcefully disputed the claim that modern science isthe onlydor the bestdway to investigate the world. Non-scientificapproaches or traditions, Feyerabend argued, allow their practi-tioners to acquire valuable insights into the workings of nature: hiscall for pluralism extended well beyond the realm of scientific in-quiry (see especially Farewell to reason, 1987, and the materialscollected in the posthumous, unfinished Conquest of abundance,1999a). In any case, the backbone of Feyerabend’s advocacy ofproliferationwithin science was provided by an argument which heput forward in the early 1960s and proposed time and time again,until the end of his career. The argument, aimed at establishing thatabsent proliferation, severe testing of theories is impossible, startswith an attack against “the assumption of the relative autonomy offacts, or the autonomy principle” (1999b [1963], p. 91).According to such principle, the facts which constitute theempirical content of a certain theory T are available to the scientificcommunity independently of the consideration of alternatives to T.In Feyerabend’s view, the principle underlies a monistic model oftheory testing characterized by the claim that “a single theory iscomparedwith a class of facts (or observation statements)which areassumed to be ‘given’ somehow” (1999b [1963], p. 91). Themonisticmodel, Feyerabend argued, is fatally flawed, since it leads to neglectthat facts and theories exhibit a much more intimate connection:Not only is the description of every single fact dependent onsome theory (which may, of course, be very different from thetheory to be tested). There exist also facts which cannot beunearthed except with the help of alternatives to the theory tobe tested, and which become unavailable as soon as such al-ternatives are excluded (1999b [1963], pp. 91e92).In other words, in order to severely test a theory T, it is not enoughto consider the empirical consequences of T and the available evi-dence: some facts which may refute T can only be discovered bydeploying at least one alternative T 0 to T. Therefore, Feyerabendargued, the monistic modeldwhich he viewed as “clearly impliedin almost all investigations which deal with questions of confir-mation and test” (1999b [1963], p. 91)dought to be replaced with apluralistic model of theory testing, revolving around the followingmaxim: “The methodological unit to which we must refer whendiscussing questions of test and empirical content is constituted bya whole set of partly overlapping, factually adequate, but mutuallyinconsistent theories” (1999b [1963], p. 92).Notoriously, the thesis that certain shortcomings of a theory canbe revealed only by using alternatives to it has commanded a greatdeal of critical attention, and in most cases commentators havedoubted the viability of Feyerabend’s defense of theoreticalpluralism (see esp. Farrell, 2003, chap. 5, and Preston, 1997, chap. 7,for extended discussions of the relevant literature). Here, however,we shall not address the merits of Feyerabend’s argument forproliferation. Rather, we shall aim at emphasizing, first of all, howdeeply rooted such argument was in the Popperian framework; andsecondly, how far Feyerabend pushed the argument away fromPopper’s ideas on theory testing.Both before and after his break with Popper, Feyerabendadmitted that Popper’s work provided the starting point of his owninvestigations. In this regard it is interesting to mention, first of all,that as Matteo Collodel forcefully argues (forthcoming, esp. fn. 31),the very language used by Feyerabend to couch his criticism of themonistic model of theory testingdas well as of the accounts ofexplanation and reduction favored by the Logical Empiri-cistsdexhibits what seems to be a distinctively Popperian pedigree.For instance, in the opening sentence of his classical “Explanation,reduction and empiricism,” Feyerabend declared that his criticismwas intended to apply to the test of theories exhibiting a very highlevel of generality (such as, for instance, Newton’s theory), towhichL. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e41 37he referred as “noninstantial theories” (1962b, p. 28 and fn. 1);‘noninstantial theory’ and germane expressions, while absent fromthe vocabulary of Logical Empiricism before Ernest Nagel importedthem in (1961), were used in the Popperian circle in the 1950s.Secondly, as Karim Bschir (forthcoming, Sect. 1) has pointed out,although commentators have in many cases taken for granted that,according to Feyerabend, Popper figured prominently among theproponents of the monistic model, “there is hardly any passage inFeyerabend where he associates Popper with the monistic model”of theory testing, for the very good reason that, as his pupilFeyerabend was aware, Popper did not put forward such a model.And indeed, as is well-known, in a passage of “Explanation,reduction and empiricism” which Feyerabend removed when hisearlier essays were collected in the two volumes of the Philosophicalpapers (1981a; 1981b), he credited Popper with being the first topoint out “the need, in the process of the refutation of a theory, forat least another theory” (1962b, p. 32).5 It seems difficult to over-estimate Popper’s influence on Feyerabend’s argument in defenseof pluralism, and in what is, to date, the most wide-ranginginvestigation on the compatibility between Feyerabendian theo-retical pluralism and Popperian critical rationalism, Bschir haspersuasively argued that Feyerabend’s ideas on theory proliferation“must be seen as an extension of certain ideas that Karl Popper hadalready formulated in his Logic of Scientific Discovery” (forthcoming,Sect. 1).To our mind, the keyword in the passage just quoted is certainly‘extension.’ For, as Bschir openly acknowledges, Feyerabend quicklymoved away from Popper’s ideas on theory testing.In this regard one must recall, first of all, that according toPopper the distinctive feature of scientific theories lies in theirhaving empirical content, which guarantees that experience canprove them false. Besides unhesitatingly seconding Popper in thisregard, Feyerabend took one further step and argued that empiri-cism requires the increase of the empirical content, and therefore ofthe testability, of the accepted theory T via the proliferation of asmany alternatives as possible: “the basic principle of empiricism”he claimed, prescribes “to increase the empirical content of what-ever knowledge we claim to possess” (1962b, p. 66; see also, e.g.,1999b [1963], p. 93). Popper, on his part, did not take the empiricalcontent of a theory T to be something that depends on the alter-natives to T, and therefore never explicitly recommended the in-crease of the number of alternatives to T as a way of maximizing itstestability (on this, see esp. Bschir, forthcoming, Sect. 4.1; Worrall,1978). Thus, Feyerabend pushed to the extreme Popper’s lessonthat theories are not appraised by comparing them to brute facts,but rather, to the so-called ‘basic-statements,’ i.e., linguistic entitiespurporting to describe certain aspects of the world. More precisely,in The logic of scientific discovery Popper argued that a theory isconsidered as falsified only if the scientific community acceptsbasic-statements contradicting the predictions that have beendeduced from it, and such basic-statements describe some “repro-ducible effect” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 66): a falsification takes placewhen the community comes to accept a certain kind of low-levelempirical hypothesis which Popper labeled “falsifying hypothesis”(2002a [1935/1959]). This means that the potential falsifiers ofscientific theories are in fact, according to Popper, other theories;and as John Preston (1997, p. 134) pointed out, Feyerabend saw noreason to restrict the pool of candidate falsifying hypotheses tolow-level ones: rather, he believed that fully fledged, high-leveltheories provide the best means to severely test the theory that5 Feyerabend added: “As far as I am aware, this point has been made previouslyby K. R. Popper in his lectures on scientific method which I attended in 1948 and1952” (1962b, p. 32, fn. 9).happens to be accepted at a given time. Based on his construal ofthe notions of empirical content and potential falsifier, Feyerabendwent on to champion theory proliferation as no less than “anessential part of the empirical method” (1999b [1963], p. 93) and toput forward the principle of proliferation: “Invent and elaboratetheories which are inconsistent with the accepted point of view, even ifthe latter should happen to be highly confirmed and generallyaccepted” (1981c [1965], p. 105).Secondly, after arguing that in order to perform severe theorytesting one should use a set of “partly overlapping, factuallyadequate, but mutually inconsistent theories” (1999b [1963], p. 92;see also 1962b, p. 66), Feyerabend soon relaxed the requirement offactual adequacy. He started Sect. 2 of the essay “Reply to criticism.Comments on Smart, Sellars and Putnam”with the claim that “[n]otall alternatives are equally suited for the purpose of criticism”(1981c [1965], p. 109), and then articulated a number of strictdesiderata that what he called “strong alternatives”dthat is, the-ories which have the potential for displacing their rivalsdought tosatisfy. And although Feyerabend did not explicitly blame hisformer mentor for embracing a naïve form of falsificationism (anaccusation which at later stages he was more than happy to make),he went much farther than Popper would have allowed in insistingon the critical role of falsified theories.6 In Sect. 1 of the same paper,Feyerabend was adamant in claiming that the principle of prolif-eration, besides recommending the invention of alternatives to theestablished view, “prevents the elimination of older theories whichhave been refuted” (1981c [1965], p. 107), due to the fact that “suchtheories contribute to the content of their victorious rivals” (1981c[1965], p. 107). Such cases as the history of heliocentrism and ofatomism, Feyerabend argued, show that “antediluvian, preposter-ous ideas [.] may yet be turned against ‘modern’ views and mayeven succeed in overthrowing them” (1981c [1965], p. 108). Historyshows that “things can never be regarded as settled,” and thatruling out the “possibility of a ‘criticism from the past’” (1981c[1965], p. 108) would mean to deprive ourselves of an extremelyprecious resource, since even discredited theories “may be said topossess a ‘utopian’ component in the sense that they providelasting, and steadily improving, measuring sticks of adequacy”(1981c [1965], p. 107) for the theories which we now happen toaccept. In the first edition of Against method Feyerabend went so faras to explicitly suggest that the condition of factual adequacy ofalternatives ought to be “removed” (1975, p. 41, fn. 8), but evenabsent such an explicit suggestion, it seems quite clear that as earlyas 1965 he had walked, although not without some hesitations, along distance from Popper’s account of theory testing.Finally, it is quite surprising that, as Collodel (forthcoming, fn. 31)has pointed out, Popper used the term ‘inkommensurabel’dwhichPopper himself translated into English as “non-comparable” (2002a[1935/1959], p. 98)das early as 1935, in the German edition of Thelogic of scientific discovery. However, the termwas used by Popper torefer to cases in which the classes of the potential falsifiers of twotheories T1 and T2 intersect but none of the two classes is included inthe other, or the two classes have no common elements, so that thefalsifiability of T1 and T2 cannot be compared with the help of thesubclass relation. Feyerabend, on his part, employed the notion ofincommensurability in “Explanation, reduction and empiricism”within the context of the appraisal of theories. More specifically, heargued against the accounts of explanation and reduction favored bythe Logical Empiricists bydiscussingat length (1962b, pp. 52e60) therelationship between the impetus theory of motion (T1) and New-tonian mechanics (T2), i.e., a pair of theories allegedly providing a6 Such issue will be discussed at length in Section 4.L. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e4138paradigm example of such accounts of explanation and reduction.According to Feyerabend’s analysis, the deductive relationships thatought to obtain betweenT2 and T1 in order for T2 to explainT1, and forT1 to be reducible to T2, do not obtain, since the concept of impetuscannot be formulated within the context of Newton’s mechan-icsdand “this is exactly as it should be, considering the inconsistencybetween some very basic principles of these two theories” (1962b, p.57). As a consequence, the accounts of explanation and reductiondefended by the Logical Empiricists turn out to be inapplicable in thecase under consideration. Here, however, it needs to be emphasizedthat Feyerabend’s discussion of such doctrineswas aimed not only atexhibiting their descriptive inadequacy, but also at attacking theconceptual conservatism which, he claimed, they promote. In otherwords, Feyerabend viewed the conceptual change that leads to theincommensurability between certain pairs of theories as a keyingredient for progress.Of course, the emphasis on the importanceofconceptual change is anything but extraneous to falsificationism;nevertheless, in the early-to-mid-1960s Feyerabend, unlike Popper,put the notion of incommensurability into the service of the cause oftheoretical pluralism (on this, see esp. Oberheim, 2006, chap. 5).Our discussion above shows that, while originating within anunmistakably Popperian framework, Feyerabend’s views on theorytesting and proliferation evolved in such a way as to lead him, bythe mid-1960s, quite far from Popper’s views. Perhaps at firstFeyerabend was not entirely clear about how far away he hadmoved, and it seems that it took him some time to fully appreciatethis. In this regard it is worthmentioning that, in the first half of the1960s, Popper resented Feyerabend for not properly acknowledgingthat Popper’s writings were the actual source of ideas that Feyer-abend pretended were his own original contributions (see Collodel,forthcoming, Sect. 2.2.2). And although in a note to the first para-graph of “Reply to criticism. Comments on Smart, Sellars and Put-nam” Feyerabend claimed that he was “not aware of havingproduced a single idea that is not already contained in the realistictradition and especially in Professor Popper’s account of it,”7 such asolemn acknowledgment ought to be viewed also as a friendlygesture resulting from the recommendationsmade by Lakatos, whoin the Autumn of 1964, encouraged by William W. Bartley, III andJoseph Agassi, approached Feyerabend in order to scold him and to“discipline his questionable intellectual conduct” (Collodel,forthcoming). In any case, the mixed standing of Feyerabend’sargument for theoretical pluralism has arguably played amajor rolein producing the continued disagreement between, on the onehand, interpreters who view the early Feyerabend as someonestriving to contribute to the development of Popper’s researchprogram and, on the other hand, interpreters who argue that asearly as the first half of the 1960s he aimed at proposing a theory ofscience which would eventually displace falsificationism. Settlingsuch a complicated issue is clearly beyond the scope of the presentpaper. However, we devoted quite some space to what in 1965Feyerabend had to say on theory testing and proliferation, becausehis views regarding these issues are wedded to his theory ofprogress as a steady increase of competing alternatives, whichmarked a crucial axiological disagreement with Popper, and whichwill be dealt with in Section 4.8 As an anonymous reviewer pointed out, the claimdcentral to Feyerabend’sstancedthat refuted theories contribute to the content of their victorious rivalsseems to be a central feature of the view of science defended by Duhem, whomFeyerabend often mentioned among his heroes.9 Note that Feyerabend introduced the expression “ocean of alternatives” in 1965,but he had already argued for the claims that undergird such view of knowledge4. Feyerabend’s theory of progressAs detailed above, between the end of the 1950s and thebeginning of the 1960s Popper put forward his second theory of7 In the 1981 reprint of the essay contained in Feyerabend’s Philosophical papers,the words “and especially in Professor Popper’s account of it” were omitted (1981c[1965], p. 104, fn. 1).progress, according towhich approximation to the truth is themaincognitive aim of science. Feyerabend, on his part, never acceptedthe claim that truth, or approximation to the truth, ought to play aregulative role within scientific inquiry (although, as is well-known, interpreters strongly disagree on the correct interpreta-tion of his attitude towards scientific realism in the early 1960s: see,e.g., Farrell, 2003, chap. 4; Oberheim, 2006, chap. 6; and Preston,1997, chap. 4). During the 1960s Feyerabend became more andmore vociferous in his defense of pluralism, which he claimed“must not be regarded as a preliminary stage of knowledge whichwill at some time in the future be replaced by the Only True The-ory,” since pluralism is “an essential feature of all knowledge thatclaims to be objective” (1999b [1963], p. 80). By the mid-1960s,wedded to his views concerning theory testing and proliferationwas the theory of progress as a steady increase of competing al-ternatives, from which an ‘oceanic’ view of knowledge stemmed:according to Feyerabend, knowledgeis not a process that converges towards an ideal view; it is anever-increasing ocean of alternatives, each of them forcingthe others into greater articulation, all of them contributing,via this process of competition, to the development of ourmental faculties. All theories, even those which for the timebeing have receded into the background, may be said topossess a ‘utopian’ component in the sense that they providelasting, and steadily improving, measuring sticks of adequacyfor the ideas which happen to be in the centre of attention(1981c [1965], p. 107).In a note to this passage in which he used the Austrian poet’sIngeborg Bachmann words in order to challenge her viewsconcerning the contrast between science and literature, Feyer-abend added that science “is an open domain,” because “itswhole past intrudes into the present” (1981c [1965], fn. 13).Although Feyerabend did not often discuss explicitly such viewof progress and knowledge, he endorsed it for a significantlylong timedindeed, the importance of the “criticism from thepast” (1993, p. 35) is glorified in all the three editions of Againstmethod (1975, 1988, 1993), in which the exact same points madeabove are reiterated and expanded, with some differences inwording.8 It is important to realize how radical Feyerabend’sviews are. In fact, although Feyerabend acknowledged that,typically, a scientific controversy comes to an end with thevictory of one of the competing alternatives, such a victory hasto be viewed, according to his theory of progress, as an onlytemporary outcome: science is in fact a battlefield where alter-natives perpetually clash with each other, and none of themever prevails on its adversaries once and for all.9Unsurprisingly, Feyerabend’s theory of progressdand the viewof knowledge stemming from itdattracted harsh criticism. Tomention but one example, Hilary Putnam polemically defined“curious” the claim which he took to be “the central contention ofFeyerabend’s papers,” i.e., the claim that, instead of aiming at cor-rect explanations of phenomena, scientists ought to strive forand progress in previous writings, especially “Explanation, reduction and empiri-cism” (1962b) and “How to be a good empiricist” (1999b [1963]). Feyerabend dis-cussed at length his view of science as an enterprise characterized by thecoexistence of mutually incompatible theories especially in “Consolations for thespecialist” (1970), Sect. 6.10 This is not meant to suggest that in the early 1960s Feyerabend’s main aim wasto contribute to the development of Popper’s research program: as mentionedabove, this is an issue on which interpreters strongly disagree, and on which weshall remain neutral here.L. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e41 39“alternative explanations by means of false theories,” so thatprogress does not consist in convergence to the truth but, rather, inentertaining a plurality of theories which “will later turn out to befalse, and will be superseded by new batteries of false theories”(1975 [1965], p. 119). In any case, inwhat follows we shall gloss overthe problems facing Feyerabend’s views, and focus instead on thecompatibility of his theory of progress with Popper’s philosophy ofscience.Let us start by noting that Popper’s first theory of progressand Feyerabend’s theory of progress exhibit a clear structuralidentity, since in both cases a substantial identity between themethod and the aim of scientific inquiry is defended: just likePopper recommended the choice of corroborated theories of evergreater explanatory and predictive power as a method servingthe purpose to get corroborated theories of ever greater explan-atory and predictive power, so from 1965 onwards Feyerabendrecommended the proliferation of alternatives as a methodserving the purpose of the proliferation of alternatives. Asmentioned above, although Feyerabend initially claimed that asevere test of any theory T requires the proliferation of a set ofpartially overlapping, factually adequate, but mutually inconsis-tent theories, he later relaxeddand in the end entirely relinqui-sheddthe requirement of factual adequacy: all alternatives, heclaimed, have a right to participate in the game of science, sincethe retention of now discredited theories is an essential ingre-dient of objective knowledge. As Feyerabend put it in 1965, hisprinciple of proliferation, besides recommending the inventionof alternatives to the established view, “prevents theelimination of older theories which have been refuted” (1981c[1965], p. 107).In other words, by the mid-1960s Feyerabend took the principleof proliferation to entail what he would later call the “principle oftenacity,” dictating that one ought to stick to a promising theory“despite considerable difficulties” (1999c [1968], p.107). At first, theidea underlying the principle of tenacity looks very sensibledeventrivial perhaps, since after all, the difficulties facing a newly intro-duced theory may well turn out to be opportunities, for such the-ory, to unleash its full potential. However, Feyerabend studiouslyrefrained from specifying under what conditions the defense of atheory in the face of known difficulties becomes unreasonable, andthe scientist’s tenacity turns into sheer stubbornness. Feyerabendoften insisted that one should take refutations seriously and that nopart of our knowledge ought to be viewed as unrevisable; on onerather isolated occasion, he went so far as to embrace what Lakatostermed “instant rationality” (1978 [1974], p. 149) and to claim that atheory must be “abandoned as soon as a test does not produce thepredicted result” (1962b, pp. 29e30). Nevertheless, nothing like aprinciple of elimination is defended in his writings, specifyingunder what conditions a theory ought to be excluded from thegame of science.The axiological stance that Feyerabend introduced in “Reply tocriticism. Comments on Smart, Sellars and Putnam” is at cross-purposes with the basic insight of falsificationism: the latter al-ways revolved around the view that scientists learn by discardingtheories which experience has shown to be faulty, the former hasbeen aptly defined as the advocacy of an “extremely cumulativistaccount of science” (Niiniluoto, 1999, p. 294). And yet the axio-logical disagreement that, we suggest, contributes to explainFeyerabend’s changing attitude towards falsificationism was duenot only to his radicalizing understanding of theoretical pluralism,but also to Popper’s evolving views on the aim of science. Before thetheory of progress as approximation to the truth was introduced,within the falsificationist framework there was quite some roomfor someone wishing to explore the possibility of amendments toPopper’s doctrines such as some of those proposed by Feyerabendin his writings.10 For instance, as Bschir (forthcoming) argues atlength, in spite of the later Feyerabend’s vocal criticisms of Popper,Feyerabendian theoretical pluralism and Popperian critical ratio-nalism are closer than has generally been acknowledged, and theformer can be viewed as an extension of the latter. More generally, itseems to us that before the introduction of Popper’s second theoryof progress, the situationwithin falsificationist philosophy of sciencewas a bit less straightforward than Popper was willing to admit.Famously, Popper repeatedly claimed that his methodologicalproposals stem from the recognition of the asymmetry betweenfalsifiability and verifiability: universal statements, he emphasized,“are never derivable from singular statements, but can be contra-dicted by singular statements” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 19), so that awell-established theory can be overthrown by singular statementscontradicting the predictions derived from the theory. In spite of hisinsistence on such asymmetrydwhich he advertised as one of themain reasons why the methodology of conjectures and refutationsis by far superior to its inductivist rivalsdPopper also had to admitthat “no conclusive disproof of a theory can ever be produced”(2002a [1935/1959], p. 28), since all scientific statements are sus-ceptible to revision. Recall, in this regard, what we said aboveconcerning the theoretical character of potential falsifiers, as wellas concerning the temporal subscript thatdideally at leastdcomesattached to the assessment of the degree of corroboration of atheory, and that characterizes the set of basic statements tenta-tively accepted by the scientific community “to which the corrob-oration relates (for example, by the date of its acceptance)” (2002a[1935/1959], p. 275).One way to look at the theory of progress and knowledge thatFeyerabend put forward in 1965 is then to consider it as an over-extension of Popperian ideas concerning theory testing, the theory-ladenness of observation, and the permanently tentative characterof scientific statements. And indeed, a long-standing interpretativetradition maintains that Feyerabend’s trajectory must be viewed asnothing but the result of “his change to a radically sceptical inter-pretation of Popper’s own philosophy of science” (Lakatos, 1978[1974], p. 166, fn. 2)da change leading to what John McEvoy(1975), for one, unhesitatingly dismissed as a “degeneration.” Bethat as it may, herewe need to emphasize that, as long as the theoryof progress as increasing explanatory power was officially in place,much of what Feyerabend defended was entirely compatible with afalsificationist outlook. Of course, when Feyerabend proposed hisown theory of progress as a steady increase of competing alterna-tives, he decidedly stepped out of the Popperian orthodoxy. Butsuch orthodoxy had, in turn, significantly changed, since afteradvocating a view of science in which “it is possible to avoid usingthe concepts ‘true’ and ‘false’” (2002a [1935/1959], p. 273), Popperput forward the theory of progress as approximation to the truth. Itwould perhaps have been possible, for Feyerabend, to defend histheory of progress while maintaining an at least loose allegiance toa (broadly conceived) Popperian framework, as long as the latterdid not entail any commitment concerning approximation to thetruth as the main cognitive aim of science; following the intro-duction of Popper’s second theory of progress, Feyerabend’s viewscould no longer be made compatible with the Popperian frame-work, no matter how broadly conceived. Popper’s changing viewson the aim of science, we suggest, are an underestimated factor thatcontributes to explain Feyerabend’s changing attitude towardsfalsificationism.L. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e41405. Concluding remarksIn this paper, based on the analysis of the theories of progressand the aim of science put forward by Popper inThe logic of scientificdiscovery and Conjectures and refutations (Sect. 2) and by Feyer-abend in “Reply to criticism. Comments on Smart, Sellars andPutnam” (Sect. 3 and Sect. 4), we argued that Popper’s changingviews on the aim of science constitute an underestimated factorthat contributes to account for Feyerabend’s changing attitude to-wards falsificationism. However, not for a moment do we mean toimply that Popper’s proposing the theory of progress as increasingapproximation to the truth provides the explanation of Feyer-abend’s more and more vociferous criticism of Popperian philoso-phy of sciencedindeed, we doubt that one such explanation ispossible, and this for at least three reasons.First of all, the FeyerabendePopper relation was a long-term,multifaceted one, that involved intertwined intellectual and per-sonal issuesdon which, as is well-known, Feyerabend returnedtime and time again in various writings (especially in Killing time,1996), providing sometimes conflicting, and sometimes unreliable,reports.Secondly, and consequently, even when the attention isrestricted to purely intellectual matters, things are in any casecomplicated: perhaps due to the fact that it took Feyerabend sometime to fully appreciate how far away he had moved from thePopperian orthodoxy, interpreters must deal with a somewhattwisted storyline. For instance, thanks to Collodel’s work(forthcoming) we now know that, at the end of the 1950s, Feyer-abend himself suggested to Popper the idea of a collection of hismost recent papers, thereby playing a role in bringing about thepublication of Conjectures and refutations, which Feyerabend vol-unteered to review. In a more than enthusiastic, and less than onepage long piece, published in Isis, he concealed any disagreementwith his former mentor and hailed the book as “a major contribu-tion to philosophy [.] whose publication constitutes a major eventin the history of this subject” (1965, p. 88). Indeed, it is difficult toimagine a more unhesitating endorsement of Popper’s philosophythan the one witnessed by this review; and yet, in 1965 Feyerabendwas advocating a theory of progress which is incompatible withthat introduced in Conjectures and refutations.Thirdly, and to our mind more importantly, Popper’s philosophyis a complex system of ideas, and depending on the specific aspectof such system onwhich one decides to focus, Feyerabendmay lookcloser to, or farther from, his former mentor. To briefly mention butone example concerning the later Feyerabend’s output, Preston hascontended that it was due to his Popperian legacy that Feyerabendchose to attack methodological monismdaccording to which thereis one set of rules of method underlying all good scientific practi-cedin the way he did: by exhibiting historical cases in whichprogress has been achieved despite the violation of rules. Feyer-abend’s criticism of monism, Preston suggests, crucially relies onthe assumption that rules must be exceptionless deductive ones: inthis regard, the Feyerabend of Against method turns out to be “aPopperian deductivistmanqué” (1997, p. 174), since just like Popper,whose characterization of the proper method of science he vehe-mently criticized, he denied the possibility of an inductive justifi-cation of rules. If Preston’s suggestion is correct, then the laterFeyerabend was, in this respect, much closer to Popper than hewould have liked to admit.Nevertheless our discussion suggests that, when it comes toaxiological issues, as early as 1965 Feyerabend’s philosophy evolvedin such a way as to be incompatible with Popper’s second theory ofprogress. In this regard our account contradicts, for instance, RobertFarrell’s claim that Feyerabend always “remained a faithful Pop-perian” in that he believed “that the aim of science consists incritical explanatory progress” (2003, p. 156). Although Popper al-ways maintained that the method of conjectures and refutations,recommending the choice of ever more general, explanatory the-ories, promotes progress, starting from the late 1950seearly 1960she characterized the aim of science as approximation to the truth.And when the attempt is made to explain Feyerabend’s disavowalof falsificationism, an accurate account ought to include not onlyFeyerabend’s move away from Popper’s views, but also Popper’smove away from his own originary views.AcknowledgmentsThanks are due to Karim Bschir for providing me with anadvanced version of his forthcoming essay on the compatibility ofFeyerabend’s theoretical pluralism and Popper’s critical ratio-nalism, as well as to Gustavo Cevolani, Matteo Collodel, RobertoFesta, and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful commentson previous versions of the present paper. Usual disclaimers apply.Financial support from PRIN grant (20122T3PTZ) Models and In-ferences in Science is gratefully acknowledged.ReferencesBschir, K. (2015). Feyerabend and Popper on theory proliferation and anomalyimport: On the compatibility of theoretical pluralism and critical rationalism.HOPOS. The Journal of the International Society for the History of Philosophy ofScience (forthcoming)Collodel, M. (2015). Was Feyerabend a Popperian? Methodological issues in thehistory of the philosophy of science. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science(forthcoming)Dilworth, C. (2007). Scientific progress. A study concerning the nature of the relationbetween successive scientific theories (4th ed.). Berlin-New York: Springer.Farrell, R. P. (2003). Feyerabend and scientific values. Tightrope-walking rationality.Dordrecht: Kluwer.Feyerabend, P. K. (1962a). Knowledge without foundations. Two lectures delivered onthe Nellie Heldt lecture fund. Oberlin (Oh.): Oberlin College.Feyerabend, P. K. (1962b). Explanation, reduction and empiricism. In H. Feigl, &G. Maxwell (Eds.), Scientific explanation, space and time (pp. 28-97). Minneap-olis: University of Minnesota Press.Feyerabend, P. K. (1965). Review of K. R. Popper, Conjectures and refutations. Isis,56, 88.Feyerabend, P. K. (1970). Consolations for the specialist. In I. Lakatos, & A. Musgrave(Eds.), Criticism and the growth of knowledge (pp. 197-230). Cambridge: Cam-bridge University Press.Feyerabend, P. K. (1975). Against method: Outline of an anarchistic theory of knowl-edge. London: New Left Books.Feyerabend, P. K. (1981a). Realism, rationalism and scientific method. Philosophicalpapers, Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Feyerabend, P. K. (1981b). Problems of empiricism. Philosophical papers, Vol. 2.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Feyerabend, P. K. (1981c [1965]). Reply to criticism. Comments on Smart, Sellars andPutnam. In P. K. Feyerabend, Realism, rationalism and scientific method. Philo-sophical papers, Vol. 1 (pp. 104e131). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Originally published in R. S. Cohen, & M. W. Wartofsky (Eds.), Proceedings of theBoston colloquium for the philosophy of science 1962e1964: In honor of PhilippFrank (pp. 223e261). New York: Humanities Press, 1965.Feyerabend, P. K. (1987). Farewell to reason. London: Verso.Feyerabend, P. K. (1988). Against method (2nd ed.). London: Verso.Feyerabend, P. K. (1993). Against method (3rd ed.). London: Verso.Feyerabend, P. K. (1996). Killing time. An autobiography. Chicago: The University ofChicago Press.Feyerabend, P. K. (1999a). Conquest of abundance. A tale of abstraction versus therichness of Being, edited by B. Terpstra. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.Feyerabend, P. K. (1999b [1963]). How to be a good empiricist. A plea for tolerancein matters epistemological. In P. K. Feyerabend, Knowledge, science and rela-tivism. Philosophical papers, Vol. 3, edited by J. Preston (pp. 78e103). Cambridge:Cambridge University Press. Originally published in B. Baumrin (Ed.), Philosophyof science: the Delaware seminar (pp. 3e39). New York: Interscience Press, 1963.Feyerabend, P. K. (1999c [1968]). Outline of a pluralistic theory of knowledge andaction. In P. K. Feyerabend, Knowledge, science and relativism. Philosophical pa-pers, Vol. 3, edited by J. Preston (pp. 104e111). Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. Originally published in S. Anderson (Ed.), Planning for diversity and choice(pp. 275e284). MIT Press: Cambridge, 1968.Grünbaum, A. (1976). Is the method of bold conjectures and attempted refutationsjustifiably the method of science? The British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-ence, 27, 105-136.Hoyningen-Huene, P., & Oberheim, E. (2000). Feyerabend’s early philosophy. Studiesin History and Philosophy of Science, 31, 363-375.L. Tambolo / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51 (2015) 33e41 41Kuipers, T. A. F. (1987). A structuralist approach to truthlikeness. In T. A. F. Kuipers(Ed.), What is closer-to-the-truth? (pp. 79-99). Amsterdam: Rodopi.Kuipers, T. A. F. (2000). From instrumentalism to constructive realism. Dordrecht:Kluwer.Lakatos, I. (1978 [1974]). Popper on demarcation and induction. In I. Lakatos, Phil-osophical papers, Vol. 1: The methodology of scientific research programmes, edi-ted by J. Worrall & G. Currie (pp. 139-167). Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. Originally published in P. A. Schilpp (Ed.), The philosophy of Karl Popper(pp. 241-273). La Salle, Open Court, 1974.Lloyd, E. (2000 [1997]). Feyerabend, Mill, and pluralism. In D. Lamb, G. Munévar, &J. Preston (Eds.), The worst enemy of science? Essays in memory of Paul Feyer-abend (pp. 115-124). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Originally published inPhilosophy of Science, 64, S396eS407.McEvoy, J. (1975). A “revolutionary” philosophy of science: Feyerabend and thedegeneration of critical rationalism into sceptical fallibilism. Philosophy of Sci-ence, 42, 49-66.Miller, D. (1974). Popper’s qualitative theory of verisimilitude. The British Journal forthe Philosophy of Science, 25, 166-177.Nagel, E. (1961). The structure of science. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.Niiniluoto, I. (1987). Truthlikeness. Dordrecht: Kluwer.Niiniluoto, I. (1999). Critical scientific realism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Oberheim, E. (2006). Feyerabend’s philosophy. Berlin: de Gruyter.Oddie, G. (1986). Likeness to truth. Dordrecht: Reidel.Oddie, G. (2014). Truthlikeness. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia ofphilosophy (Summer 2014 Edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2014/entries/truthlikeness/. Retrieved 3rd September 2014.Popper, K. R. (1957). The aim of science. Ratio, 1, 24-35.Popper, K. R. (1959). Back to the Presocratics. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,59, 1-24.Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.Popper, K. R. (1972). Objective knowledge. An evolutionary approach. Oxford: Clar-endon Press.Popper, K. R. (1974). Replies to my critics. In P. A. Schilpp (Ed.), The philosophy of KarlPopper (pp. 961-1197). La Salle: Open Court.Popper, K. R. (2002a [1935/1959]). The logic of scientific discovery. London: Rout-ledge. Originally published as Logik der Forschung. Vienna: Springer, 1935. FirstEnglish edition: London: Hutchinson, 1959.Popper, K. R. (2002b [1974]). Unended quest. An intellectual autobiography. Rout-ledge: London. Originally published as Autobiography of Karl Popper. In P. A.Schilpp (Ed.), The philosophy of Karl Popper (pp. 3e181). La Salle: Open Court,1974.Preston, J. (1994). Methodology, epistemology and conventions. Popper’s bad start.In D. Hull, M. Forbes, & R. M. Burian (Eds.), PSA 1994. Proceedings of the biennialmeeting of the Philosophy of Science Association (Vol. 1, pp. 314-322) East Lansing(Mich.): The Philosophy of Science Association.Preston, J. (1997). Feyerabend: Philosophy, science and society. Cambridge: PolityPress.Putnam, H. (1975 [1965]). How not to talk about meaning. In H. Putnam, Philo-sophical papers, Vol. 2: Mind, language and reality (pp. 117-131). Cambridge:Cambridge University Press. Originally published in R. S. Cohen, & M. W.Wartofsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the Boston colloquium for the philosophy of sci-ence 1962e1964: In honor of Philipp Frank (pp. 205e222). New York: HumanitiesPress, 1965.Tichý, P. (1974). On Popper’s definition of verisimilitude. The British Journal for thePhilosophy of Science, 25, 155-160.Watkins, J. (2000). Feyerabend among Popperians, 1948e1978. In D. Lamb,G. Munévar, & J. Preston (Eds.), The worst enemy of science? Essays in memory ofPaul Feyerabend (pp. 47-57). Oxford: Oxford University Press.Worrall, J. (1978). Is the empirical content of a theory dependent on its rivals? ActaPhilosophica Fennica, 30, 298-310.