ABSTRACT: 
This study was performed to understand better the mechanisms of action of an (22.5 kHz) ultrasonic wire catheter device used to remove atheromatous plaque in diseased blood vessels (ultrasonic angioplasty). During a clinical procedure, the wire acts as an acoustic waveguide to transfer acoustic energy from a generator outside the body to the ball tip of the wire, which is inserted in the blood vessel. The acoustic field radiated by the vibrating ball tip (1.5- to 3.0-mm diameter), was mapped in a relatively large (600 L) water tank and compared to the field from a well-characterized simple source. A dipolelike radiation pattern due to the translating ball tip was observed. At low power settings, standing wave effects in a smaller cylindrical volume (200-mm diameter, 350-mm height), which was used to simulate anthropometric dimensions, increase relative to the larger tank measurements. The standing wave ratio is dependent upon the pc characteristics of the medium and the dimensions of the volume, rather than on the absorption at this frequency. At high power-settings of the device, cavitation at the tip of the wire was measured using a 20-MHz passive cavitation detection scheme. 
 
PREDICTION: 
The paper aims to understand better the mechanisms of action of an 22.5 kHz acoustic field radiated by the vibrating ball tip 1.5- to 3.0mm diameter:, was mapped in a relatively large 600 L. water tank and compared to the field from a well-characterized simple source. A dipolelike radiation pattern due to the translating ball tip was observed. At low power settings, standing wave effects in a smaller cylindrical volume 200-mm diameter, 350-mm height, which was used to simulate anthropometric dimensions, increase relative to the larger tank measurements. The standing wave ratio is dependent upon the rc characteristics of the medium and the dimensions of the volume, rather than on the absorption at this frequency. At high power settings of the device, cavitation at the tip of the wire was measured using a 20-MHz passive cavitation detection scheme. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Swarthmore College Works Engineering Faculty Works Engineering 9-1-1996 Measurement of pressure and assessment of cavitation for a 22.5-kHz intra-arterial angioplasty device I. R. S. Makin E. Carr Everbach Swarthmore College, ceverba1@swarthmore.edu This work is brought to you for free and open access by . It has been accepted for inclusion in Engineering Faculty Works by an authorized administrator of Works. For more information, please contact myworks@swarthmore.edu. Follow this and additional works at: https://works.swarthmore.edu/fac-engineering Part of the Engineering Commons Let us know how access to these works benefits you Recommended Citation I. R. S. Makin and E. Carr Everbach. (1996). "Measurement of pressure and assessment of cavitation for a 22.5-kHz intra-arterial angioplasty device". Journal Of The Acoustical Society Of America. Volume 100, Issue 3. 1855-1864. DOI: 10.1121/1.416005 https://works.swarthmore.edu/fac-engineering/63 Measurement of pressure and assessment of cavitationfor a 22.5-kHz intra-arterial angioplasty deviceInder Raj S. Makin and E. Carr EverbachSwarthmore College, Department of Engineering, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania 19081-1397~Received 29 August 1995; accepted for publication 24 March 1996!This study was performed to understand better the mechanisms of action of an ~22.5 kHz! ultrasonicwire catheter device used to remove atheromatous plaque in diseased blood vessels ~ultrasonicangioplasty!. During a clinical procedure, the wire acts as an acoustic waveguide to transfer acousticenergy from a generator outside the body to the ball tip of the wire, which is inserted in the bloodvessel. The acoustic field radiated by the vibrating ball tip ~1.5- to 3.0-mm diameter!, was mappedin a relatively large ~600 L! water tank and compared to the field from a well-characterized simplesource. A dipolelike radiation pattern due to the translating ball tip was observed. At low powersettings, standing wave effects in a smaller cylindrical volume ~200-mm diameter, 350-mm height!,which was used to simulate anthropometric dimensions, increase relative to the larger tankmeasurements. The standing wave ratio is dependent upon the rc characteristics of the medium andthe dimensions of the volume, rather than on the absorption at this frequency. At high power settingsof the device, cavitation at the tip of the wire was measured using a 20-MHz passive cavitationdetection scheme. © 1996 Acoustical Society of America.PACS numbers: 43.80.Sh, 43.80.Gx, 43.35.Ei @FD#INTRODUCTIONIntensive research efforts are underway to control thehigh incidence of coronary arterial disease and the occlusionof the peripheral vasculature among the aging human popu-lation in western societies. One approach in treatment is thedevelopment of instrumentation that invasively removes theobstruction in the diseased vessel. Removal of atheromatousplaque ~angioplasty! is currently achieved by a wide array ofphysical means such as vessel dilating balloons, laser beams,mechanical tissue removal devices, as well as low-frequencyultrasonic wires.1,2 However, as mentioned in Ref. 1, thevarious methods of angioplasty exploit two basic physicaltechniques of tissue repair, namely ‘‘remodeling’’ of the lu-men by compressing the cholesterol plaque and ‘‘removal’’of the occluding material. Ultrasound angioplasty falls prin-cipally in the latter device category, whereby the blockingmaterial is physically removed from the underlying normallining of the blood vessel.Compared to competing angioplasty techniques such aslaser angioplasty and mechanical atherectomy devices, theultrasonic technique affords advantages in terms of morecontrolled and selective removal of the diseased fibroticand/or calcified tissue layer, while sparing the underlyingnormal layers.2–7 In addition, the particle size of the ablateddebris is sufficiently small to minimize the blockage of ves-sels downstream and is comparable to that produced by othertherapeutic techniques.2,7 Hence the ultrasound modality en-tails comparable risks due to embolization ~blockage! in thecirculation comparable to that of current angioplasty tech-niques.The description and the speculated mechanisms of theultrasonic angioplasty techniques have so far been describedmainly in the medical literature. The speculated mechanismsof action of these devices are based on the experience gainedin a clinical setting for in vitro experiments, or in vivo animalor human studies. Only recently has a theoretical analysis oflow-frequency ultrasonic devices such as the ones used forangioplasty been presented by Nyborg.8 It is believed thatbubble growth and collapse caused by the acoustic fieldaround the oscillating ball tip of the wire is a mechanism ofaction of the device.2,8,9 However, cavitation in the ultrasonicangioplasty system could possibly result from a combinationof effects, namely, the acoustic field due to vibration of thewire tip as well as the pressure gradients around the tipcaused by the hydrodynamic flow field. The hydrodynamicsof a sphere moving through water will briefly be consideredin Sec. III and the Appendix. The aim of this research is toperform direct pressure measurements of the acoustic fieldsemitted by the ultrasonic source in order to attain a betterunderstanding of the radiation pattern of the source and, inaddition, to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms ofaction of the device.I. MATERIALS AND METHODSA. Description of the deviceThe device under investigation @Alliger Ultrasonic WireSystem ~AUWS!, MISONIX Inc., Farmingdale, NY# is beingdeveloped for a technique of disruption of atheroscleroticplaque and thrombi in the coronary and peripheral bloodvessels by using sound energy. The functional componentsof the system are: a generator, convertor, dampner, and thewire, as shown in Fig. 1. The generator supplies a high-voltage signal at 22.5 kHz to the piezoelectric crystals~PZT4! placed in the convertor. The acoustic energy radiatedfrom the piezo elements is guided through a tapered stainlesssteel horn and conducted further into a titanium wire of vari-able length and thickness. The wire terminates in a ball tipand is encased in a Teflon® sheath. In order to restrict thetransverse whipping of the wire during operation, a fluid1855 1855J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100 (3), September 1996 0001-4966/96/100(3)/1855/10/$10.00 © 1996 Acoustical Society of America Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58~preferably of high viscosity! is pumped under pressure ~50–100 psi! through the dampner port and under the sheath cov-ering the wire ~see Fig. 1!. The diameters of the ball tips forthe wires used in our experiments were 1.98 and 2.46 mm;the wires’ respective lengths were 445 and 660 mm. Themeasured amplitudes of displacement in the longitudinal di-rection for the two wires at full operational setting of thedevice were given by the manufacturer to be about 100 and65 mm, respectively. The two wires described above andinvestigated here will for simplicity be referred to as wires 1and 2, respectively. The ball tip of wire 1 is mushroomshaped.B. Characteristics of the wire sourceDuring operation of the device, sound is radiated intothe surrounding fluid mainly by the axial translatory motionof the ball tip of the wire. Since the axial movement of theball tip ~'100 mm!, as well as the radius of the ball tip ~'1.3mm!, are both much less than the wavelength of the drivingfrequency in water ~l566.6 mm for f522.5 kHz, c51500m/s!, the field radiated by the translatory movement of theball tip ~see Fig. 2! may be approximated by that of adipole.8 Assuming that the radiation of sound from the balltip is dipolelike, a theoretical estimation of negative acousticpressures occurring at the tip can be made in order to predictwhether or not these pressures are sufficient to cause acousticcavitation. For a ball tip of nominal radius a51.3 mm hav-ing a maximum displacement d5100 mm, the acoustic pres-sure amplitudes expected at the wire tip are about 600 kPa—sufficient to cause cavitation at the operating frequency of22.5 kHz.8,10,11As mentioned earlier, violent collapse of bubbles aroundthe tip of the wire is a possible mechanism of action of thisdevice. Cavitation could result during operation of the deviceat high settings caused by acoustic pressure fields, as well asthe hydrodynamic activity around the wire tip. A brief dis-cussion of the possible importance of hydrodynamic phe-nomena in causing cavitation in the vicinity of the ball tip isgiven in the Appendix.The comparison of our experiments with theoretical pre-dictions from a model of a translating sphere operating as adipole source can be qualitative at best since the model as-sumes a free spherical body translating only in the z direc-tion ~refer to Fig. 2!. In reality, however, a spherelike ball tipis attached to a wire which has a tendency to whip trans-versely.C. Field measurements in a large volumeMeasurement of the acoustic field from the ultrasonicwire when it radiates in a relatively free field was performedin the largest available tank, which measured 91438123812mm and was fabricated from 12.5-mm acrylic. However, sig-nificant standing waves were still observed in the tank be-cause of the relatively long wavelength of the signal and thealmost negligible attenuation of sound in water at 22.5 kHz.The approach for assessing the field due to the unknownsource, i.e., the ultrasonic wire, was to compare its patternwith the field due to a known simple source @Bru¨el & Kj,r~B&K! model 8103# operated at the same frequency, andlocated at the same position as the wire in the tank. The tankin each case was filled with water to the same level.The experiments were controlled from a MacintoshQuadra 700 computer with a National Instruments GPIB in-terface. In addition, the AUWS generator was activated fromthe computer by a NBMIO-16X D/A card. The programmingenvironment used to control various instruments and acqui-sition of data was LabVIEW ~National Instruments!. A sche-matic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3. Measure-ment of the acoustic fields was performed by raster scanningthe horizontal and vertical planes symmetrically about thesource under investigation. The receiver used was a secondB&K 8103 hydrophone, which, according to the manufac-turer, is a broadband, omnidirectional receiver in the 100-Hzto 120-kHz range ~,1-dB pressure deviation in the xz andyz planes!. The receiver is mounted on a computer-controlled three-axis positioner ~VELMEX Unislide leadscrew with NF-90 controller! as close to the source as pos-sible and aligned end-on to the source under investigation.The planes scanned were symmetric about the z axis ~seeFig. 3!. Data points acquired for both the vertical and hori-zontal planes scanned the plane 1503150 mm about the zaxis, at a resolution of 3 mm. The resolution of 3 mm wasobserved to be adequate for sources radiating a signal of66.6-mm wavelength. The signal received at the B&K 8103FIG. 1. Schematic of AUWS.FIG. 2. Schematic of a translating sphere.FIG. 3. Measurement setup for excitation of source and acquisition of re-ceived signal.1856 1856J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58hydrophone was amplified and filtered by a charge preamp-lifier ~B&K model 2635! and recorded by a digital oscillo-scope ~LeCroy model 9450!. The amplitude of the signalacquired by the scope was downloaded to the computer intoa file.As a first step, the accuracy of the B&K 8103 transduceras a simple source radiating at 22.5 kHz was tested. Thesource is pulsed with an eight-cycle toneburst at a pulse rep-etition frequency ~PRF! of 5 Hz. The received signal mea-sured is the amplitude of the direct wave signal launchedfrom the source, such that any reflections from the tankboundaries are gated out. The measured pressure decay withrange for the B&K 8103 source was in good comparisonwith the theoretically predicted pressure decay for a simplesource Fig. 4~a!. The scans in Fig. 4~b! and ~c! show thesmooth decay of pressure for the B&K 8103 source in thehorizontal and vertical planes, symmetric about the z axis.The source is pulsed as described earlier.The simple source ~B&K 8103! is next driven in thecontinuous wave ~CW! mode and its pressure field is mea-sured, again, in the horizontal and vertical planes symmetricabout the z axis. As in the case of the scans in the pulsedmode, the scanned planes extend from 21 to 171 mm in the zdirection, and from 275 to 75 mm in the x or y direction.The step size between each measurement point is 3 mm.The simple source is next replaced by the wire source.Although we expect a dipolelike radiation from this source,its field is complicated because of the transverse whipping ofthe wire. For these measurements, the wire is driven at verylow power settings to minimize the influence on the field ofthe transverse motion of the wire. In addition, the low gainsettings of the device allow the piezocrystals and the hornassembly to operate in their linear regimes. The acousticfields for the two wires under investigation were measured inthe form of horizontal and vertical planes extending between12 and 171 mm along the z axis and 275 to 75 mm along they and x axes. Due to the design geometry of the sources, thereceiver hydrophone can be brought closer to the source inthe case of the wires as compared to the B&K 8103 sourceused in the previous case.Finally, for both the wires under investigation, the gainon the generator is turned up to a setting comparable to thatused during a therapeutic procedure ~dial settings of 13–14on the generator!. Measurement of acoustic pressures weremade along the axis of the wire ~z axis! from a range of 13 to245 mm in step sizes of 2 mm. The received signal in thiscase is the amplified broadband response of the B&K 8103transducer. The observed signal in the time domain is nowerratic, the signal now having frequency components muchhigher than the 22.5-kHz driving frequency. The recordedpressure amplitudes correspond to the peak-to-peak pressureat a particular point noted at each instant in time.D. Field measurements in a cylindrical tubeIn the clinical setting, the ultrasonic wire is introducedthrough a peripheral blood vessel and operated within thebody. It is relevant, therefore, to investigate the manner inwhich the acoustic field of the device varies when it is oper-ated in a small volume. The scenario of the wire catheteriz-ing a blood vessel in an extremity is approximated by acylindrical ‘‘tube-in-a-tube’’ model as shown in Fig. 5. Themodel consists of an upright acrylic cylinder ~inside diameter203 mm, 355-mm high, wall thickness 3.175 mm!, with aflexible polyurethane tube ~inside diameter 12.5 mm,1.5-mm wall thickness! affixed at its center along the cylin-der’s axis. Both ends of the cylinder are covered with 9.525-mm-thick acrylic flanges. The inside tube and the cylindercan be filled with similar or different liquids.The source is placed approximately 65 mm from thelower wall of the cylinder. The inner tube has an inside di-ameter of 12.5 mm in order to accommodate the receiverB&K 8103 hydrophone. The measurement protocol followedfor these series of experiments in the cylindrical tube is suchthat the acoustic fields for the simple B&K 8103 source aswell as the unknown wire source are scanned along the longaxis of the source for up to 251 mm from the source. Mea-surements are first made with both the polyurethane tube andthe cylinder filled with water up to 345 mm. The measure-ments are then repeated with the cylinder filled with a mix-ture of 2 parts 99.9% Glycerin and 1 part water, for thesimple source as well as the wires. For comparison of thefields from the B&K simple source with the two wire sourcesinvestigated, the the gain setting of the generator for the wiredevice is kept low ~dial settings '4!, in order to minimizethe transverse whipping of the wires. The pressure amplitudeas a function of axial range is determined from the receivedsignal, which is low-pass filtered around 22.5 kHz.The axial pressure fields of both the wires being inves-tigated are also measured for high gain settings of the gen-erator ~dial setting 14–16!. The liquid media in this casewere: deionized, degassed water in the cylinder as well as theinner tube, or both the cylinder and the inner tube filled withthe Glycerin solution. The cylinder is filled with Glycerin,the inner tube filled with Hexabrix®, which is the dampningfluid for the device during clinical use.E. Evidence of acoustic cavitationDuring operation of the ultrasonic wire at high gain set-tings, significant jet formation can be observed originatingfrom the ball tip of the wire. It is therefore relevant to detectthe occurrence of cavitational activity, and then to investi-gate a correlation between the gain setting of the device andthe resulting cavitational activity.Cavitation is detected by using active and passive acous-tic techniques, whereby a high-frequency ~20–30 MHz! fo-cused transducer is used to detect the rapid growth and col-lapse of individual bubbles or bubble clouds in the region ofthe spatial pressure maximum in a focused acousticfield.12–14 The techniques described in Refs. 12–14 are prin-cipally used to assess pressure thresholds for cavitation anddetect cavitation events in a focused sound field from a pis-ton source operating in the megahertz frequency range, con-ditions which are more common in diagnostic medical ultra-sound. A 20-MHz focused transducer ~Krautkramer Branson,narrow bandwidth series!, having a nominal diameter of 6.3mm and a focal length of 51 mm, is used here to probe theregion of the wire just distal to its ball tip first in the pulse-echo mode ~active cavitation detection!.12 Subsequently the1857 1857J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58transducer recorded passively the 20 MHz component of thebroadband acoustic emissions of collapsing bubbles in thefield due the ultrasonic wire.14A schematic diagram of the setup for the detection ofcavitation is shown in Fig. 6. Briefly, the ultrasonic wire ispositioned in a cell measuring 100380370 mm such that thedistal tip of the ball on the wire is at the focus of the 20-MHzprobe. The axis of the probe transducer is perpendicular tothe axis of the wire. The cell is filled with deionized anddegassed water. Since the cell is open to the atmosphere, thegas content of water attains equilibrium with the atmosphereprior to the experiment. The focus of the probe transducer isthen moved beyond the ball tip by 1 mm along the z axis ~seeFig. 6!, with the help of a three-axis micrometer positioningstage on which the probe transducer is mounted. Since evenat maximum operational settings, the longitudinal translatoryamplitudes of the ball tip cannot be greater than 100 mm,shifting of the wire tip by 1 mm from the focus ensures thatthe signal received by the probe transducer is not a result ofreflections from the surface of the wire tip. Any signal outputat the 20-MHz transducer, therefore, is due to the violentcollapse of individual bubbles and/or bubble clouds just dis-tal to the ball tip of the wire. A broad bandwidth needlehydrophone is used simultaneously to monitor the noise inthe megahertz frequency range emitted by collapsing bubblesclose to the tip of the wire.The 20-MHz probe is first driven in the pulse-echo modeand the ultrasonic wire is operated using a foot switch, thegain of the device being increased very gradually. Initially,no received signal at 20 MHz can be detected. However, asthe gain on the AUWS generator is increased, a small steadysignal at the location of the 20-MHz probe focus that is in-dicative of a bubble cloud forming at the tip of the wire canbe detected. On increasing the gain on the wire generatorfurther, the signal output at the probe increases in amplitudedramatically and becomes erratic in time. This response isindicative of violent collapse of bubbles, the sound resultingfrom which is being received by the probe at 20 MHz. Dueto the continuous intense activity of bubble collapse at thesegain settings of the generator, however, it is difficult to dif-ferentiate between the probe signal reflected from bubbleclouds forming at the tip of the ball of the wire and the signalfrom violently collapsing bubbles. Therefore, the cavitationmonitor is now switched to passive detection mode.In passive mode, the probe transducer is not excited,functioning only as a narrow bandwidth receiver. The onlyFIG. 4. Comparison of theory for a simple source with experiment @~a!#, andfield maps for vertical and horizontal planes @~b! and ~c!#, for the B&K 8103excited in the pulsed mode.FIG. 5. Tube-in-tube model for field measurement in a bodylike space.FIG. 6. Setup to measure cavitation during operation of the AUWS.1858 1858J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58FIG.7.Comparisonoffieldsradiatingfromasimplesourceandthewiresource~wire1!inthehorizontalandverticalplanes.Simplesource:~a!and~c!,wiresource:~b!and~d!.FIG.8.Fieldmapsinhorizontalandverticalplanesforwires1and2.Wire1:~a!and~c!,wire2:~b!and~d!.1859 1859J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58signal that can be observed at 20 MHz in the current systemis caused by the broadband signature of violent collapse ofbubbles around the surface of the ball tip of the ultrasonicwire. The gain for the AUWS generator is maintained con-stant at a particular level. The device is then activated by thecomputer, and the acquisition of data from the 20-MHztransducer is initiated after allowing the AUWS time ~about5 s! to stabilize its output. The signal received as a result ofcavitation at the ball tip is received by the 20-MHz trans-ducer, amplified by a broadband receiver amplifier ~MATECmodel 625!, and displayed on a digital oscilloscope ~LeCroymodel 9450!. A root-mean square ~rms! value for eachscreen display is calculated by the oscilloscope. These rmsvalues are downloaded to the computer 3 to 5 times persecond and stored in a file. After a predetermined duration~120 s!, the computer turns off the AUWS and simulta-neously stops any further acquisition of data. Details of pas-sive estimation of cavitation activity in an intense sound fieldwith the help of a narrow bandwidth focused 20-MHz probeis described by Everbach et al.14II. RESULTSA. Acoustic field in a large volumeAs we described in Sec. I C, the field radiated by theAUWS is mapped in a relatively large tank, and is comparedto the field from a simple source radiating in the CW modein the same volume of fluid. Figure 7 shows a comparison ofthe fields in the horizontal and vertical planes, respectively,due to the two sources excited in the CW mode. The AUWSis operated at a low setting. We note a standing wave patternin both cases due to reflections from boundaries of the tank.Important to note in these figures is the steeper decay ofpressure with range in the case of AUWS source as com-pared to the simple source. The steep decay of pressure withrange in the case of the AUWS source is indicative of itsdipolelike radiation characteristic ~note the pressure scales inFig. 7!. The pressure fields due to the wire source show ajaggedness as compared to the smooth simple source field.This jaggedness is caused by the transverse whipping of thewire even when it is operated at very low amplitude settings.The field plots of the horizontal and vertical planes forwires 1 and 2 are shown in Fig. 8. Here the steep pressuredecay close to the source becomes more apparent, since wenow measure the field pressures starting closer to the source,i.e., from an axial range of 12 mm. We observe higher pres-sures in Fig. 8~a! as compared to Fig. 8~b!. The gain settingson the generator in both cases were kept approximately thesame. Since the pressure radiated from a source is dependenton its size,10,11 the higher output from wire 2 as compared to1 can be explained by its larger source dimensions ~ball di-ameter of wire 2 is 2.46 mm; wire 1 ball diameter is 1.98mm!. Similar to the horizontal plane measurements, the pres-sure field plots for both wires in the vertical plane @Fig. 8~c!and ~d!# initially decay rapidly, followed by a slower decayin pressure. Differences in the horizontal and vertical planefields are because of variations in the tank boundary imped-ances.At high gain settings of the device generator, as shownin Fig. 9~a! and ~c!, the time signature recorded at 13 mmFIG. 9. Time waveforms @~a! and ~c!#, and axial field plots @~b! and ~d!# for AUWS at high gain settings.1860 1860J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58from the wire tip is devoid of almost all periodicity and isquite complex. This complex signal is a result of the higherharmonics generated within the horn as well as the transversewhipping of the vibrating wire. In addition, significant jetformation is noted visually at the tip of the ball. The bubbleactivity further complicates the signal received at the hydro-phone. Further, in Fig. 9~b! and ~d! we note no standingwave pattern in the scans for peak pressures measured alongthe axis of the wire. On an average, the pressure is observedto decay monotonically with range. The acoustic pressuresresulting at the surface of the ball tip extrapolated from thepressures measured on axis are at least a few atmosphereseven with a conservative assumption of the pressure ampli-tudes varying inversely as range away from the wire source.B. Acoustic field in a cylindrical tubeMeasurement of the acoustic field radiated from theAUWS in a cylindrical space of about 11.5-liter capacity is amore appropriate approach in assessing the behavior of thedevice when it is operated within the human body. As de-scribed in Sec. I D, pressure measurements along the axis ofthe wire are made within a 12.5 mm polyurethane tube, in-side which the ultrasonic wire is fixed.Figure 10 shows the axial field plots for a water-filledcylinder with the central inner tube also filled with water.The source within the inner tube is a simple source vibratingat 22.5 kHz in Fig. 10~a!, the sources for plotting the axialfields in Fig. 10~b! and ~d! are the ultrasonic wires 1 and 2being operated at a low gain setting. We note a much moredistinct standing wave pattern in this case as compared to thefield plots mapped with the corresponding sources in a muchlarger volume as discussed in Sec. II A. In addition to thesmaller volume of the cylinder compared to the large tankdiscussed earlier, the field here is further differentiable fromthat in Sec. II A due to the cylindrical shape of the enclosure.Comparing the fields from a simple source in Fig. 10~a!to the field due to the dipole-like radiation of the ultrasonicwire in ~b! and ~d!, we note some difference in the positionof nulls between the two scans. The peak amplitudes aredifferent for the two source types, however, but important toappreciate here is the limited axial range-dependent decay inFIG. 10. Axial field plots with the source placed in a cylindrical tube.1861 1861J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58the pressure amplitudes and a dominance of the standingwave pattern when a source is radiating at a frequency of22.5 kHz in water. On comparing Fig. 10~b! and ~d!, we notethe output for the wire 2 to be higher than wire 1 for com-parable gain settings of the generator. After removal of thecentral polyurethane tube and the top acrylic flange and re-peating the scans described earlier in this section, no signifi-cant change in the standing wave pattern along the axis ofthe wire sources was observed ~data not presented!. Inter-faces such as the 3.175-mm-thick acrylic walls of the cylin-der are almost acoustically transparent to the 22.5-kHz signalin water, and in fact the signal experiences an almost pres-sure release boundary at the interface between the air and thewalls of the cylinder. This observation is of practical rel-evance to the use of the AUWS within the body.The axial acoustic field plots obtained on operating theAUWS at high amplitude settings for the wires 1 and 2 areshown in Fig. 10~c! and ~e!. The time signature of the signalwas complex as in the case of measurements in the large tank@Fig. 9~a! and ~c!#, and comprised of frequency componentsmuch higher than the 22.5-kHz driving frequency. The peakpressure plots @Fig. 10~c! and ~e!#, show a much less signifi-cant standing wave pattern as compared to low gain settingsof the device in ~b! and ~d!. The less dominant standing wavecharacter can be explained by the cancellation of the variousmodes, which are excited within the fluid volume when thesource is radiating at multiple frequencies. The decay ofpressure with range in this case, however, is not as marked asthat observed in the corresponding measurements made inthe large tank @Fig. 9~b! and ~d!#.Finally, when the cylinder and the inside tube are filledwith glycerin ~results not presented here!, we noted a markeddecay of axial pressures with increasing range in addition toa standing wave pattern superimposed on the axial field. Thenormal modes which can be excited in the fluid filled cylin-der now are different from those excited when it was filledwith water, since the normal modes are a function of thesound speed of the medium.11,15 The decay of pressure in thiscase cannot be explained solely on the absorption of sound inglycerin. On pulsing the B&K 8103 simple source at 22.5kHz successively in water and the 66% glycerin fluid, nomeasurable difference between the fields in the two fluidscould be measured within the sensitivity of the system. Fur-ther, the measured value for the absorption coefficient of100% glycerin at 1 MHz of 5.6 Np/m by Averkiou,16 can beextrapolated to 22.5 kHz by using an inverse quadratic fre-quency dependence and the value at 22.5 kHz is 0.0028Np/m. Since we are using 66% glycerin, the absorption forthe fluid is expected to be even smaller, and hence negligibleat this frequency.C. Measurement of cavitationEven at very low gain settings of the AUWS, mi-crobubbles are observed to form at the tip of the vibratingball. As described in Sec. I E, the bubble cloud is observedby scanning the region just beyond the ball tip with a 20-MHz focused transducer and operated in the pulse-echomode ~data not shown!.For higher settings of the AUWS generator, when cavi-tational activity around the surface of the ball tip in the formof distinct bubble growth and collapse is established, the20-MHz component of the sound due to collapse of bubblesis received by the detector transducer in the cell ~described inSec. I E and by Everbach et al.!.14 Figure 11 shows thevariation of the rms values of a 200-ms segment of the signaldisplayed on the oscilloscope. The rms data for each segmentof the signal on the scope are downloaded to the computer 3to 5 times per second for a total duration of 120 s. Theaverage activity of cavitation for each experimental run canbe related to the mean of all downloaded rms values by theparameter rms (rms 5 ^rms& 3 1000). Comparing the plotsfor wire 1 in Fig. 11~a! and ~c!, we note a dependence of thecavitational activity at the ball tip on the settings of gain onthe AUWS generator. Further, as can be seen by comparingthe left and right-hand column plots in Fig. 11, the amount ofcavitation occurring at the ball tip is dependent on the type ofwire. Wire 1 is short, with a mushroom-shaped ball head,whereas wire 2 is longer with a larger, more spherical ballhead. Cavitational activity is noted to be consistently higherat comparable gain settings for wire 1 as compared to thewire 2. The effect of using different wire types at differentgenerator settings is summarized in Fig. 11~e!. This effect isin contrast to the measurement of pressures at low gain set-tings of the AUWS where the output from wire 1 was ob-served to be lower than from wire 2.III. DISCUSSION AND SUMMARYThe current study is motivated by the need to character-ize a low-frequency intra-arterial angioplasty device cur-rently under development for application in human patients.Since the device is driven acoustically, its effectiveness inpractice could be enhanced by a better understanding of themanner in which the acoustic field generated by the device isdistributed in a particular volume of fluid. Pressure measure-ments made with the wire device in a relatively large tank ofwater show a steeper rate of decay with range when com-pared with similar measurements made using a simplesource, indicating a dipolelike radiation characteristic forAUWS. Further, as described in Sec. III B, both the wiresources as well as the simple source show a more markedstanding wave pattern when operated in a small volume offluid. The high standing wave ratio is a result of the longwavelength of the signal at 22.5 kHz in tissuelike fluids com-pared to the dimensions of the excited fluid space, as well asthe low absorption of sound at these frequencies. At suchlow driving frequencies, the inter organ interfaces havingreasonably well matched impedances can be treated asacoustically transparent to the signal. The principal mecha-nism for standing waves in the body ~i.e., if they do occur!,is probably the acoustic field reflected from the humantissue–air interface. Acoustic pressure varies with range, theoperating conditions of the AUWS such as the high gainsettings at which the device is used in practice, as well as therc characteristics of the host medium.Finally, based on calculations and measurements, the es-timated pressures at the surface of the ball tip do result in1862 1862J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58cavitation during operation of the device. In fact, cavitationalactivity has been hypothesized to be one of the principlemechanisms of action of such devices in causing disruptionof atheromas.2,8 By operating the device at high gain set-tings, the occurrence of cavitation events based on the vio-lent collapse of bubbles close to the surface of the ball tipwas recorded. The amount of cavitation activity was mea-sured for two representative wire tip configurations. Theamount of cavitation due to the mushroom-shaped ball tip ~1!was observed to be greater than the one having a morespherical shape ~2!, although the acoustic pressure ampli-tudes for the larger ball tip ~2! were greater. The enhancedcavitation with the bluff mushroom-shaped wire tip as com-pared to the larger sized spherical wire is indicative of ahydrodynamic mode of occurrence of cavitation working incombination with cavitation due to the acoustic field. Thisissue has been briefly addressed in the Appendix. The occur-rence of hydrodynamic cavitation probably becomes moresignificant at very high gain settings and for wire tip profileswith a sharper contour. Hence, if cavitation is indeed one ofthe principal mechanisms of action, then bluff shapes of balltips could be expected to be more effective in a clinical set-ting than the smooth, spherical wire tips.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis work was supported by an NSF Presidential Fac-ulty Fellow award ~Everbach!, Number 92537777.APPENDIX: HYDRODYNAMIC CONSIDERATIONSIn order to investigate the hydrodynamic phenomena,the ball tip is assumed to be spherical, the wire attachment atone end is ignored, and the movement of the spherical bodyis assumed to proceed in a non oscillatory manner, i.e., onlyalong the z axis ~see Fig. 2 for coordinate system!. Based onthe maximum displacement of the ball tip ~' 100 mm!, themaximum axial velocity is v0514.14 ms at f522.5 kHz.The Reynolds number for the sphere can then be calculatedas17FIG. 11. Cavitational activity measured as the 20-MHz component of the sound due to bubble collapse, monitored over a 120-s period from the two wiresources.1863 1863J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58Re5rv02am54.133104, ~A1!where a51.3 mm, and for water, density r51000 Kg/m3,and viscosity m50.8931023 N s/m2. For flow around asphere, the Reynolds number calculated in Eq. ~A1! is sub-critical as compared to the high Reynolds number valueswhich are associated with a sudden decrease in the drag co-efficient. Therefore this flow is associated with a signifi-cantly high form drag coefficient.17,18 These drag forces re-sult in a distribution of pressure magnitudes around thesphere much less than those predicted by theory for friction-less flow ~about 1 atm!.17Hydrodynamic cavitation occurs when the low fluidpressures are at or below the vapor pressure of the liquid. Anestimate of the resistance of a flow system around a curvedsurface can be obtained by using the expression for the cavi-tation number s ~also called Euler’s number!, which is de-fined as18–20s5P02Pv12rv02 50.97, ~A2!where P051 atm is the ambient static pressure, Pv50.03atm is the vapor pressure for water at 27 °C.21 A relativelyhigh value of s50.97 is indicative of inception of cavitationin the wake region of the sphere moving through water butnot necessarily leading to violent cavitation19 as was ob-served physically with the device.1B. F. Waller, ‘‘ ‘Crackers, breakers, stretchers, drillers, scrapers, shavers,burners, welders, and melters’—The future treatment of atheroscleroticcoronary artery disease? A clinical-morphological assessment,’’ J. Am.Coll. Cardiol. 13, 969–987 ~1989!.2W. Steffen and R. J. Siegel, ‘‘Ultrasound Angioplasty—A review,’’ J.Interven. Cardiol. 6, 77–88 ~1993!.3R. J. Siegel, D. C. Cumberland, and J. R. Crew, ‘‘Ultrasound recanaliza-tion of diseased arteries,’’ Endovascular Surgery 72, 879–897 ~1992!.4R. J. Siegel, P. Gaines, J. R. Crew, and D. C. Cumberland, ‘‘Clinical trialof percutaneous peripheral ultrasound angioplasty,’’ J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.22, 480–4887 ~1993!.5R. J. Siegel, J. Gunn, A. Khan, M. C. Fishbein, R. J. Bowes, D. Oakley, C.Wales, W. Steffen, S. Campbell, H. Nita, T. Mills, P. Silverton, R. K.Myler, and D. C. Cumberland, ‘‘Use of therapeutic ultrasound in percu-taneous coronary angioplasty,’’ Circulation 89, 1587–1592 ~1993!.6U. Rosenschein, A. Frimerman, S. Laniado, and H. I. Miller, ‘‘Study ofmechanism of ultrasound angioplasty from human thrombi and bovineaorta,’’ Am. J. Cardiol. 22, 1263–1266 ~1994!.7A. Ernst, E. A. Schenk, T. J. Woodlock, H. Alliger, S. Gottlieb, S. Z.Child, and R. S. Meltzer, ‘‘Feasibility of recanalization of human coronaryarteries using high-intensity ultrasound,’’ Am. J. Cardiol. 73, 126–132~1994!.8W. L. Nyborg, ‘‘Basic physics of low-frequency therapeutic ultrasound,’’in Ultrasound Angioplasty, edited by R. Siegel ~Kluwer Academic, Bos-ton, 1996!, pp. 1–23.9 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach, ‘‘Pressure and cavitation measure-ments of an intra-arterial angioplasty device,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97,3326~A! ~1995!.10D. T. Blackstock, ‘‘Class Notes’’ for a Course on Physical Acoustics~University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 1990! ~unpublished!.11P. M. Morse, Vibration and Sound ~American Institute of Physics, NewYork, 1986!.12R. A. Roy, S. I. Madanshetty, and R. E. Apfel, ‘‘An acoustic backscatter-ing technique for the detection of transient cavitation produced by micro-second pulses of ultrasound,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 87, 2451–2458 ~1990!.13S. I. Madanshetty, R. A. Roy, and R. E. Apfel, ‘‘Acoustic microcavitation:its active and passive detection,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 90, 1515–1526~1991!.14E. C. Everbach, I. R. S. Makin, M. Azadniv, and R. S. Meltzer, ‘‘Corre-lation of ultrasound-induced hemolysis with cavitation detector output invitro,’’ Ultrasound Med. Biol. ~in press!.15L. E. Kinsler, A. R. Frey, A. B. Coppens, and J. V. Sanders, Fundamen-tals of Acoustics ~Wiley, New York, 1982!.16M. A. Averkiou, ‘‘Experimental investigation of propagation and reflec-tion phenomena in finite amplitude beams,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, The Uni-versity of Texas at Austin, 1994.17H. Schlichting, Boundary-Layer Theory ~McGraw-Hill, New York, 1979!.18T. G. Leighton, The Acoustic Bubble ~Academic, London, 1994!.19F. R. Young, Cavitation ~McGraw-Hill, London, 1989!.20R. H. Sabersky and A. J. Acosta, Fluid Flow ~Macmillan, New York,1964!.21 CRC Handbook of Tables for Applied Engineering Science, edited by R.E. Bolz and G. T. Tuve ~CRC, Cleveland, 1973!.1864 1864J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 100, No. 3, September 1996 I. R. S. Makin and E. C. Everbach: Ultrasound angioplasty Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP: 130.58.65.20 On: Thu, 21 May 2015 15:56:58