ABSTRACT: 
This paper presents the study of influence of laminate sequence and fabric type on the baseline acoustic nonlinearity of fiber-reinforced composites. Nonlinearelastic wave techniques are increasingly becoming popular in detecting damage in composite materials. It was earlier observed by the authors that the non-classical nonlinear response of fiber-reinforced composite is influenced by the fiber orientation [Chakrapani, Barnard, and Dayal, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 137(2), 617–624 (2015)]. The current study expands this effort to investigate the effect of laminate sequence and fabric type on the non-classical nonlinear response. Two hypotheses were developed using the previous results, and the theory of interlaminar stresses to investigate the influence of laminate sequence and fabric type. Each hypothesis was tested by capturing the nonlinear response by performing nonlinear resonance spectroscopy and measuring frequency shifts, loss factors, and higher harmonics. It was observed that the laminate sequence can either increase or decrease the nonlinear response based on the stacking sequence. Similarly, tests were performed to compare unidirectional fabric and woven fabric and it was observed that woven fabric exhibited a lower nonlinearresponse compared to the unidirectional fabric. Conjectures based on the matrix properties and interlaminar stresses were used in an attempt to explain the observed nonlinear responses for different configurations. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper presents the study of influence of laminate sequence and fabric type on the baseline acoustic nonlinearity of carbon fiber reinforced composites. Nonlinear elastic wave techniques are increasingly becoming popular in detecting damage in composite materials. It was earlier observed by the authors that the non-classical nonlinear response of carbon fiber-reinforced composite is influenced by the fiber orientation. The current study expands this effort to investigate the effect of laminate sequence and fabric type on the baseline acoustic nonlinearity of carbon fiber reinforced composites. Nonlinear elastic wave techniques are increasingly becoming popular in detecting damage in composite materials. It was earlier observed by the authors that the non-classical nonlinear response of carbon fiber-reinforced composite is influenced by the fiber orientation. The current study expands this effort to investigate the effect of laminate sequence and fabric type on the baseline acoustic nonlinearity of carbon fiber reinforced composites. Nonlinear elastic wave techniques are increasingly becoming popular in detecting damage in composite materials. It was earlier observed by the authors that the non-classical nonlinear response of carbon fiber-reinforced composite is influenced by the fiber orientation. The current study expands this effort to investigate the effect of laminate sequence and fabric type on the baseline acoustic nonlinearity of carbon fiber reinforced composites. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Disciplines Aerospace Engineering | Structures and Materials Comments This article is published as Chakrapani, Sunil Kishore, Daniel J. Barnard, and Vinay Dayal. "Influence of laminate sequence and fabric type on the inherent acoustic nonlinearity in carbon fiber reinforced composites." The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139, no. 5 (2016): 2310-2319. DOI: 10.1121/1.4946996. Posted with permission. This article is available at Iowa State University Digital Repository: http://lib.dr.iastate.edu/aere_pubs/82 Influence of laminate sequence and fabric type on the inherent acoustic nonlinearity in carbon fiber reinforced composites Sunil Kishore Chakrapani, Daniel J. Barnard, and Vinay Dayal Citation: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139, 2310 (2016); View online: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4946996 View Table of Contents: http://asa.scitation.org/toc/jas/139/5 Published by the Acoustical Society of America Articles you may be interested in Influence of fiber orientation on the inherent acoustic nonlinearity in carbon fiber reinforced composites The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 137, 617 (2015); 10.1121/1.4906165 Evaluation of the successive approximations method for acoustic streaming numerical simulations The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139, 2269 (2016); 10.1121/1.4946993 Higher order acoustoelastic Lamb wave propagation in stressed plates The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 140, 3834 (2016); 10.1121/1.4967756 Determination of acoustic nonlinearity parameter (β) using nonlinear resonance ultrasound spectroscopy: Theory and experiment The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 141, 919 (2017); 10.1121/1.4976057 Numerical study of Rayleigh wave propagation along a horizontal semi-infinite crack buried in half-space The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 141, 137 (2017); 10.1121/1.4973688 Asymptotic limits of some models for sound propagation in porous media and the assignment of the pore characteristic lengths The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139, 2463 (2016); 10.1121/1.4947540 Influence of laminate sequence and fabric type on the inherent acoustic nonlinearity in carbon fiber reinforced composites Sunil Kishore Chakrapania) and Daniel J. Barnard Center for Nondestructive Evaluation, 111 ASC II, 1915 Scholl Road, Ames, Iowa, 50011, USA Vinay Dayal Department of Aerospace Engineering, Iowa State University, 1200 Howe hall, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA (Received 9 July 2015; revised 11 February 2016; accepted 5 April 2016; published online 2 May 2016) This paper presents the study of influence of laminate sequence and fabric type on the baseline acoustic nonlinearity of fiber-reinforced composites. Nonlinear elastic wave techniques are increas- ingly becoming popular in detecting damage in composite materials. It was earlier observed by the authors that the non-classical nonlinear response of fiber-reinforced composite is influenced by the fiber orientation [Chakrapani, Barnard, and Dayal, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 137(2), 617–624 (2015)]. The current study expands this effort to investigate the effect of laminate sequence and fabric type on the non-classical nonlinear response. Two hypotheses were developed using the pre- vious results, and the theory of interlaminar stresses to investigate the influence of laminate sequence and fabric type. Each hypothesis was tested by capturing the nonlinear response by per- forming nonlinear resonance spectroscopy and measuring frequency shifts, loss factors, and higher harmonics. It was observed that the laminate sequence can either increase or decrease the nonlinear response based on the stacking sequence. Similarly, tests were performed to compare unidirectional fabric and woven fabric and it was observed that woven fabric exhibited a lower nonlinear response compared to the unidirectional fabric. Conjectures based on the matrix properties and interlaminar stresses were used in an attempt to explain the observed nonlinear responses for different configura- tions.VC 2016 Acoustical Society of America. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4946996] [JDM] Pages: 2310–2319 I. INTRODUCTION A considerable amount of effort has been invested into understanding the mechanical properties of composites since they are an integral part of aerospace and energy sectors. Fiber reinforced composites such as carbon fiber/epoxy (CFRP) or glass/epoxy have been around for a while. The epoxy can be considered isotropic, but the reinforcement makes the laminate transversely isotropic as in the case of unidirectional (UD) laminates. By varying the direction of the reinforcements or fibers and using multiple layers of dif- ferent orientations, an anisotropic material can be fabricated. This essentially makes the composite plate, a multi-layered structure, which is also anisotropic in nature. All these attrib- utes makes it difficult to inspect or characterize these materi- als. Several researchers have characterized the mechanical properties of composites which go into designing structures. Similarly, several researchers have used conventional non- destructive tools such as ultrasonics1–9 for characterization and damage detection in composites. But as we approach a point where detection of early damage indicators such as fa- tigue cracks or micro-cracks becomes very important, under- standing the nonlinear properties of composite structures has to be given a higher priority. Several researchers10–20 have shown that nonlinear acoustic techniques can be used effec- tively to detect and characterize small scale damage in com- posites and other materials. The Nonlinear Resonance Ultrasound Spectroscopy (NRUS) which belongs to Nonlinear Elastic Wave Spectroscopy (NEWS)10–13 class of techniques is of specific interest to the current work. It captures the non-classical nonlinear (NCNL) nature of intact and damaged structures by performing frequency sweeps near resonance condition for various modes includ- ing flexural, torsional, and longitudinal vibration.21 A shift in the fundamental frequency can be observed depicting nonlinear response. The total shift in frequency can be used to characterize the damaged state or the inherent nonlinear response. Chakrapani et al. reported the inherent NCNL response of composites using the NRUS technique.22 The influence of fiber orientation on the NCNL response was studied in intact UD CFRP laminates by varying the fiber orientation along the length of the sample. The current article builds on the previous work by the authors22 in terms of characterizing the effect of laminate sequence and fabric type on the NCNL response. The NCNL characteristics of four different lami- nate sequences were investigated and they were compared to the results obtained from the previous orientation study. Furthermore, the type of fabric used for fabrication was also investigated by comparing results between continuous fabric laminates and woven fabric laminates. Similar to the earlier work, standard parameters such as resonant frequency shifts, modal damping ratio (MDR), and higher harmonics were used to comment on the NCNL response. The NCNL param- eter was also calculated and compared between different lamina sequences and fabric types.a)Electronic mail: csk@iastate.edu 2310 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 VC 2016 Acoustical Society of America0001-4966/2016/139(5)/2310/10/$30.00 II. BACKGROUND Non-classical nonlinearity was first observed in rock and other geo-materials in which elasticity is controlled by bonds along grain boundaries. These materials exhibited a type of material nonlinearity which was different from classical elastic nonlinearity. While classical nonlinearity is controlled by higher order elastic constants (b, d, etc.), non- classical nonlinearity includes a nonlinear hysteretic compo- nent, which makes it different from classical nonlinearity. Although the source of hysteresis has been identified in geo- materials, it is more challenging in the case of multi-material structures such as concrete and composites.22,23 These mate- rials exhibit a high baseline non-classical nonlinearity which can increase due to damage. Hence, characterization of the damage state becomes difficult. The current article acts as an extension of the previous work by the authors in terms of creating a catalog of NCNL responses for composites based on their fiber orientation, laminate sequence, and the type of fabric used in manufacturing. Since the baseline nonlinearity varies for different configurations of the composite laminate, understanding the NCNL response while applying nonlinear nondestructive evaluation (NDE) becomes vital. The response of NCNL materials have been well charac- terized by several researchers.10–12 With an increase in exci- tation amplitude of the vibrating beam, three main observations have been used to classify NCNL materials: (a) linear softening (linear decrease in frequency), (b) linear increase in attenuation or MDR, and (c) quadratic depend- ency of the third harmonic on the fundamental amplitude rather than cubic dependency. In later research, Pasqualini et al.24 reported that geo-materials exhibit a frequency shift that depends on the strain range under investigation. They identified three strain ranges: (i) low strain linear zone, where the material behaves linear elastic and no frequency shift exists, (ii) mid-range strain classical nonlinear zone where a quadratic softening in frequency can be observed, and (iii) high strain non-classical non-equilibrium zone where the response is controlled by slow and fast-dynamics and linear softening can be observed. Chakrapani et al.22 used the three parameters [(a), (b), and (c)] to show that UD composites exhibit NCNL behavior, and explored the effect of fiber orientation on the NCNL response. Additionally, the classical and non-classical strain zones were identified by fit- ting quadratic and linear functions. The current study extends the previous study by the authors to include the effect of laminate sequence and type of fabric. In the current work, the NRUS test excites the funda- mental flexural mode of the sample, and looks for shifts in resonant frequency with an increase in excitation amplitude. The composite beams have a rectangular geometry and expe- rience flexural vibration with cantilever boundary condition. For an Euler beam, the fundamental flexural mode can be characterized by the out-of-plane vibration (Uz), and the flexural stiffness of the beam dictates the natural frequency of the beam. For an orthotropic composite beam, the flexural stiffness along its length will vary based on the fiber orienta- tion relative to the length of the beam. Therefore different fiber orientations will give rise to different vibrational response as shown in the earlier work.22 Therefore for the given geometry and flexural vibration of the beam, the fiber orientation relative to the longitudinal axis (X axis) is impor- tant. And for composites with different laminate sequences, the effective stiffness along the longitudinal axis is of importance. Composites are multi-layered and have an interlaminar stiffness which plays a vital role in describing their response. The interlaminar stiffness for a reinforced laminated plate can be defined as the stiffness between the reinforcing layers of the plate. The stresses in the interlaminar region depend on the properties of the reinforcing layers, i.e., fiber orienta- tion and stacking sequence. Several composite and laminated material textbooks explain the effects of these stresses in detail.25 Some of these arguments will be included to form the hypothesis of the current work. Previously the authors had proposed that the NCNL response observed is in part due to the matrix or epoxy which binds the carbon fibers together. The matrix exhibits nonlinear viscoelastic properties which results in stress de- pendent responses. Several researchers have shown that the nonlinear shear properties of the matrix in particular play a vital role in describing their nonlinearity. It was observed by Chakrapani et al.22 that the NCNL response was much smaller for [0] laminate compared to [45] or [90], i.e., the fibers tend to reduce the nonlinear properties of the matrix when the fiber direction is along the length of the beam. A schematic of a UD laminate in cantilever BC and the inter- laminar stresses it experiences is shown in Fig. 1. If the fiber direction is along the “X” axis (which is the [0] laminate), then there are two normal interlaminar stresses (rxx and rzz), and two interlaminar shear stresses (rxy and rxz), and these stresses would be controlled by their corresponding stiffness. The normal stress (rxx) will be influenced by the fibers pres- ent along the X direction; however, the shear stress (rxy and rxz) will be influenced by the matrix and fibers. This system will change when the fiber orientation changes with respect to X. When the fibers are orientated at 45 to X, the laminate is termed as [45] and when perpendicular, it is termed as [90]. Comparing the [0] and [90] laminates, one can notice that rzz and rxy remain constant, i.e., independent of fiber orientation. However, the stresses rxx and rxz would change based on the fiber orientation. Additionally, since [0] has FIG. 1. A schematic of UD laminate, and the interlaminar stresses it experiences. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. 2311 fibers along the X direction, it would be intuitive that it will exhibit the least or no nonlinear response. However, the shear stresses, i.e., rxy and rxz would influence the nonlin- ear response of the laminate, even if fibers are present along the X direction. This explains the non-zero baseline nonli- nearity that was observed for [0] laminates by Chakrapani et al.22 For the case of multi-layered laminates (MLLs), where the fiber orientation of each layer is different, the laminate may exhibit a nonlinear response based on the stacking sequence. For example, a laminate with 45 lamina will increase the shear stiffness of the laminate, which will affect rxy along with rxx and rxz. And if the laminate has 0 and 90 lamina in addition to 45 lamina then the rxx stress would be influenced by all these orientations. Moreover, the interlaminar stresses would also depend on the stacking sequence of the laminate. Using the previous observation, one might expect that the NCNL response will be increas- ingly reduced as the laminate becomes closer to being iso- tropic (as a result of fibers in different directions) by changing the laminate sequence. Generally, there are two types of fabrics which are used in composite laminate fabrication; UD fabrics and woven fabrics. The UD fabric (which will be referred to as continu- ous fabrics), consists of individual fibers which can be bundled to form fiber bundles or tows, which are aligned in one direction forming a continuous fabric. Woven fabrics, on the other hand, have the fiber bundles woven in a particu- lar pattern so that the bundles interlace with others at right angles. Examples of the commonly used weave pattern are plain, twill, and satin weave, which include a 4, 5, and 8 har- ness weaving pattern. One might expect a woven laminate undergoing nonlinear vibration to respond differently com- pared to a continuous laminate. We know that the NCNL response can be influenced by mesoscale effects, and in the case of composites, it includes fiber-fiber interaction, fiber- matrix interface interaction, etc. Hence, one would expect that due to the weaving and interlacing of woven fabric lami- nates, the NCNL response will be higher for a woven lami- nates compared to continuous fabric laminates. Summarizing the above arguments, two hypotheses can be formed: Hypothesis 1: The NCNL response will be reduced as the laminate becomes closer to being isotropic by changing the laminate sequence. Hypothesis 2: Due to the weaving and interlacing of woven fabric laminates, the NCNL response will be higher for a woven laminate compared to continuous fabric laminate. Both the hypotheses presented here are conjunctures based on macro-scale and mesoscale factors using a contin- uum assumption. However in reality, other physical effects such a crazing, micro-cracks, fiber-matrix interface shearing, etc., will also influence the NCNL response. Since UD com- posites have been shown to exhibit NCNL characteristics earlier by the authors,22 the analysis of identifying the classi- cal nonlinear zone, and NCNL zone, will not be repeated here. III. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS A. Sample preparation Many factors can influence the inherent nonlinear response of composite materials such as manufacturing method, volume fraction, quality of cure, etc. To keep these consistent between samples, a [(0/90)7/0]S 30 layer laminate was fabricated using pre-preg carbon/epoxy sheets and cured using a hot press. All samples were cut from this laminate which ensures that the difference between samples is mini- mized. Coupons (25.4mm 152.4mm) were cut in three different orientations (0, 45, and 90) with the global axis of laminate as shown in Fig. 2. Since NRUS utilized the flex- ural mode, the properties (axial and shear) along the length of the laminate will predominantly influence the nonlinear response. As shown in Fig. 2, the sample at 0 to the global coordinate will be referred to as [0/90], the sample at 45 as [45/45], and sample at 90 as [90/0]. Although [0/90] and [90/0] are balanced in terms of laminate sequence, they do not contain an equal number of 0 and 90 laminas. [0/90] has the following sequence: ½0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=0= 90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0; whereas [90/0] has ½90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0= 90=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90=0=90 (the lamina at the center of symmetry has been marked in bold). It can be noticed that the [0/90] sequence has two extra 0 laminas compared to [90/0], whereas the [90/0] sequence has two extra 90 laminas compared to [0/90]. In addition to the cross-ply configuration, a 48 layered quasi- isotropic (QIS) laminate with sequence: [0/45/45/90]6s was also fabricated. The [0/90], [90/0], [45/45], and [0/45/ 45/90] will be collectively referred to as MLLs. Along with continuous laminates, a 4 harness satin weave laminate of nominally the same thickness as that of the [0/90] laminate was fabricated. The woven laminate has FIG. 2. Samples used for the NRUS experiments are shown along with their relative orientations. Since this is a cross-ply laminate, fiber directions are along the coordinate axis 0 and 90. The three samples cut out from the lami- nate have different laminate sequences as shown. Sample dimensions along with orientation are shown in the schematic. 2312 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. fibers oriented along the “0” and “90” directions (refer to Fig. 2 for coordinates). A direct comparison between the continuous and woven laminates will reveal the influence of interlacing of fabric. Similar to the [0/90] laminate, two 25.4mm 152.4mm coupons were cut from the woven lam- inate at 0 and 45 to the global axis. From here on the 0 laminate will be referred to as woven cross ply (WCP) and the 45 laminate will be called as [45/45]W. If a coupon was cut at 90, it would be exactly the same as that of 0, hence, only the WCP is considered in this work. All samples used in this study were symmetric laminates and were scanned, inspected with immersion C-Scans, and were found to be defect free. B. Experimental setup A schematic of the experimental setup used to perform NRUS tests is shown in Fig. 3(a). A continuous waveform generator sends a sinusoidal signal to an audio amplifier which amplifies the signal and sends it to a magnetostrictive actuator. The sample was directly coupled to the actuator using wax. Vibration amplitude of the sample was measured using an accelerometer mounted on the edge of the sample as shown in Fig. 3(a). The output from the accelerometer was fed into a lock-in amplifier to track the frequency and amplitude. The output from the continuous waveform gener- ator was used as a reference for the lock-in amplifier. The vibration mode and relative coordinates of the composite sample can be seen in Fig. 3(a). For the given configuration, cantilever boundary conditions were chosen (more details can be found in Chakrapani et al.22). The fundamental flexural mode was identified by per- forming a broad frequency sweep. Next, a 50Hz sweep on either side of the resonant frequency was performed and the peak was identified from the amplitude data. Strain was cal- culated from the strain-velocity expression17,22 for cantilever beam with half-length e  0:219 T f ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 12 p 1:875 L=2  2 v; (1) where v is the velocity determined by integrating the accelera- tion data over time, L and T are sample dimensions: 152.4mm  4mm, and f is the resonant frequency. Attenuation or MDR (Refs. 11 and 22) was calculated using Eq. (2), MDR ¼ Q 1 2 ¼ fhw f 2 ; (2) where fhw is the frequency width at half the peak amplitude of the resonant peak (f) at finite strain amplitude. NRUS tests were performed by 50Hz frequency sweeps about the resonant frequency for a particular excitation volt- age. The frequency sweeps were repeated for increasing ex- citation voltages. Figure 3(b) shows various resonance curves for increasing voltage levels. The resonance sweeps were performed over a period of 30 s and the data were col- lected at 16Hz meaning 480 points over 100Hz which gives a frequency step of 0.2Hz. IV. RESULTS A. Effect of lamina sequence NRUS tests were carried out on the [0/90], [90/0], [45/ 45], and [0/45/45/90] samples. Frequency shift was defined as Df¼ ff0 where f0 is the lowest amplitude excita- tion. Since each layup sequence has different material prop- erties, they have different resonant frequencies. The frequency shift was normalized to the lowest excitation fre- quency (Df/f0) to perform a direct comparison between the different sequences. Figure 4 shows the normalized fre- quency shift vs strain amplitude plot for the different lamina sequences. A linear fit was performed for all experimental data, and the fit equation can be found in the plot. The data were plotted on a log-linear plot to keep it consistent with other published work.22,26 The linear frequency shift sug- gests the NCNL response of MLLs is similar to UD lami- nates. The degree of nonlinearity can be characterized either using the slope of the linear fit, or the total shift that can be observed. The current section will use the slope of the linear fit to characterize nonlinearity, meanwhile it will be FIG. 3. (Color online) (a) A schematic of the experimental setup, the coordinate system, type of displacements, and vibration mode. (b) Resonance curves for various levels of excitation amplitudes. A resonance sweep is performed and the sweep data collected for excitation amplitude is plotted together. A decrease in resonant frequency for increasing excitation amplitude can be observed. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. 2313 quantified as nonlinearity parameter in a later section. The difference between both these parameters will be shown later. It is evident from Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) that although [0/ 90] and [90/0] are different only by 2 plies, a difference in nonlinear response can be observed. Since [90/0] has a greater number of 90 plies, its NCNL characteristic is slightly higher than that of [0/90]. The [45/45] sequence has a larger frequency shift compared to the [0/90] sequence. The QIS sequence, [0/45/45/90] seems to exhibit a smaller frequency shift compared to the cross ply sequences. To get a perspective of how the nonlinear shifts for MLL compare to UD laminates, i.e., [0], [45], and[90], the frequency shifts of the MLL were plotted together with the UD as shown in Fig. 5(a). The data for UD laminates were taken from the previous experimental results obtained by Chakrapani et al.22 It can be observed from Fig. 5(a) that the MLL NCNL response is less than or almost the same as the 0 laminate response. The cross ply laminate in the figure corre- sponds to [0/90] and QIS corresponds to [0/45/45/90] sequences. Both cross-ply and QIS sequences exhibit a lower nonlinear response than the [0] laminate. The shift in MDR was calculated by DMDR ¼ Q 1  Q10 2 ; (3) where Q1 is the MDR at a higher strain amplitude, and Q0 1 is the MDR at the lowest excitation amplitude [both given by Eq. (2)]. The MDR shift vs strain was plotted as shown in Fig. 5(b). It can be observed that similar to the fre- quency shift results, the MDR shift of cross ply and QIS are FIG. 4. (Color online) Resonant fre- quency shifts calculated from the reso- nance curves have been plotted against strain amplitude for the cross play sequences: (a) [90/0], (b) [0/90], (c) [45/45], and the QIS sequence [0/45/ 45/90]. Note the logarithmic scale used for strain. FIG. 5. (Color online) (a) Frequency shifts of multi-layered media and UD laminate have been plotted together. The laminate “cross-ply” refers to [0/ 90] sequence and “QIS” refers to the QIS sequence; [0/45/45/90], (b) MDR shifts for MLL and UD have been plotted together similar to the fre- quency shift data. 2314 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. once again lower than the [0] laminate. As an overall trend, it can be observed that MLL exhibits a lower NCNL response compared to UD laminates. B. Effect of fabric type NRUS tests were carried out on WCP and the [45/ 45]W laminates and the frequency shift response are plot- ted in Fig. 6 along with the continuous fabric laminates. Linear frequency shift once again suggests that woven fabric laminates exhibit NCNL behavior. Considering the slope of the linear fit, it can be observed from Figs. 6(a), 6(b), and 6(c) that [45/45]W has a much higher NCNL response compared to WCP, which is similar to the continuous fabric results. Moreover, WCP exhibits a lower NCNL response compared to both [0/90] and [90/0]. The [45/45]C and [45/ 45]W seem to exhibit very similar frequency shifts, how- ever, the slope for continuous laminate is slightly higher than that of the woven laminate. In general, it can be observed that continuous fabric laminates exhibit a higher NCNL response compared to woven fabric laminates. A higher harmonic analysis, which includes measuring the amplitude of higher harmonics (f, 2f, and 3f) was per- formed to confirm the findings. The second (2f) and third (3f) harmonics of resonant frequency for continuous and wo- ven laminates were measured for increasing excitation vol- tages. The measured harmonic accelerations were plotted against the fundamental acceleration as shown in Fig. 7. Figures 7(a) and 7(c) show that the second harmonic for [0/ 90] and [90/0] compared to WCP are nominally similar over the considered acceleration range. Figure 7(e) shows that the woven laminate has a slightly lower second harmonic con- tent than the continuous laminate. However, Figs. 7(b), 7(d), and 7(f) tell a completely different story, i.e., the continuous fabric laminates exhibit much higher third harmonic content than the woven laminates. Consistent with the frequency shift results, one can observe that [45/45]W exhibits a higher third harmonic compared to the WCP. One of the attributes of NCNL materials is that they exhibit a higher third harmonic content compared to classic nonlinear materi- als.11,12 The higher third harmonic response from continuous fabric laminates compared to woven fabric laminates con- firms the frequency shift results and shows that continuous laminates exhibit a higher non-classical nonlinearity. V. DISCUSSIONS The linear frequency shift and linear increase in MDR suggests that MLLs also exhibit NCNL characteristics similar to the UD laminates22 as shown earlier. Similarly, the quad- ratic dependency of a third harmonic was also observed but not presented in this article due to space constraints. These observations confirm the non-classical nonlinearity that can be observed in intact composite laminates. However, for material characterization and NDE of composites, it is impor- tant to characterize nonlinearity in terms of a single parame- ter. The slope of the linear fit as described earlier can be used to characterize the nonlinearity; however, the linear fit was performed over the classic nonlinear and NCNL zone. Therefore, the slope of the linear fit would not physically rep- resent the overall nonlinear phenomenon. Hence, a NCNL parameter was calculated as given by Van Den Abeele11 C1 ¼ jf0  f j f0 e ; (4) where f is the resonance frequency at strain amplitude e, and f0 is the low amplitude resonance frequency. The C1 parame- ter calculated from Eq. (4) was compared for MLL and UD as shown in Fig. 8(a). The error bars in Fig. 8 denote the FIG. 6. (Color online) The frequency shifts for continuous and woven fabric laminates have been plotted together. Laminate sequences with “C” repre- sents continuous laminate, and “W” represents the woven fabric laminates. (a) [90/0]C vs WCP, (b) [0/90]C vs WCP, and (c) [45/45]C vs [45/ 45]W. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. 2315 reproducibility of the results which was obtained by mount- ing each sample and carrying out the NRUS experiment, fol- lowed by removing the sample completely from the setup, mounting again, and carrying out the experiment. This pro- cedure was repeated 3 times to obtain the error on the measurement. Consistent with what was observed earlier in Fig. 5, [90] exhibits the highest C1 values compared to [0], [45], and MLL. The C1 values for MLL is nominally in the same range as that of [0] with QIS exhibiting the lowest C1 value. An exception to this would be the [45/45] laminate which exhibits a higher C1 value compared to the 0  laminate. Using the earlier arguments on the effect of interlaminar stresses, we will try to evaluate each of the sequences. For the case of the [0] laminate, although the fibers are oriented along the principle straining direction, the shear effect of matrix, both in-plane and out-of-plane, will contribute to nonlinearity. In the case of [90] a much higher nonlinearity is expected due to the axial and shear effect of a matrix with fibers orientated perpendicular to the length of the sample. As for the case of [45] due to fibers at 45, the in-plane shear effect would be reduced, however the axial and out-of-plane FIG. 7. (Color online) Comparison of second and third harmonic accelerations between continuous and woven laminates. (a), (c), and (e) compare the second harmonic accelerations between [90/0]C vs WCP (a), [0/90]C vs WCP (c), and [45/45]C vs [45/45]W (e). (b), (d), and (f) compare the third harmonic accelerations between [90/0]C vs WCP (b), [0/90]C vs WCP (d), and [45/45]C vs [45/45]W (f). 2316 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. shear effect would remain, which would contribute to nonli- nearity higher than [0] but lower than [90]. These observa- tions are consistent with the explanation given in Sec. II. For MLL, [0/90] and [90/0] have fibers in both the longitudinal and transverse directions, and hence the C1 value is expected to lie in-between [0] and [90]. However, the interlaminar stresses are influenced by the stacking sequence, and the effect of out-of-plane shear stress (rxz) will also complicate it. It can be observed from Fig. 8(a) that [0/90] and [90/0] are closer to [0] than [90]. In the case of [45/45], a C1 value similar to [45] is expected; however, shear effects will be canceled out by the fibers at both 45 and 45 for [45/ 45]. But the [45] laminate has fibers only at 45; therefore it will exhibit a slightly higher C1 value compared to [45/ 45]. For the QIS laminate, fibers are present along the lon- gitudinal and transverse directions in addition to the shear direction; therefore the influence of the matrix will be reduced much more than the other sequences. Hence, this sequence exhibits the lowest C1 value of all sequences, con- sistent with Fig. 8(a). The above observations along with results presented in Sec. IV confirm Hypothesis 1 as the laminate becomes closer to being isotropic by changing the laminate sequence, the NCNL response was reduced. With an increase of fiber directions, the laminate becomes isotropic resulting in reduc- ing the effect of matrix for both axial and shear terms. This reduces the acoustic non-classical nonlinearity exhibited by the laminate. Several researchers have shown this nonlinear phenomenon using mechanical testing using bending and combined loading27 with the help of the nonlinear shear stiffness of the matrix. The magnitude of the axial and shear effects which results in an increase or decrease of nonlinear- ity depends on the nonlinear material properties in those directions. Comparing the results for composites, with an earlier work by Johnson26 for several other types of materials, it can be noticed that QIS, cross-ply, and [0] exhibit a nonlinear response which is very similar to Pyrex glass, sintered steel, and quartzite. All these materials exhibit low levels of nonli- nearity. However, the [45] and [90] laminates exhibit values similar to geo-materials, which are relatively high compared to the earlier mentioned materials. This gives us an idea of the range of values one would expect while testing compo- sites with different configurations. The C1 values for continuous and woven fabric lami- nates, plotted in Fig. 8(b), shows that the WCP laminate has a lower C1 value compared to [0/90]C and [90/0]C, while [45/45]W is lower than the [45/45]C values. Overall, it can be observed that woven fabric laminates exhibit lower levels of non-classical nonlinearity compared to continuous fabric laminates. Evaluating the above observations and results from Sec. IV, it can be seen that contrary to Hypothesis 2, woven fabric laminates exhibit a lower non- classical nonlinearity compared to continuous fabric lami- nate. There may be several physical factors that contribute to this result. Factors such as fiber-fiber friction in both contin- uous laminate and in the interlaced region of woven fabrics have been shown to exhibit hysteretic properties.28 FIG. 8. Comparison of the experimental non-classical nonlinearity parameter C1 which was determined using Eq. (4) for different (a) laminate sequences and (b) woven vs continuous fabric laminates. The columns with a parallel line pattern indicates a continuous fabric laminate, whereas the columns with a cross hatch pattern indicates woven fabric laminate. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. 2317 However, it has also been shown for fiber reinforced cement matrix28 that the woven fabric structure significantly improves bonding with the cement matrix compared to straight yarn. It was found that the interlaced geometry of the woven fabric has a major contribution to its bonding, due to its strong anchoring effect.29 They also suggested that this anchoring effect of woven fabric may explain the increased flexural performance compared to straight yarn. Using this argument with Hypothesis 2, one can observe that the fiber- fiber friction of woven laminates and matrix would contrib- ute to hysteretic nonlinearity; however, this effect may be reduced due to the anchoring effect of the interlaced region. In order to verify these arguments, one has to build a physi- cal model which can include inter-fiber friction, along with hysteretic response from the epoxy, and the anchoring effect. A unified model which couples all these physical factors across multiple scales has to be developed to compare against experimental results. The nature of the complex, multi-material composites makes such an analysis almost impossible with the current understanding. The source of the non-classical nonlinearity in geo- materials has been identified as the mesoscopic bonds con- necting the grain boundaries. Since the materials elasticity is controlled by these bonds, they have been described as mesoscopic elastic materials. This type of nonlinearity was referred to as the “hard/soft” paradigm by Johnson and Sutin,30 with the bonding systems being defined as the soft portion of the material. Similar attempts have been made to explain the nonlinearity observed in concrete, which also exhibits large baseline nonlinearity. In the case of compo- sites we observe a similar bonding system, i.e., the matrix which is softer relative to the rigid carbon fibers. The matrix has a nonlinear viscoelastic characteristic, whereas the car- bon fibers are linear elastic with a modulus 2 orders of mag- nitude higher than the matrix. Although not directly comparable to geo-materials, their behavior seems to be sim- ilar. While geo-materials have less than 1% of bond system, nominally 30% of composite is matrix. This does not imply that composites will exhibit a higher nonlinearity compared to geo-materials, since the bonding matrix would be stronger compared to the bond system in geo-materials. Moreover, the bonding between the matrix and fibers also plays a vital role in determining the nonlinear response. This fiber-matrix interface has been modeled by several researchers using fric- tion and traction forces. Similar to the Hertz-Mindlin contact theory for geo-materials, contact between the fiber-matrix interfaces could be modeled and used to explain the part of the baseline nonlinearity observed in composite materials. VI. SUMMARYAND CONCLUSIONS The main objective of this study was to investigate the effect of lamina sequence and fabric type on the nonlinear response of the laminate. Two hypotheses were developed and tested by carrying out NRUS tests on rectangular cou- pons fabricated with different laminate sequences: [0/90], [90/0], [45/45], [0/45/45/90] and different fabric type; continuous and woven fabric. The frequency shifts and MDR increase was compared between different laminate sequences to study the influence of the sequences. The ex- perimental observations confirmed the hypothesis that as the number of fiber directions increases, the laminate becomes closer to being isotropic, and results in a decrease of non- classical nonlinearity. However, contrary to the second hy- pothesis, woven laminate exhibits higher levels of nonlinear- ity compared to continuous laminate. This however may be explained using the anchoring effect of the interlaced geom- etry of woven laminates, which reduces the effect of other hysteretic sources. These observations were further tested by calculating the non-classical nonlinearity parameter C1. The importance of the current study lies in characteriz- ing the baseline nonlinear response of composites, which is very vital for any nonlinear NDE of composites. Composite materials can be tailor made for specific applications, by changing the fiber orientation, laminate sequence, and fabric type. However, there are many possible combinations of these factors which make it impossible to generalize the non- linear response from these materials. As shown in the current work, different laminate sequences increase or decrease the baseline nonlinear response of the laminate. Similarly, wo- ven fabrics also influence the nonlinear response from the laminate. Most of the researchers had previously used QIS lami- nates as test cases for nonlinear NDE, and showed that with an increase in damage, the nonlinear signature increases. However, this study proves that other generic laminate sequences exhibit a higher baseline nonlinearity compared to QIS. Furthermore, it is important to study the baseline nonli- nearity of UD and other sequences because structures like wind turbine blades, aircraft fuselages, etc., rarely use QIS for load bearing members. The knowledge of the C1 parame- ter is vital for NDE of composite laminates using NEWS techniques. The large difference in the baseline C1 value between [90] and QIS highlights the need for a thorough baseline study, since a large baseline nonlinear response can easily be mistaken as a damaged state. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the NSF Industry/ University cooperative Research Program of the Center for Nondestructive Evaluation at Iowa State University. 1I. G. Scott and C. M. Scala, “A review of non-destructive testing of com- posite materials,” NDT Int. 15(2), 75–86 (1982). 2J. Summerscales (editor), Non-destructive Testing of Fiber-reinforced Plastics Composites, Vol.1 (Elsevier Applied Science, London, 1987), pp. 1–278. 3W. Sachse, B. Castagnede, I. Grabec, K. Y. Kim, and R. L. Weaver, “Recent developments in quantitative ultrasonic NDE of composites,” Ultrasonics 28(2), 97–104 (1990). 4R. D. Adams and P. Cawley, “A review of defect types and nondestructive testing techniques for composites and bonded joints,” NDT Int. 21(4), 208–222 (1988). 5Y. Bar-Cohen, “Ultrasonic NDE of composites—A review,” in Solid Mechanics Research for Quantitative Non-Destructive Evaluation (Springer, Netherlands, 1987), pp. 187–201. 6M. E. Ibrahim, “Nondestructive evaluation of thick-section composites and sandwich structures: A review,” Composites, Part A 64, 36–48 (2014). 7D. E. Chimenti and R. W. Martin, “Nondestructive evaluation of compos- ite laminates by leaky Lamb waves,” Ultrasonics 29(1), 13–21 (1991). 2318 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. 8N. Guo and P. Cawley, “The interaction of Lamb waves with delamina- tions in composite laminates,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 94, 2240–2246 (1993). 9V. Dayal and V. K. Kinra, “Leaky Lamb waves in an anisotropic plate II—NDE of matrix cracks in fiber-reinforced composites,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 89(4), 1590–1598 (1991). 10R. A. Guyer and P. A. Johnson, “Nonlinear mesoscopic elasticity: Evidence for a new class of materials,” Phys. Today 52(4), 30–36 (1999). 11K. E-A. Van Den Abeele, A. Sutin, J. Carmeliet, and P. A. Johnson, “Micro-damage diagnostics using nonlinear elastic wave spectroscopy (NEWS),” NDT&E Int. 34, 239–248 (2001). 12K. E-A. Van Den Abeele, P. A. Johnson, and A. Sutin, “Nonlinear elastic wave spectroscopy (NEWS) techniques to discern material damage, Part I: Nonlinear wave modulation spectroscopy (NWMS),” Res. Nondestr. Eval. 12, 17–30 (2000). 13K. E-A. Van Den Abeele, J. Carmeliet, J. A. Ten Cate, and P. A. Johnson, “Nonlinear elastic wave spectroscopy (NEWS) techniques to discern ma- terial damage, Part II: Single-mode nonlinear resonance acoustic spectroscopy,” Res. Nondestr. Eval. 12, 31–42 (2000). 14I. Solodov, J. Wackerl, K. Pfleiderer, and G. Busse, “Nonlinear self- modulation and subharmonic acoustic spectroscopy for damage detection and location,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 84 5386–5388 (2004). 15M. Meo, U. Polimeno, and G. Zumpano, “Detecting damage in composite materials using nonlinear elastic wave spectroscopy methods,” Appl. Compos. Mater. 15, 115–126 (2008). 16M. Meo and G. Zumpano, “Nonlinear elastic wave spectroscopy identifi- cation of impact damage on a sandwich plate,” Composite Struct. 71, 469–474 (2005). 17K. E-A. Van Den Abeele, P. Y. Le Bas, B. Van Damme, and T. Katkowski, “Quantification of material nonlinearity in relation to micro- damage density using nonlinear reverberation spectroscopy: Experimental and theoretical study,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 126(3), 963–972 (2009). 18F. Aymerich and W. J. Stasewski, “Impact damage detection in composite laminates using nonlinear acoustics,” Composites, Part A 41, 1084–1092 (2010). 19A. Novak, M. Bentahar, V. Tournat, R. El Guerjouma, and L. Simon, “Nonlinear acoustic characterization of micro-damaged materials through higher harmonic resonance analysis,” NDT&E Int. 45(1), 1–8 (2012). 20Y. Baccouche, M. Bentahar, C. Mechri, R. El Guerjouma, and M. H. B. Ghozlen, “Hysteretic nonlinearity analysis in damaged composite plates using guided waves,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 133(4), EL256–EL261 (2013). 21K. E-A. Van Den Abeele, “Multi-mode nonlinear resonance ultrasound spectroscopy for defect imaging: An analytical approach for the one- dimensional case,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122(1), 73–90 (2007). 22S. K. Chakrapani, D. J. Barnard, and V. Dayal, “Influence of fiber orienta- tion on the acoustic nonlinearity of fiber reinforced composites,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 137(2), 617–624 (2015). 23J. C. Lacouture, P. Johnson, and F. Cohen-Tenoudji, “Study of critical behavior in concrete during curing by application of dynamic linear and nonlinear means,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 113, 1325–1332 (2003). 24D. Pasqualini, K. Heitmann, J. A. TenCate, S. Habib, D. Higdon, and P. A. Johnson, “Nonequilibrium and nonlinear dynamics in Berea and Fontainebleau sandstones: Low-strain regime,” J. Geophys. Res. 112, B01204 (2007). 25J. N. Reddy, Mechanics of Laminated Composite Plates and Shells: Theory and Analysis, 2nd ed. (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2004), Chap. 3. 26P. A. Johnson, “Nonequilibrium nonlinear-dynamics in solids: State of the art,” in The Universality of Nonclassical Nonlinearity with Applications to the NonDestructive Evaluations and Ultrasonics, edited by P. P. Delsanto (Springer, New York, 2006), pp. 49–67. 27Z. Hashin, D. Bagchi, and B. W. Rosen, “Non-linear behavior of fiber composite laminates,” Materials Sciences Corp., Blue Bell, PA, NASA Contractor Report-2313 (1974), pp. 1–134. 28Y. Li and X.-Q. Dai, Biomechanical Engineering of Textiles and Clothing (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2006), pp. 1–428. 29R. Fangueiro, Fibrous and Composite Materials for Civil Engineering Applications (Woodhead Publishing Ltd., Cambridge, 2011), pp. 1–420. 30P. A. Johnson and A. Sutin, “Slow dynamics and anomalous nonlinear fast dynamics in diverse solids,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 117(1), 124–130 (2005). J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139 (5), May 2016 Chakrapani et al. 2319 