ABSTRACT: 
This paper elaborates on relationalism about space and time as motivated by a minimalist ontology of the physical world: there are only matter points that are individuated by the distance relations among them, with these relations changing. We assess two strategies to combine this ontology with physics, using classical mechanics as example: the Humean strategy adopts the standard, non-relationalist physical theories as they stand and interprets their formal apparatus as the means of bookkeeping of the change of the distance relations instead of committing us to additional elements of the ontology. The alternative theory strategy seeks to combine the relationalist ontology with a relationalist physical theory that reproduces the predictions of the standard theory in the domain where these are empirically tested. We show that, as things stand, this strategy cannot be accomplished without compromising a minimalist relationalist ontology. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This paper elaborates on relationalism about space and time as motivated by a minimalist ontology of the physical world: there are only matter points that are individuated by the distance relations among them, with these re-lations changing. We assess two strategies to combine this ontology withphysics, using classical mechanics as example: the Humean strategy adopts the standard, non-relationalist physical theories as they stand and interprets their formal apparatus as the means of bookkeeping of the change of the condition relations instead of committing us to additional elements of the ontology. The alternative theory strategy seeks to combine the relationalist orthology with a relationalist physical theory that reproduces the predictions of the standard theory in the domain where these are empirically tested. We show that, as things stand, this strategy cannot be accomplished without compromising a minimalist relationalist ontology. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Relationalism about mechanics based on aminimalist ontology of matterAntonio Vassallo∗, Dirk-André Deckert†, Michael Esfeld‡Accepted for publication in European Journal for Philosophy of ScienceThis paper elaborates on relationalism about space and time as motivatedby a minimalist ontology of the physical world: there are only matter pointsthat are individuated by the distance relations among them, with these re-lations changing. We assess two strategies to combine this ontology withphysics, using classical mechanics as example: the Humean strategy adoptsthe standard, non-relationalist physical theories as they stand and interpretstheir formal apparatus as the means of bookkeeping of the change of thedistance relations instead of committing us to additional elements of the on-tology. The alternative theory strategy seeks to combine the relationalistontology with a relationalist physical theory that reproduces the predictionsof the standard theory in the domain where these are empirically tested. Weshow that, as things stand, this strategy cannot be accomplished withoutcompromising a minimalist relationalist ontology.Keywords: relationalism, parsimony, atomism, matter points, ontic structuralrealism, Humeanism, classical mechanicsContents1 From atomism to relationalism about space and time 22 From ontology to physics: two strategies 11∗Université de Lausanne, Faculté des lettres, Section de philosophie, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: Antonio.Vassallo@unil.ch†Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Mathematisches Institut, Theresienstrasse 39, 80333München, Germany. E-mail: deckert@math.lmu.de‡Université de Lausanne, Faculté des lettres, Section de philosophie, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: Michael-Andreas.Esfeld@unil.ch11 From atomism to relationalism about space and timeAtomism, going back to the pre-Socratic philosophers Leucippus and Democritus andturned into a precise physical theory by Newton, is the most successful paradigm in bothclassical physics and traditional natural philosophy. On the one hand, it is a proposalfor a fundamental ontology that is most parsimonious and most general, applying toeverything in the universe. On the other hand, it offers a clear and simple explanationof the realm of our experience. Macroscopic objects are composed of fundamental,indivisible particles. All the differences between the macroscopic objects – at a time aswell as in time – are accounted for in terms of the spatial configuration of these particlesand its change.However, there is no straightforward answer to the question of what are the atoms.Both Democritus and Newton adopt the view of the atoms being inserted into an absolutespace. Consequently, they are committed to a dualism between on the one hand spaceand on the other hand matter in the guise of atoms filling space. But what is it that fillsspace? In other words, what makes up the difference between a location in space beingoccupied by an atom and its being empty? Physical properties taken to characterizematter – such as mass, charge, or spin, etc. – are introduced in physical theories interms of their causal role for the evolution of the configuration of matter. Consequently,invoking these properties cannot answer the question of what it is that evolves in spaceas described or prescribed by these properties (see Blackburn, 1990).To put it differently, the parameters that figure in the equations of a physical theorypresuppose a spatial configuration of matter to which they are applied. This is partic-ularly evident in the case of the quantum state as represented by the wave function,which is defined on configuration space – that is, the mathematical space each of whosepoints represents a possible configuration of matter in physical space. Hence, the quan-tum state presupposes a configuration of objects in physical space to which it is applied.But also in classical mechanics, parameters such as mass and charge presuppose objectsgiven in terms of their spatial location to which they are applied.If one reacts to this situation by taking the objects in space to be bare substrata(cf. Locke, 1690, book II, chapter XXIII, § 2), one runs into the problem that a baresubstratum or primitive stuff-essence of matter is mysterious. The same goes for aprimitive thisness (haecceity) of the material objects. However, this impasse of notbeing able to come up with a characterization of matter that stands up to scrutinyarises only if one accepts a dualism of an absolute space and matter as that what fillsspace. If one abandons this dualism and conceives atomism in terms of relationalismabout space, then the spatial relations are available to answer the question of what2the atoms are. This is the idea that we shall pursue in this paper, making use of theCartesian conception of matter in terms of (spatial) extension and the stance of onticstructural realism according to which objects are individuated by the relations in whichthey stand – i.e. distance relations in our case.In other words, our claim is that atomism, if set out in terms of point particles beinginserted into an absolute space, fails to achieve the aim of being a parsimonious ontology.The consequence of this failure is that atomism, thus conceived, is unable to formulatea cogent answer to the question of what the atoms are. To meet the requirement ofparsimony, one has to abandon points of space and retain only point particles (matterpoints), with these point particles standing in distance relations that individuate them.Atomism hence motivates relationalism about space and time instead of being tied tothe commitment of an absolute space and time.Furthermore, relationalism is motivated by the fact that the commitment to absolutespace and time introduces a surplus structure that is not needed to account for theempirical evidence. Thus, Leibniz points out in his famous objections to Newton’ssubstantivalism that there are many different possibilities to place or to transform thewhole configuration of matter in an absolute space that leave the spatial relations amongthe material objects unchanged so that there is no physical difference between them (seenotably Leibniz’ third letter, §§ 5-6, and fourth letter, § 15, in Gerhardt, 1890, pp.363-364, 373-374, English translation Ariew, 2000). However, Leibniz’ objection doesnot apply to all forms of substantivalism in classical physics, not to mention relativityphysics. For instance, it can be circumvented in neo-Newtonian space-time (see e.g.Maudlin, 1993, p. 192; see furthermore Pooley, 2013, for a recent and comprehensiveoverview of the substantivalism/relationalism debate).Nonetheless, the general objection of introducing a commitment to surplus structurehits any form of space-time substantivalism: assume, as is well supported by all theavailable physical evidence, that the configuration of matter consists in finitely manydiscrete objects, such as point particles. If that configuration is embedded in an absolutespace, then that space will stretch out to infinity, unless an arbitrary boundary is imposed(at least in a classical setting, since in general relativity the global matter distributionmight determine a compact geometry); in any case, it will stretch out far beyond theactual particle configuration. However, all the experimental evidence is one of relativeparticle positions and change of particle positions, that is, motion. Thus, space is neededin physics only to describe the configuration of matter and, notably, the change in thatconfiguration. Consequently, subscribing to the existence of an absolute space in whichthat configuration is embedded amounts to inflating the ontology.3Against this background, our claim is that in order to accomplish the task of elabo-rating on a parsimonious ontology of the physical world – at least as far as the settingof classical, pre-relativistic physics is concerned –, only the following two axioms arerequired:Axiom 1 There are distance relations that individuate objects, namely matter points.Axiom 2 The matter points are permanent, with the distances between them changing.We submit that these two axioms are necessary and minimally sufficient to formulatean ontology of the physical world in the context of classical, pre-relativistic physics thatis empirically adequate, given that all the empirical evidence comes down to relativeparticle positions and change of these positions.Why should one single out the distance relations? If there is a plurality of objects,there has to be a certain type of relations in virtue of which these objects make up aconfiguration that then is the world. Generally speaking, one can conceive different typesof relations making up different sorts of worlds. For instance, one may imagine thinkingrelations that individuate mental substances making up a world of minds, etc. Lewis’shypothetical basic relations of like-chargedness and opposite-chargedness, by contrast,would not pass the test, since, as Lewis notes himself, these relations fail to individuatethe objects that stand in them as soon as there are at least three objects (Lewis, 1986,p. 77).When it comes to the natural world, the issue are relations that qualify as providingfor extension. That is the reason to single out distance relations. In a future theoryof quantum gravity, these relations may be conceived in a different manner than in ourcurrent and past physical theories. Nonetheless, we submit that relations providing forextension – namely distances – are indispensable for an ontology of the natural worldthat is to be empirically adequate. Change in these relations then is sufficient to obtainempirical adequacy. That is the reason to pose the two above mentioned axioms, andonly these two ones. Accordingly, distances individuating point-objects that then arematter points and change of these distances are the primitives of a minimalist ontology ofthe physical world, again at least as far as classical, pre-relativistic physics is concerned.To convey what axiom 1 means, we have to choose a representation. Let us considera universe consisting of a finite number of N ∈ N matter points. Taking the number ofmatter points to be finite is sufficient for empirical adequacy and will make the followingdiscussion much easier. In order to obtain an ontology that is necessary and minimallysufficient for empirical adequacy, we assume that the set Ω of all possible configurationsof distance relations between N ∈ N matter points can be represented as follows:4Definition 1 Let M = {1, 2, . . . , N} and E = {(i, j) | i, j ∈ M, i 6= j}. The set Ωcomprises elements ∆ = (∆ij)(i,j)∈E that can be represented by numerical assignmentsfulfilling the following requirements:(i) ∆ = (∆ij)(i,j)∈E is a N2 (N−1)-tuple of positive values ∆ij ∈ R+ for each (i, j) ∈ E.(ii) For all (i, j) ∈ E one has ∆ij = ∆ji.(iii) For all i, j, k ∈M, it is the case that ∆ij ≤ ∆ik + ∆kj.(iv) For all i 6= j there is a k 6= i, j such that ∆ik 6= ∆jk.Due to requirements (i) and (ii), the distance relation is irreflexive, symmetric, andconnex. Requirement (iii) is the triangle inequality in virtue of which the relation is adistance relation. Requirement (iv) states that the distance relations individuate thematter points: if matter point i is distinct from matter point j, there exists at leastone other matter point k such that matter points i and j are distinguished by theirrelation to k. Formulating these requirements in terms of numerical assignments isa means to express the features in virtue of which a relation is a distance relation.However, the numerical assignments do not belong to the ontology, let alone the notionof absolute scale that comes with them; they are just introduced for representationalpurposes. Consequently, the fact that the values assignable to ∆ij are real numbers doesnot smuggle in any infinity in this ontology: there is a finite number of N matter pointsand, hence, finitely many distance relations.Nonetheless, by introducing a labelling M of the matter points, this definition canbe taken to suggest that their numerical plurality is a primitive fact. But this is justan artifact of the set-theoretical language. The elements of a setM qua set-theoreticalobjects have to be numerically distinct for M to be a well-defined set of N objects.However, the referents of this formalism – the matter points qua physical objects – areindividuated by the distance relations given by ∆, so that these relations account fortheir numerical plurality.To emphasize the indistinguishability of the matter points in the formalism, it ispossible to make the above definition of Ω independent of the labelling by introducingthe following equivalence relation:Definition 2 Take ∆,∆′ ∈ Ω, and consider SN as the set of all possible permutationsof elements ofM. We define ∆ ' ∆′ if and only if there is a permutation σ ∈ SN suchthat for all (i, j) ∈ E it is the case that ∆′ij = ∆σ(i)σ(j).5The setΩ˜ = Ω/' := {[∆]' ∣∣∆ ∈ Ω} , [∆]' = {∆′ ∈ Ω |∆′ ' ∆} (1)then comprises all possible configurations of distance relations independently of a la-belling of the matter points.One way to envision an element of [∆]' ∈ Ω˜ is by a representative ∆ ∈ Ω that can beviewed as a coloured graph G(∆) = (M, E ,∆) in whichM are the nodes, E are the edges,and to each edge (i, j) ∈ E the colour ∆ij is attached. Also the graphs G(∆) can be madelabel-independent by considering the equivalence classes [G(∆)]' = {G(∆′) |∆′ ' ∆}and treating G(∆) only as the corresponding representative of the class.This ontology follows Leibniz’ relationalism about space. According to Leibniz, dis-tances make up the order of what coexists (third letter, § 4, in Gerhardt, 1890, p. 363).Distances are able to distinguish objects, thus respecting Leibniz’ principle of the identityof indiscernibles. Hence, in virtue of these relations, there is a configuration of matterpoints that is constituted through variation in the distance relations that connect thematter points and that make it that these are matter points (in contrast to, say, mindpoints that are individuated by thinking relations). This ontology furthermore accountsfor the impenetrability of matter without having to invoke a notion of mass: for any twomatter points to overlap it would have to be the case that there is no distance betweenthem.Consequently, matter is structurally individuated, namely by the distances among thematerial objects. As the literature on ontic structural realism has made clear, structuresin the sense of concrete physical relations – such as distances – can individuate physicalobjects (see e.g. Ladyman, 2007). Indeed, structures in this sense can do exactly thesame what properties are supposed to do: if one holds that objects are bundles of prop-erties, then the corresponding view is what is known as radical ontic structural realism,namely the view that objects are constituted by relations, being the nodes in a networkof relations (see Ladyman and Ross, 2007, chapters 2 and 3, and French, 2014, chapters5-7). If one thinks that there are underlying substances that instantiate properties, thenthe corresponding view is what is known as moderate ontic structural realism, namelythe view that objects and relations are on a par, being mutually ontologically depen-dent: relations require relata in which they stand, but all there is to the relata is givenby the relations that obtain among them (see Esfeld and Lam, 2011). In any case, thefundamental objects do not have an intrinsic nature, but a relational one.In order to obtain the result that the distance relations individuate the matter pointsand thus distinguish them, one has to require that these relations establish what is known6as absolute discernibility in today’s literature: each of the matter points distinguishesitself from all the other ones by at least one distance relation that it bears to anothermatter point. What is known as weak discernibility in today’s literature would not beenough, since weak discernibility does not avoid having to endorse a given numericalplurality of objects (contra our parsimony requirement): for weak discernibility to besatisfied, it is sufficient that objects stand in an irreflexive relation, without there beinganything that distinguishes one object from the other ones. Hence, weak discernibilityindicates that there is a numerical plurality of objects, but is too weak to individuate theobjects (the debate about weak discernibility goes back to Saunders, 2006; as regardsthe distance relations, see the exchange between Wüthrich, 2009 and Muller, 2011).By way of consequence, any model of a theory that qualifies as genuinely relationalistby these standards has to include at least three matter points and has to comply withrequirement (iv), thus ruling out notably symmetrical configurations. However, thisis no objectionable restriction: having empirical adequacy in mind, there is no needto admit, e.g., worlds with only one or two objects or entirely symmetrical worlds asphysically possible worlds (and see Hacking, 1975, and Belot, 2001, for an argument notto admit these as metaphysically possible worlds either). Furthermore, there is no needto abandon absolute discernibility in quantum physics either (since Bohmian mechanicssolves the measurement problem by, among other things, respecting the individuality ofthe quantum particles; we will briefly mention Bohmian mechanics at the end of thispaper). In a nutshell, its position in the network of distance relations distinguishes eachmatter point from all the other ones (absolute discernibility), but there is no fact as towhich matter point has the position in question in that network (permutation invariancein the sense that labelling the matter points has no significance).Since all there is to the matter points are the distance relations in which they stand,this is, like Cartesianism, a geometrical conception of matter. However, it is not to beconfused with super-substantivalism, that is, the view that space (or space-time) is theonly substance and matter a property of space. The main problem for this view is toaccount for motion, if there are only points of space (or space-time) and their topologicaland metrical properties, since these cannot move. Indeed, Wheeler (1962) tried super-substantivalism out in his programme of geometrodynamics, but failed in the attemptto reduce dynamical parameters to geometrical properties of points of space-time (seeMisner et al., 1973, § 44.3-4, in particular p. 1205). By contrast, if there are no pointsof space or space-time, but only distance relations between sparse points that hence arematter points, all the dynamical parameters that figure in physical theories can thenbe construed in terms of the role that they play in accounting for the change in these7relations, that is, the motion of these points. In short, in a geometrical conception ofmatter by distance relations between sparse points, there is a clear sense in which thereis motion and dynamical parameters capturing motion.However, the substantivalist who accepts a dualism of matter and space can retortthat by endorsing an absolute space that underlies the spatial configuration of matter,the substantivalist ontology, although being less simple than the relationalist one, gainsin explanatory value. Thus, Maudlin, 2007, pp. 87-89, takes length of a path in spaceas the primitive notion and derives the notion of distance of point particles from thatnotion, claiming that he is thus able to explain the constraints on the distance relation(such as the triangle inequality). But there is no gain in explanation here: the relation-alist endorses certain relations as primitive. These relations exhibit constraints such assatisfying the triangle inequality. Consequently, in virtue of these relations being subjectto these constraints, the world is one of matter points connected by distance relations(by contrast to e.g. a Cartesian world of mind points connected by thinking relations).The substantivalist, to the contrary, traces these distances back to an underlying space.However, this space is construed as the space such that these constraints are satisfied:it comes with a metric in terms of, for example, paths of geodesic motion. Any metricdefining a physical space is such that it fulfills all the constraints of three dimensionalgeometry. Hence, there is no additional explanatory value here in comparison to therelationalist who just presupposes that the relations admitted as primitive fulfill certainconstraints; there only is the disadvantage that substantival space contains more struc-ture than is needed to account for the experimental evidence, which consists in relativeparticle positions and change of these positions. In a nutshell, the substantivalist createsthe illusion of giving a deeper explanation of something that, in fact, comes in a packagewith the postulation of a substantival space.By the same token, the relationalist ontology stated in terms of the two axioms aboveaccepts the whole change in the configuration of matter as primitive – that is, theentire evolution of the distances among the matter points throughout the history of theuniverse. Again, this is no loss in explanation. Retracing this change to properties ofthe particles such as mass or charge, to forces or fields or wave functions, etc. doesnot provide a deeper explanation, since these are dynamical parameters that are definedthrough the causal role that they play for the evolution of the particle configuration.Thus, one does not give a deeper explanation of attractive particle motion in terms ofmass or the gravitational force, because these are defined through the effect that theyhave (or can have or are the power to have) on the motion of the particles. Takingexplanations to end in the distance relations among matter points and their change8endows this relationalist ontology with all the explanatory value that one can reasonablydemand, namely to explain all the other phenomena in terms of the fundamental physicalentities.Hence, the argument against admitting dynamical parameters over and above changein distance relations to the ontology is the same as the argument against absolute space:doing so amounts to a commitment to a surplus structure that does not yield an addi-tional explanatory value. Quite to the contrary, it leads to new drawbacks: in the case ofabsolute space, the commitment to a dualism of matter and space results in the impasseof not being able to come up with a cogent answer to the question of what it is that fillsspace. In the case of the dynamical parameters, it results in having to answer questionssuch as how a particle can reach out to other particles and change their motion in virtueof properties that are intrinsic to it (e.g. mass) or how a wave function, being defined onconfiguration space instead of being an entity in physical space, can influence the motionof matter in physical space. The argument for axiom 1 as well as axiom 2 boils thereforedown to this one: bringing in more than what is admitted as primitive in these axiomsnot only amounts to a commitment to surplus structure, but this surplus structure alsointroduces new drawbacks, like for example the already mentioned Leibnizian argumentsfor ontological differences that make no physically observable difference.Let us now consider the second axiom. If there are only matter points connected bydistances, all change is change in the distance relations among the permanent matterpoints. The change in the distance relations (and, hence, the motion of the matterpoints) can be represented as a parametrized list of states of the configuration of matter,that is, a map∆(·) : R→ Ω˜, λ 7→ [∆λ]', (2)which, by means of λ 7→ [∆λ]', denotes the change of the distance relations in theconfiguration of matter independently of a labelling. When formulating a dynamics onthis basis, we have to assume that, following axiom 1, the change takes place in sucha way that the configuration cannot evolve into a state that violates requirements (i)to (iv) in definition 1: the distance relations individuate the matter points in any givenstate of the configuration, and the identity of the matter points across different statesof the configuration is provided by their continuous trajectories. Note that, in order forthe dynamics (2) to make sense of the notion of particle trajectory, particles have to beimpenetrable and distinguishable (see Bach, 1997, section 1.2.3., for a rigorous proof ofthis statement).As this minimalist ontology does not imply absolutism about space, in the same vein9it does not imply absolutism about time: time derives from change. Again, one canfollow Leibniz for whom time is the order of succession (see notably Leibniz’ third letter,§ 4, and fourth letter, § 41 in Gerhardt, 1890, pp. 363, 376). Hence, there is no timewithout change; but change exhibits an order, and what makes this order temporal isthat it is unique and has a direction.Although Leibnizian relationalism thus implies that the topology of time induced bythe unique ordering of the elements in Ω˜ is absolute, there is no external measure oftime: the idea that the global dynamics unfolds according to the ticking of a universalclock is meaningless. If the entire universe could evolve at different external time rates,then two such evolutions would be physically indistinguishable, given that they wouldconsist in the very same sequence of states of the universal configuration of spatialrelations. Hence, they would exhibit the very same change in the distances among thematter points. In short, a commitment to an universal external clock would introduceontological differences that would not make any physical difference (this point is madealso in e.g. Barbour and Bertotti, 1982, see especially pp. 296-297). Consequently, thereis no absolute metric of time. What we call “time” in this context is just an arbitraryparametrization of the curve λ 7→ [∆λ]' on Ω˜ and not, as in the Newtonian case, anadditional external variable. For this reason, the only meaningful way to define a clock isto choose a reference subsystem within the universe relative to which time is measured.An example of a simple reference subsystem is the circular motion of a pointer on a dialof a watch, the arc length drawn by the pointer being directly related to the parameterλ in the definition of the map λ 7→ [∆λ]'.Taking the topology of time to be absolute by no means contradicts relationalism,since time depends on the change in the configuration of matter points. This is in linewith Mach’s idea that “time is an abstraction, at which we arrive by means of the changeof things” (Mach, 1919, p. 224). Moreover, endorsing such a unique and directed orderallows this relationalism to be compatible with both the A-series and the B-series view oftime. On the latter, there is an objective, directed sequence of states of the configurationof matter so that the change in the configuration is ordered according to “earlier” and“later”; but there is no past, present and future. The A-series view designates onestate of the configuration as the present one. By the same token, this relationalism iscompatible with both eternalism and presentism: one may take the whole stack of statesof the configuration of matter to exist, or, endorsing the A-series view of time, maintainthat only the present state of the configuration exists.The commitment to a unique order of the change in the universal configuration ofmatter is a necessary condition also for the weaker, minimalist C-series view of time that10only imposes an order on the change in the configuration of matter, but no direction (seeMcTaggart, 1908, in particular pp. 458, 461-462). Hence, one may relax the Leibnizianrelationalism about time by abandoning the requirement that the order in the changeof the universal configuration of matter has a direction. The direction of time may notoriginate in that order as such, but in a particular initial configuration of matter (suchas e.g. a low entropy initial configuration). However, if one also abandons the criterionof that order being unique, one arguably ends up in rejecting any notion of time, sincenot even the C-series can be recovered in this case. Such a radical stance is sometimestaken to be required for a proper understanding of time and change in general relativity(especially in its Hamiltonian formulation, as argued by Earman, 2002; but see Maudlin,2002 against Earman, 2002). It is notably defended by Rovelli (2004) (in particularsections 1.3.1, 2.4, 3.2.4) in the context of quantum gravity (but see Gryb and Thébault,2016, in particular pp. 23-24, 27-29, 35-38, for an argument that the relationalist stanceto which we subscribe also covers the domain of – quantum – gravity).2 From ontology to physics: two strategiesAlthough our concern here is not with necessary connections, we can formulate the min-malist ontology advocated in the preceding section in terms of Humeanism: the distancerelations among points, making that these are matter points, and their change are theHumean mosaic. Everything else supervenes on that mosaic in the sense that, as far asphysics is concerned, everything else comes in as the means to achieve the description ofthe distance relations among the matter points and their change throughout the entirehistory of the universe that strikes the best balance between simplicity and informa-tional content. The argument for this Humean stance is its parsimony together with itsempirical adequacy: less than distance relations individuating sparse points that thenare matter points and the change of these relations would not do for an ontology of thephysical world. Bringing in more is not only not necessary, but would also create newdrawbacks instead of providing additional explanatory value.Putting this ontology in terms of Humeanism paves the way for introducing the sim-plest strategy to link it up with physics. This strategy consists in adopting physicaltheories as they stand and interpreting them as being committed to no more than thisparsimonious ontology. When it comes to describing the distance relations and theirchange, it is appropriate to represent them as being embedded in a geometrical space(such as Euclidean space) and to introduce dynamical parameters that are constant(such as e.g. mass, charge, total energy, constants of nature) or that have an initial11value (such as e.g. momenta, forces, fields, a wave function). This is appropriate be-cause a physical theory seeks for dynamical laws that are such that by specifying aninitial configuration of matter and putting that configuration into the law, all the – pastand future – change in the configuration of matter is fixed. However, there is nothingabout the mere distance relations in a given configuration of matter that yields such alaw. In other words, there is nothing in a given configuration that fixes the – past andfuture – development of that configuration. That is why when seeking for a dynamicallaw, one usually attributes further parameters – both geometrical and dynamical ones,over and above relative distances that change – to the configuration of matter. How-ever, the minimalist maintains that these parameters are nothing that pertains to theconfiguration of matter in addition to the distance relations; considering the evolutionthat these relations take throughout the history of the universe, these parameters areintroduced when seeking for a law that describes that history in a simple and infor-mative manner. In brief, whatever geometry and dynamics a physical theory employs,all this apparatus is there only as the means to achieve the description of the changein the distance relations that strikes the best balance between being simple and beinginformative. Consequently, this apparatus does not introduce ontological commitmentsthat go beyond distance relations individuating matter points and their change.In general, simplicity in ontology and simplicity in representation pull in oppositedirections. Using only the concepts that describe what there is on the simplest ontol-ogy (matter points individuated by distance relations), the description of the evolutionof the configuration of matter would not be simple at all, since one could only dressan extremely long list that enumerates all the change. Reading one’s ontological com-mitments off from the simplest description – such as e.g. Newtonian mechanics –, theontology would not be simple at all: it would in this case be committed to absolutespace and time, to momenta, gravitational masses, forces, etc. Humeanism allows us tohave the best of these two worlds: simplicity in ontology achieved through parsimonyand simplicity in description achieved through buying into the simplest physical theorythat is empirically adequate.Huggett (2006) shows how one can understand Euclidean geometry and Newtonianmechanics in a package as the Humean best system for a world of classical mechanics thatconsists only in distances among point particles and their change (see Belot, 2011, pp.60-77, for a criticism that spells out how the general objections against Humeanism applyin this case). The idea is that if one considers the entire history of the change in the dis-tance relations in the configuration of matter points of the universe, the spatio-temporalgeometry best suited to describe the universe is fixed together with the dynamical laws12by the history of these relations as a whole. Given the fact that the change in thedistance relations manifests certain salient patterns, Huggett singles out the notion ofinertial motion as the idea of a particularly regular and simple motion. He then ties thenotion of reference frame to that of a material body at rest at the origin of the frame.This makes it possible to relate different frames by means of continuous spatially rigidtransformations. An inertial frame can then be defined as the frame in which the dynam-ical laws that supervene on the history of relations for the entire universe hold. In thisway, the notion of inertial motion neither requires a substantival affine structure thatsingles out straight trajectories nor an absolute external time to which the uniformity ofmotion should be referred. Rather, these two structures supervene on purely relationalfacts. By the same token, absolute acceleration is reduced to the history of change ofthe spatial relations holding between an inertial and a non-inertial frame. Similarly, theregularities in the history of relations make it that Euclidean geometry is the simplestand most informative geometry representing that history. Such a framework clearly vin-dicates Leibnizian relationalism about space (spatial relations and their change are theontological bedrock) and time (temporal facts supervene on the history, i.e. an orderedsequence, of instantaneous distance relations).In the same vein, Hall (2009, § 5.2) sketches out how dynamical parameters such asboth inertial and gravitational mass as well as charge can be introduced as variables thatfigure in the laws of classical mechanics achieving the simplest and most informativedescription of the change in the relative particle positions throughout the history ofthe universe. Furthermore, this strategy has recently been applied to the quantumtheories that admit a primitive ontology of matter in physical space in order to solvethe measurement problem, such as Bohmian mechanics: in a nutshell, the universalwave function only has a nomological role, being a variable in the law that achievesthe simplest and most informative description of the change in the primitive ontology(e.g. relative particle positions) throughout the history of the universe (see Miller, 2014,Esfeld, 2014, Callender, 2015, Bhogal and Perry, 2016). The availability of this Humeanstrategy shows that there is no point in reading off one’s ontological commitments fromthe formalism of physical theories: one can be a scientific realist and yet be committedonly to distance relations individuating matter points and the change of these relations,whatever other variables may figure in a physical theory that captures that change.To mention a particularly striking example of this fact, consider a model of Newto-nian mechanics with an angular momentum of the universe J that is greater than zeroin the centre-of-mass rest frame. Obviously, a rotating universe is not conceivable ina relationalist ontology that admits only distance relations among matter points, but13no space in which the configuration of matter is embedded. However, also in a New-tonian ontology of a universe rotating in absolute space, the rotation of the universewould manifest itself in certain changes in the distance relations among the point par-ticles (e.g. in inhomogeneities in the cosmic microwave background with respect to ourpoint of view). Consequently, the relationalist is free to interpret a value of angularmomentum of the universe that is greater than zero as a convenient means to capturethose changes in a simple and informative manner, without being committed to a spacein which the universe rotates: describing those changes by using only variables for thechange of relative distances would lead to a law of motion that is extremely complicated.Introducing further variables – such as an angular momentum of the universe that canhave a value greater than zero –, by contrast, would enable the formulation of a law ofmotion that is simple and elegant, but that is there only to capture the change in therelative distances among the point particles. In this manner, the relationalist can handleall kinds of bucket-like challenges.Nonetheless, this strategy cannot recognize all the possible mathematical solutions ofthe dynamical equations of a physical theory as describing physically possible situations.As already mentioned at the end of the preceding section when discussing time, axiom 1and requirement (iv) of definition 1 pose also a constraint on the dynamics: for instance,an evolution of the distance relations among the matter points that ends up in anentirely symmetrical configuration of the matter points is excluded in the same way asis a symmetrical initial configuration. Such solutions are a mathematical surplus of theformalism; the corresponding points in configuration space do not represent physicallypossible configurations of matter points. As argued in the preceding section, this is noobjectionable restriction: having empirical adequacy in mind, there is no need to admite.g. entirely symmetrical worlds as physically possible worlds.This Humean strategy is a purely philosophical one: it is always available to vindicatethe minimalist ontology set out in the previous section, physics be as it may, as longas all the evidence in fundamental physics comes down to relative particle positionsand their change. In a nutshell, on this strategy, there is a relationalist ontology, but anon-relationalist physical theory. This is no problem, since the non-relationalist theorycan be interpreted in a cogent manner that is consistent with scientific realism as beingcommitted to no more than the parsimonious relationalist ontology.However, one may wonder whether buying into all the formal apparatus of, say, New-tonian mechanics is necessary to achieve a description of the change in the distancerelations that meets the standards of simplicity and informational content. This re-flection opens up the way for another strategy that can be dubbed alternative theory14strategy: instead of endorsing physical theories as they stand – such as Newtonian me-chanics – and refusing to read ontological commitments off from their formalisms, oneconstructs alternative physical theories whose formal apparatus stays as close as pos-sible to the ontology of there being only distance relations among point particles andtheir change and that matches the standard theories in their testable empirical predic-tions. In a nutshell, this strategy consists in building a relationalist physical theory on arelationalist ontology.It is important to be clear about what the alternative theory strategy can achieve andwhat it cannot achieve: even if the ontology is exhausted by distance relations individ-uating matter points and the change of these relations, when it comes to formulatinga dynamical law capturing that change, further dynamical parameters have to be in-troduced for the reason given above. Consequently, the alternative theory strategy hasto admit dynamical parameters such as mass, constants of nature, initial momenta, etc.and cannot but resort to the Humean strategy in order to ban these parameters from theontology. However, when it comes to space and time, the aim of this strategy is to avoidquantities that are tied to absolute space and time, such as empty space-time points,absolute velocities, absolute accelerations, or absolute rotations. As regards classicalmechanics, the alternative theory strategy goes back at least to Mach (1919). In thelast three decades, it has been quite exhaustively worked out by Julian Barbour andcollaborators (see Barbour and Bertotti, 1982, for the seminal paper that laid down the“best-matching” framework). Furthermore, Belot (1999) and Saunders (2013) have alsoproposed each a relationalist theory of classical mechanics.Let us discuss Belot’s proposal first (see also Pooley and Brown, 2002, section 5, for anappraisal of the framework). Belot starts by considering the Hamiltonian formulation ofclassical mechanics given in the language of symplectic geometry. Simply speaking, if wetake Q to be the configuration space of a given system, then the cotangent bundle T ∗Qis the phase space of the system (see Frankel, 1997, section 2.3c, for technical details).This space comes equipped with a smooth function H, called the Hamiltonian, which –roughly – represents the total energy of the system, and a 2-form ω, called the symplecticform. Glossing over the technical aspects, ω renders it possible to define a map H 7→ XHthat associates to the Hamiltonian a smooth vector field XH over T ∗Q: such a map isnothing but an intrinsic representation of the usual Hamilton’s equations. Hence, byintegrating XH given some initial conditions (q0, q˙0), we get the unique curve in T ∗Qthat represents the dynamical evolution of the system under scrutiny. In the case ofN gravitating particles, T ∗Q will be nothing but R6N . The justification of this fact isstraightforward, if we consider what it takes to determine an initial condition (q0, q˙0):15for each particle, we have to specify three numbers that give its position and furtherthree numbers that specify the velocity vector “attached” to it. We immediately see inwhat sense this framework naturally fits a substantivalist understanding of space: twoN -particle states that agree on all relational facts about the configuration (not only therelative positions, but also the relative orientations of the velocities), but disagree on howsuch a configuration is embedded in Euclidean space, would count as physically distinctpossibilities. Then, the natural relationalist move would be to construct a relationalconfiguration space Q0 by quotienting out from Q all the degrees of freedom associatedwith an embedding in Euclidean space, such as rigid translations and rotations. If we callE(3) the set of isometries of Euclidean 3-space, then Q0 = Q/E(3): this constructionassures us that distinct points in Q that represent the same relational configuration“collapse” to the same point in Q0. Note that (i) Q0 admits a well-defined cotangentbundle T ∗Q0, which is equipped with a well-behaved symplectic structure, and (ii) thatthe starting Hamiltonian defined on Q admits a smooth projection H0 to T ∗Q0 becauseit is invariant under the action of E(3).Belot’s theory qualifies as relational, since the ontological facts making up a set ofinitial data do not encode any notion of position in absolute space or absolute velocity,and the laws of motion specify how these initial data evolve; furthermore, the dynamicallaws of the theory are fully defined on relational phase space. However, there are atleast three concerns that one can raise about Belot’s proposal. In the first place, thistheory still has a notion of absolute time inherent in the dynamical laws. In fact, thereis nothing in the quotienting out procedure that leads from a dynamics over Q to oneover Q0 that eliminates the absolute temporal metric of Newtonian mechanics, whichmeans that the very same succession of purely relational configurations can unfold atdifferent rates depending on the ticking of an universal external clock. Secondly, thereis a clear sense in which spatial relations are Euclidean from the beginning: they arejust equivalence classes of embedding degrees of freedom as encoded in E(3). Thirdly,Belot’s theory, despite being very close to Newtonian mechanics, is not as empiricallypredictive as its absolute counterpart. This is obvious because, if we think about all theinitial data that are needed in the Newtonian theory, we realize that they must includethe rate of change in the orientation of the configuration of N particles with respect toabsolute space: in the passage from Q to Q0, this information is simply washed away.In particular, the Newtonian theory admits models with non vanishing total angularmomentum J of the universe. We repeat that this is not just a metaphysical aspect, buta physical one in the sense that the condition J 6= 0 carries with it empirically testableconsequences. Belot’s proposal to overcome the problem is just to bite the bullet: his16relational reduction indeed recovers only a part of the Newtonian one, but – given thatup to now we have reliable experimental evidence that the universe is not rotating – itrecovers exactly the empirically adequate part.Let us turn to Barbour’s proposal (see Barbour and Bertotti, 1982; Barbour, 2003,2012 for the original resources; Pooley and Brown, 2002, sections 6-7, give an excellentoverview of the framework, together with some cogent philosophical considerations).Barbour’s relationalist motivations are the same as Belot’s, that is, to eliminate allthe spatial degrees of freedom that produce no observable difference. However, Barbourextends this requirement to temporal degrees of freedom as well. By way of consequence,the construction of his framework involves two steps, namely the implementation of (i)spatial and (ii) temporal relationalism. As regards the first step, Barbour adopts thesame strategy as Belot: he takes standard configuration space Q and quotients out allEuclidean isometries, comprised of scale transformations, which means that he quotientsout also the degrees of freedom related to “stretchings” or “shrinkings” of configurationsthat preserve the ratio of distances. This means that he considers a wider group thanE(3), namely the similarity group Sim(3). Hence, his relational configuration spaceQ0 = Q/Sim(3) is aptly called shape space, because each configuration in there isindividuated by its form and not by its size.The second step is technically more complicated: firstly he defines an “intrinsic”difference that measures how similar two shapes are. This difference is expressed interms of “best-matching” coordinates. Intuitively, we imagine the two shapes laid downover two distinct Cartesian coordinate grids O and O′; then we hold fixed the first shapeand grid and “move” the second by applying transformations in Sim(3) until the twoshapes are juxtaposed as close as possible. The best-matching coordinates are thendefined as the overlap deficit O−O′ between the two coordinate grids. Secondly, he usesthis intrinsic metric to define a Jacobi action, thus setting a Jacobi variational principleonQ0 (see Lanczos, 1970, pp. 132-140, for a technical introduction to the Jacobi principlein classical mechanics). The Jacobi action is reparametrization invariant, that is, it doesnot change whatever “time” parameter we choose.With this machinery in place, carrying out the variation of the action with respect tothe best-matching coordinates, we obtain a set of generalized Euler-Lagrange equationswhose integral curves are nothing but the geodesics of Q0. Given some initial condi-tions, one of these curves is singled out, which represents the dynamical evolution of thesystem. This evolution is given in fully relationalist terms: the curve singled out by theequations plus the initial conditions represents a list of relational configurations, whichis parametrized by an arbitrary monotonically increasing parameter: hence, there is no17external clock that measures dynamical change; on the contrary, it is the change in thelist of configurations that enables an (arbitrary) parametrization. The important pointis that there exists a particular parametrization of the curve for which the generalizedEuler-Lagrange equations take the usual Newtonian form. Thus, if we adopt this (again,arbitrary) parametrization, we obtain a dynamical description that matches the New-tonian one. In this sense, Newtonian mechanics comes out of Barbour’s framework bymeans of something closely resembling a gauge fixing. The descriptive simplicity of theNewtonian formulation then explains why, historically, classical physics was framed inthese terms.There are at least three critical points about this framework worth being highlighted.Firstly, no usual Newtonian potential is compatible with the condition of scale-invariance.Even if it is always possible to reproduce the form of the most usual classical potentials inthe appropriate gauge by a clever mathematical manoeuvre, still this mimicking strategymight lead to unwanted physical restrictions, such as no angular momentum exchangebetween subsystems (see Anderson, 2013, section 5.1.2, for a technical discussion of thispoint). Secondly, the implementation of a geodesic principle on a general shape spacemight not always be that straightforward. In general cases, in fact, the quotienting outprocedure sketched above leads to a shape space whose global geometry is that of a strat-ified manifold, where each “stratum” is a sub-manifold that can differ from the othersin many respects, including the dimensionality. It is then quite intuitive to understandthat, if Q0 is a stratified manifold, it is problematic to account for a dynamical evolutiongiven in terms of a geodesic trajectory that hits different strata of Q0 (see Anderson,2015, section 9.4 and references mentioned therein, for discussion). The moral is thatBarbour’s framework works well in a suitably small region of Q0, but might break downon a larger scale, depending on the particular geometrical structure of Q0. Thirdly, asa result of quotienting out the group of rotations from Q, one gets the condition J = 0as a constraint on shape space dynamics. However, even if the actual universe satisfiesthe condition of J = 0, it is desirable that a relationalist theory should be able, as faras possible, to accommodate observable consequences ascribable in absolute terms to anon-vanishing total angular momentum of the universal configuration of matter.Finally, let us consider the proposal spelled out in Saunders (2013). Like Belot andBarbour, Saunders’ aim is to dispense with absolute quantities of motion. However,unlike the former two, he also seeks to save the core conceptual structure of Newton’sPrincipia. In order to do so, he shows that the Newtonian laws can be cast in terms ofdirected distances representing inter-particle separations. This is possible because theabsolute notion of “straight trajectory” needed to make sense of inertial motion – which,18in turn, is required for rendering Newton’s first and second law meaningful – involvestoo much structure, namely, a privileged affine connection (that of neo-Newtonian space-time). Instead, Newton’s laws can make perfect sense even if we replace the talk ofstraight trajectories with that of relative velocities not changing over time, and thiscan be accounted for not just by a single preferred connection, but by a whole class ofaffine connections whose time-like geodesics are mutually non-rotating. This is all thatSaunders needs in order to account for accelerations and rotations in relationalist terms:a space-time manifold equipped with enough structure to allow for the comparison ofspatial directions (and related angles) at different times (what Saunders calls “Newton-Huygens” space-time, see also Earman, 1989, pp. 31-32, for a formal characterization ofthis space-time). In the Newton-Huygens space-time, unlike the neo-Newtonian one, itis meaningless to talk about the absolute acceleration of a particle, or even its inertialmotion (two notions that are tied to a privileged affine connection), while it is perfectlymeaningful to ask questions about the change of orientation of a configuration in time.The huge virtue of this framework is that it is able to recover the full spectrum ofNewtonian models, thus accounting also for J 6= 0 cases, without invoking absolutenotions. Given, in fact, that differences in direction can be defined relationally byadmitting a primitive notion of parallelism, and then defining change in direction bycomparison of spatial relations at different times, Saunders’ theory can account for globalrotations in terms of relational quantities. However, the fact that this theory makesit meaningful to compare spatial directions at different times represents a substantialweakening of the relationalist programme. This framework is much less relationalistthan Belot’s and Barbour’s, for which the excision of any physical meaning attached toglobal rotations is a constitutive feature. In this sense, Saunders’ theory is a “halfwayhouse” form of a relationalism, as he himself notes (Saunders, 2013, p. 44).In sum, there are well-grounded reservations whether these relationalist theories fullyimplement a relationalist ontology. That ontology is relationalist both with respect tospace and with respect to time, whereas Belot’s and Saunders’ theories are relationalistonly with respect to space. Furthermore, that ontology is not tied to a particular geome-try such as Euclidean geometry: a configuration of matter points satisfying axiom 1 anddefinition 1 does not carry with it any primitive geometrical fact that singles out a distin-guished space in which it has to be embedded. By contrast, there is a clear sense in whichBelot’s and Barbour’s spatial relations are Euclidean from the outset: each point in Q0can be seen as an equivalence class of Euclidean configurations; there is no way, by fixinga certain gauge, to end up with a configuration embedded in a non-Euclidean space. AlsoSaunders’ relations are inherently Euclidean, since Newton-Huygens space-time encodes19the structure of a series of instantaneous 3-dimensional affine spaces equipped with anEuclidean metric. Even worse, all these theories rely on more primitive structure thanjust distances. The very concept of shape requires primitive facts about angles to bemeaningful, so that Barbour’s ontology has to include a conformal structure. Saun-ders’ ontology requires not only distances, but directed distances, which means thatsome primitive geometrical facts have to be postulated (especially those making up astandard of space-like parallel transport), which are encoded in an affine structure.At this point, one may legitimately ask whether it is possible to resort to the Humeanstrategy to argue that the additional structure of these theories is just part of the packagewe get when seeking for the best description of motion. The answer is that such a move,in this case, raises substantial worries. Put simply, a Humean justification of the surplusstructure would imply that what these theories do is basically to “embellish” a set ofrelational initial data ∆0 by embedding them in a more structured set Q0 and then usingthe equations of motion cast in terms of this surplus structure to evolve these data untilreaching the result Qt, from which the relational solution ∆λ would be read off. But thatwould have unwanted implications. The first of these is that, in this way, neither of theabove theories could be considered even mildly relationalist anymore, being parasitic ona dynamical description that involves an irreducible surplus structure. In such a case,it would be awkward to prefer these mathematically elaborated theories to Newtoniangravitation, given that Huggett’s Humean strategy works perfectly for the purposes ofa relationalist ontology in that context. The second implication is that the strategy ofevolving relational data by “stealing a ride” to a non-relationalist dynamics and thendiscarding the surplus structure as a mere representational means would suspiciouslylook like a trivial instrumentalist move, as discussed, e.g., by Earman (1989, p. 128) andBelot (2000, p. 10).In short, combining a minimalist relationalist ontology with the alternative theorystrategy faces a dilemma: either one insists that angles or directions are just part of theHumean package, thus ending up with – using Earman’s words – a “cheap instrumentalistrip-off” of a theory that in any case does not qualify as a genuine relationalist competitorto Newtonian mechanics; or one bites the bullet and introduces more primitive structurein the ontology (be it a conformal or an affine one), thus compromising the originalmotivations for relationalism from ontological parsimony.Let us now briefly consider how the Humean and the alternative theory strategyfare when it comes to quantum mechanics. Adopting relationalism about space andtime is a reasonable option if one pursues a solution to the quantum measurementproblem in terms of being committed to what is known as a primitive ontology of matter20being distributed in ordinary space-time (and not just the quantum state defined onconfiguration space). Bohmian mechanics is the most prominent primitive ontologytheory of quantum mechanics, setting out a primitive ontology of point particles movingin a three-dimensional, Euclidean space (see Dürr et al., 2013). Given that the laws ofBohmian dynamics, although being different from the Newtonian ones, are nonethelessformulated over an absolute Newtonian spatio-temporal background, all the options forrelationalism discussed in this section can be applied to Bohmian mechanics as well.Concerning the strategy to interpret a non-relationalist theory as being committedonly to a relationalist ontology, we already mentioned the Humean treatment of thewave function at the beginning of this section. Space-time in Bohmian mechanics posesno problem for Humeanism: the manner in which Huggett (2006) deals with space-time in the Newtonian case can simply be applied to the Bohmian case. As regardsthe alternative theory strategy, the proposal of Belot (1999) would require forcing theBohmian formalism in a Hamiltonian context; this is possible, but results in a quiteunreasonably complicated formalism with a huge amount of surplus descriptive structure,which is not needed by Bohmian dynamics (see Holland, 2001a,b for a decently workedout Hamiltonian version of Bohmian mechanics). Barbour’s framework, by contrast, canin a natural way be applied to Bohmian mechanics (see Vassallo, 2015, Vassallo and Ip,2016). The same goes for the milder relationalist approach of Saunders (2013), since thisapproach would basically amount to rewrite the Bohmian theory in a way that makes itmeaningless to refer distances and directions to any point taken as “origin”.We cannot go into relativity physics in this paper for lack of space. We would justlike to make two brief remarks concerning quantum field theory and general relativitytheory, respectively. (i) The relationalist ontology set out in section 1 can be carriedon to quantum field theory: this theory is hit by the measurement problem in thesame way as quantum mechanics (see Barrett, 2014). The Bohmian solution to themeasurement problem can be applied to quantum field theory in the same way as toquantum mechanics, even in the form of an ontology of permanent point particles movingaccording to a deterministic law that explains the statistics of the appearances of particlecreation and annihilation phenomena in the experiments (this approach is known asDirac sea Bohmian quantum field theory; see Colin and Struyve, 2007, Deckert, 2010,chs. 6-7). However, it is an open issue whether and how the relationalist approachesdiscussed in this section can be carried on from Bohmian mechanics to such a Bohmianquantum field theory.(ii) When it comes to general relativity theory, also in this domain, as in any otherfield theory, fields are tested by the motion of particles. There is no direct evidence of21fields. All the evidence is one of relative particle motion (cf. Einstein and Infeld, 1949, p.209). Against this background, a Humean strategy of treating the formal apparatus ofgeneral relativity theory as being the means to achieve a description of the overall relativeparticle motion that strikes the best balance between being simple and being informativeabout that motion seems to be an option that would be worth trying out (see Vassalloand Esfeld, 2016, for a concrete proposal in this sense). As regards the alternative theorystrategy, Barbour and collaborators have developed an alternative theory of gravitationin the relativistic regime (see notably Barbour et al., 2002, Barbour, 2012), which hasrecently attracted attention in the philosophical literature (see e.g. Gryb and Thébault,2016).In conclusion, we have seen that, when vindicating a relationalist ontology for classicalmechanics consisting of matter points individuated by distance relations and the changeof these relations only, the Humean strategy of combining a relationalist ontology with anon-relationalist physical theory and interpreting that latter theory as being committedto no more than the minimalist relationalist ontology is coherent and always availableas a fall back option for the relationalist. Pursuing the more ambitious strategy ofdeveloping a relationalist physical theory that is an alternative to the standard non-relationalist physics can, as things stand, not be carried out without compromising therelationalist ontology – at least by including a primitive conformal structure, or even byincluding a primitive affine structure (when seeking to recover all models of Newtonianmechanics that may have observable consequences).Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Vincent Lam, Dustin Lazarovici, Andrea Old-ofredi and Christian Wüthrich for helpful discussions. A. Vassallo’s work on this paperwas supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, grant no. 105212_149650,while D.-A. Deckert’s work was funded by the junior research group grant Interactionbetween Light and Matter of the Elite Network of Bavaria.ReferencesAnderson, E. (2013). The problem of time and quantum cosmology in the relational particlemechanics arena. arXiv:1111.1472v3 [gr-qc]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1111.1472.Anderson, E. (2015). Configuration spaces in fundamental physics. arXiv:1503.01507v2 [gr-qc].http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.01507.Ariew, R., editor (2000). G. W. Leibniz and S. Clarke: Correspondence. Indianapolis: Hackett.Bach, A. (1997). Indistinguishable classical particles. Berlin: Springer.22Barbour, J. (2003). Scale-invariant gravity: particle dynamics. Classical and Quantum Gravity,20:1543–1570.Barbour, J. (2012). Shape dynamics. An introduction. In Finster, F., Müller, O., Nardmann,M., Tolksdorf, J., and Zeidler, E., editors, Quantum field theory and gravity, pages 257–297.Basel: Birkhäuser.Barbour, J. and Bertotti, B. (1982). Mach’s principle and the structure of dynamical theories.Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 382:295–306.Barbour, J., Foster, B., and OMurchadha, N. (2002). Relativity without relativity. Classical andQuantum Gravity, 19:3217–3248.Barrett, J. A. (2014). Entanglement and disentanglement in relativistic quantum mechanics.Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 48:168–174.Belot, G. (1999). Rehabilitating relationalism. International Studies in the Philosophy of Science,13:35–52.Belot, G. (2000). Geometry and motion. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 51(4):561–595.Belot, G. (2001). The principle of sufficient reason. Journal of Philosophy, 98:55–74.Belot, G. (2011). Geometric possibility. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Bhogal, H. and Perry, Z. R. (2016). What the Humean should say about entanglement. Noûs,page DOI 10.1111/nous.12095.Blackburn, S. (1990). Filling in space. Analysis, 50:62–65.Callender, C. (2015). One world, one beable. Synthese, 192(10):3153–3177.Colin, S. and Struyve, W. (2007). A Dirac sea pilot-wave model for quantum field theory. Journalof Physics A, 40(26):7309–7341.Deckert, D.-A. (2010). Electrodynamic absorber theory – a mathematical study. Tönning: DerAndere Verlag.Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., and Zanghì, N. (2013). Quantum physics without quantum philosophy.Berlin: Springer.Earman, J. (1989). World enough and space-time. Absolute versus relational theories of spacetime.Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.Earman, J. (2002). Thoroughly modern McTaggart or what McTaggart would have said ifhe had read the general theory of relativity. Philosopher’s Imprint, 2(3). http://www.philosophersimprint.org/002003/.Einstein, A. and Infeld, L. (1949). On the motion of particles in general relativity theory.Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 1:209–241.Esfeld, M. (2014). Quantum Humeanism, or: physicalism without properties. The PhilosophicalQuarterly, 64(256):453–470.Esfeld, M. and Lam, V. (2011). Ontic structural realism as a metaphysics of objects. In A. andBokulich, P., editors, Scientific structuralism, pages 143–159. Dordrecht: Springer.Frankel, T. (1997). The geometry of physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.French, S. (2014). The structure of the world. Metaphysics and representation. Oxford: Oxford23University Press.Gerhardt, C. I., editor (1890). Die philosophischen Schriften von G. W. Leibniz. Band 7. Berlin:Weidmannsche Verlagsbuchhandlung.Gryb, S. and Thébault, K. P. Y. (2016). Time remains. British Journal for the Philosophy ofScience, page DOI 10.1093/bjps/axv009.Hacking, I. (1975). The identity of indiscernibles. Journal of Philosophy, 72:249–256.Hall, N. (2009). Humean reductionism about laws of nature. Unpublished manuscript.http://philpapers.org/rec/halhra.Holland, P. (2001a). Hamiltonian theory of wave and particle in quantum mechanics I: Liou-ville’s theorem and the interpretation of the de Broglie-Bohm theory. Il Nuovo Cimento B,116:1043–1070.Holland, P. (2001b). Hamiltonian theory of wave and particle in quantum mechanics II: Hamilton-Jacobi theory and particle back-reaction. Il Nuovo Cimento B, 116:1143–1172.Huggett, N. (2006). The regularity account of relational spacetime. Mind, 115(457):41–73.Ladyman, J. (2007). On the identity and diversity of objects in a structure. Proceedings of theAristotelian Society. Supplementary Volume, 81(1):23–43.Ladyman, J. and Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: metaphysics naturalized. New York:Oxford University Press.Lanczos, C. (1970). The variational principles of mechanics. University of Toronto Press, fourthedition.Lewis, D. (1986). On the plurality of worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.Locke, J. (1690). An essay concerning human understanding.Mach, E. (1919). The science of mechanics: a critical and historical account of its development.Fourth edition. Translation by Thomas J. McCormack. Chicago: Open Court.Maudlin, T. (1993). Buckets of water and waves of space: why spacetime is probably a substance.Philosophy of Science, 60:183–203.Maudlin, T. (2002). Thoroughly muddled McTaggart or how to abuse gauge freedom to createmetaphysical monstrosities. Philosopher’s Imprint, 2(4).Maudlin, T. (2007). The metaphysics within physics. New York: Oxford University Press.McTaggart, J. E. (1908). The unreality of time. Mind, 17(68):457–474.Miller, E. (2014). Quantum entanglement, Bohmian mechanics, and Humean supervenience.Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 92:567–583.Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S., and Wheeler, J. A. (1973). Gravitation. San Francisco: Freeman.Muller, F. A. (2011). How to defeat Wüthrich’s abysmal embarassment argument against space-time structuralism. Philosophy of Science, 78:1046–1057.Pooley, O. (2013). Substantivalist and relationalist approaches to spacetime. In Batterman,R., editor, The Oxford handbook of philosophy of physics, pages 522–586. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Pooley, O. and Brown, H. (2002). Relationalism rehabilitated? I: Classical mechanics. BritishJournal for the Philosophy of Science, 53:183–204.24Rovelli, C. (2004). Quantum gravity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Saunders, S. (2006). Are quantum particles objects? Analysis, 66:52–63.Saunders, S. (2013). Rethinking Newton’s Principia. Philosophy of Science, 80(1):22–48.Vassallo, A. (2015). Can Bohmian mechanics be made background independent? Studies inHistory and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 52:242–250.Vassallo, A. and Esfeld, M. (2016). Leibnizian relationalism for general relativistic physics.Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics. DOI 10.1016/j.shpsb.2016.08.006.Vassallo, A. and Ip, P. H. (2016). On the conceptual issues surrounding the notion of relationalBohmian dynamics. Foundations of Physics, 46:943–972.Wheeler, J. A. (1962). Geometrodynamics. New York: Academic Press.Wüthrich, C. (2009). Challenging the spacetime structuralist. Philosophy of Science, 76:1039–1051.25