ABSTRACT: 
The process of Mesoamerican cultural expansion into western and northwestern Mexico has been a subject of speculation and investigation for over three centuries. Although many cultural traits have been "implicated" in this process, the practice of erecting stelae has not been one of them. Fieldwork by the author in Jalisco and Nayarit over the past 14 years has resulted in the discovery of 48 stone monuments which are proposed to be rustic versions of the usually more sophisticated stelae associated with cultures of central Mesoamerica. These west Mexican stelae are described and discussed in terms of their context, date, and possible function. Similar stone monuments from other sites in western and northwestern Mexico are also described, and relevant ethnohistoric data are presented. Finally, the diffusion of the practice of erecting stelae is discussed in relation to the process of mesoamerieanization in western and northwestern Mexico. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article presents evidence that stelae were erected in many areas of northwestern Mesoamerica, including both how and when mesoamericanization erecting stelae in peripheral northwestern Mesoamerica, and the stelae found in heartland Mesoamerica. The article presents evidence that stelae were erected in many areas of northwestern Mesoamerica, although the expression of this Mesoamerican trait was altered in both form and function to suit better the cultural context into which it was introduced, apparently by stimulus diffusion. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  THE NORTHWESTERN EXPANSION OF MESOAMERICA A long-standing problem in Mesoamerican Prehispanic studies has been the extent of mesoamericanization of northwestern Mexico, including both how and when mesoamericanization oc- curred. As early as 1650, Tello (1968:26-27) described the great fortified center of La Quemada, Zacatecas, and related it to the ethnohistoric accounts of the legendary wanderings of the Mex- ica. Subsequent investigators also related these ruins to Mexica culture or to the Tarascans (Batres 1903). In 1908, Gamio (1910) excavated at Alta Vista, Zacatecas, and recognized that site as marking the northernmost limit of several architectural traits which linked it to central Mexican cultures. Then, in a pioneer- ing archaeological study of the Nayarit and Sinaloa coastal plain, Sauer and Brand (1932) focused on the problem of a "cultural corridor" which might link central Mexico with the na- tive cultures of the southwestern United States. Their fieldwork revealed the presence of a highly developed Prehispanic culture in Nayarit and Sinaloa that they called Aztatlán. A few years later, Mason (1937) reported on Prehispanic sites of high cul- tural development, identified as the Chalchihuites culture, which were found to extend into northwestern Durango as far as the site of Zape (see also Brand 1939). Next, studies by Ek- holm (1940, 1941, 1942) and Kelly (1941) made further contri- butions to the problem of northwest Mexico/central Mexico Prehispanic relations, and ties between central Mexico and the eastern part of West Mexico were studied by Noguera (1942), Lister (1949), and Porter (1956). Another major contribution to this problem was made by Kirchhoff in his classic study of 1943, in which he delimited the geographic boundaries of Mesoamerican culture based on sixteenth-century ethnographic traits. His demarcation of the northern boundary revealed a salient of Mesoamerican culture protruding far northwest into Durango and Sinaloa (Kirchhoff 1943). In regard to time depth, Kirchhoff (1948:134-135) later suggested that at some time in the past western Mexico did not pertain to Mesoamerica, and that there must have been a grad- ual mesoamericanization of the area. He noted that the closer one gets to Jalisco, Colima, and Nayarit, the less Mesoameri- can and more specifically western Mexican are the culture traits. He went on to propose that west Mexican studies ought to es- tablish the ways in which that area contrasts with the rest of Mesoamerica. More recently, investigations by Armillas (1964), Kelly and Braniff de Torres (1966), Kelley and Abbott (1966), Sáenz (1966a, 1966b), Matos and Kelly (1974), Oliveros (1974), Pick- ering (1974, 1985), Schöndube (1974, 1980), Kelley (1974), Weigand (1974, 1978, 1985), Kelley and Kelley (1976), Aveni, Hartung, and Kelley (1982), Kelly (1985), and Trombold (1985) have shown a continued interest in determining the relationships between the northwestern peripheral area of Mesoamerica and the Mesoamerican heartland. Some of the archaeological traits that have been cited as per- haps indicating a degree of mesoamericanization of the north- western area at one time or another are rare Olmecoid artifacts, Thin Orange pottery, talud-tablero architecture, astronomical petroglyph markers, cloisonné pottery, human sacrifice, the skull rack, Mazapan pottery figurines, Plumbate pottery, Mix- tec codex-like designs on pottery, and representations of vari- ous central Mexican deities. There is evidence of contacts between heartland Mesoamerica and northwestern peripheral Mesoamerica from at least Middle Formative times through the Classic and into the Postclassic period. THE EXTENSION OF STELAE INTO NORTHWESTERN MESOAMERICA One archaeological trait that has not been researched in regard to the mesoamericanization of northwestern Mexico is the stela. 21 22 Mountjoy Such stone monuments, especially those attributed to the Maya, are one of the more outstanding archaeological remnants of Mesoamerican ceremonialism. The practice of erecting stelae appears to have originated during the Middle Formative period (Grove 1989; Lowe 1989). Formative period stelae have been reported in some abundance from the Mexican states of Veracruz, Tabasco, Chiapas, Oax- aca, and Morelos, as well as from southern Guatemala and at least one from Belize (Hammond 1982; Marcus 1976). The far- thest extension of the stela trait northwestward during the For- mative appears to be into Guerrero (Grove and Paradis 1971; Martinez 1986). Classic period stelae have been found throughout most of Maya territory (Proskouriakoff 1950), as well as in the Mexi- can states of Oaxaca (Brockington 1957; Jorrin 1974), Morelos (Sáenz 1966c), Puebla (Marquina 1970; von Winning 1979), Queretaro (Carlos Castañeda, personal communication, 1985), Veracruz (Cervantes 1976; Kelly 1982), and they are relatively common in Guerrero (Diaz 1986; Lister 1971; Muller 1966). The farthest northwestern extension of stela erection recorded for the Late Classic or Epiclassic is into the border area of south- eastern Michoacan near Huetamo (Figure 1) (Chadwick 1971; Osborne 1943). Mesoamerican stela production appears to decline rapidly in the Postclassic, but stelae which may date to the Postclassic pe- riod have been found in El Salvador (Kelly 1982), the northern Yucatan Peninsula (Proskouriakoff 1950), in the Peten, Gua- temala (Bullard 1970), and in the Mexican states of Oaxaca, Puebla, Mexico, and Veracruz (Jorrin 1974; Kelly 1982). The farthest northwestern extension of Postclassic stelae is recorded to be at Huetamo in southeastern Michoacan (Figure 1) (Chad- wick 1971). Certainly, the diffusion of the practice of erecting stelae into northwestern Mexico would be another clear sign of mesoamericanization, but the published literature on the mat- ter indicates that with the exception of a corner of southeast- ern Michoacan, northwestern Mexico did not participate in this important expression of Mesoamerican ceremonialism at any period. However, this article presents evidence that stelae were erected in many areas of northwestern Mexico in Prehispanic times, although the expression of this Mesoamerican trait was altered in both form and function to suit better the cultural con- text into which it was introduced, apparently by stimulus diffusion. DEFINITION OF A STELA A stela is "an upright stone slab or pillar bearing an inscription or design and serving as a monument, marker, or the like" (Random House Dictionary of the English Language 1966: 1391) or "a slab or pillar of stone usually carved or inscribed and used for commemorative purposes (as to mark a grave)" (Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language [unabridged] 1966:2235). Although it is common for stelae in the Mesoamerican heartland to be rather tall (2.44 m to 3.05 m) (Morley 1956:308), generally rectangular, and the surface of the stone pecked or carved in such a way that there are designs which stand out in low relief, none of these charac- teristics seems essential for defining a stone as a stela. In her ex- tensive study of Classic Maya sculpture, Proskouriakoff (1950:204) defined "stela" simply as: An upright independent monument. Usually in thc form of a thick slab, approximately rectangular or slightly wedge- shaped in form and often rounded on the upper end. West Mexican stelae 23 Even in the Maya area many rock pillars identified as stelae bear no carved or pecked inscriptions, although it is possible they once bore painted designs (Brockington 1957:96-97). Fur- thermore, stones identified as stelae in some areas of Meso- america, Oaxaca, for example, have considerable variation in height, degree of intentional shaping and in their final form (Gamio 1963; Jorrín 1974). STELAE FOUND RECENTLY IN JALISCO AND NAYARIT Description During fieldwork in Jalisco and Nayarit from 1975 through 1990, I or my fieldwork associates discovered 48 stones which I believe are local versions of Mesoamerican stelae. Subsequent investigation of the archaeological and ethnohistorical literature of northwestern Mesoamerica has revealed other stones which may be stelae. First, the 48 stones discovered in Jalisco and Nayarit will be described, and their apparent date and possible function will be discussed. Then, possible stelae found in other sites or areas will be discussed, along with their apparent date and possible function. Last, ethnohistorical data on similar stones will be presented, especially those data which relate to the function of such stones. Eighteen stelae were found at eight different sites in the Tomatlan river valley of central coastal Jalisco (Figure 1) dur- ing fieldwork in 1975-1977 and in 1984. Another stela was dis- covered in the municipality of San Blas, Nayarit, in 1983 (Figure 1), and 29 more were found in the municipality of Puerto Vallarta during 1986-1990. Basic data on all of these stones are presented in the Appendix. Thirty four of the monu- ments were found essentially whole; the remaining fourteen were missing one or more portions. Measurements of length, width, and thickness have been recorded for most of the stones, whole or broken. When the measurements recorded in the Ap- pendix are for incomplete portions of the stone, they are en- closed in parentheses and have not been included in the summary statistical characterizations of the monuments. The height of the stones ranges from 0.60 m to 2.34 m, with a mean of 1.14 m, a median of 1.07 m, and a standard devia- tion of 0.43 m. The width ranges from 0.16 m to 0.72 m, with a mean of 0.34 m, a median of 0.30 m, and a standard devia- tion of 0.15 m. Thickness ranges from 0.09 m to 0.32 m, with a mean of 0.17 m, a median of 0.14 m, and a standard devia- tion of 0.06 m. The stones give the general impression of being roughly rect- angular in outline, and rectangular, triangular, or roundish in cross-section. The complete specimens usually have some degree of pointedness at the top. It is sometimes not clear whether the similarities in form and size were produced through careful se- lection of naturally shaped stones, or if the form or size was in- tentionally achieved by breaking, pecking, and grinding. Some intentional shaping is possible for all of the stelae found at the Tom-31 site (Figures 2b and 2d; Figure 3), as well as for some of those found at other sites in the Tomatlan basin. On the other hand, Stela 1 from the Tom-57 site does not appear inten- tionally shaped, and although Stela 1 from the Tom-8 site (Fig- ure 2a) has some deliberate chipping along one edge, it mostly was formed naturally, perhaps by river action. The angularity of some of the Tomatlan area stelae, for example, Stela 5 at the Tom-31 site and Stela 1 from the Tom-56 site, may indicate se- lection from rock deposits of the sort commonly exposed by ar- royos in the hilly areas close to many of the habitation sites. Stela 1 from the SB-1 (Aticama) site (Figure 2c) might have been picked up along the cobble-strewn Los Cocos beach nearby, although it certainly would have been a uniquely large cobble. The only possible alteration of this stone is within an area of 0.14 m by 0.08 m on the top where the stone may have been intentionally flattened. One of the stelae (Stela 1) from the PV-1 (Ixtapa) site (Fig- ure 4) was definitely shaped into rectangular form, but the other five stelae at the site appear to have been selected for their nat- ural shape and not further shaped. Such selection of naturally shaped stones seems to be the case for both of the stelae from the PV-12 (Los Cimientos) site. However, the one stela from the PV-15 (La Mesa del Huizcoyul) was definitely shaped into the unusual form of an inverted T (Figure 5). The expanded base of the stela was apparently designed to better anchor the stone in an upright position. All 20 of the stelae found at the PV-16 (La Soledad) are slivers or slabs of broken rock, but one of them (Stela 5) has large scars where flakes were struck off along the edge of one side, and one other stela (Stela 20) appears ex- tensively pecked into its final form. The type of rock selected for stelae (Appendix) was often grano-diorite of whitish or cream color, occasionally grading to a bluish diorite which appears slightly harder or denser, or a 25 West Mexican stelae cream, bluish- or reddish-colored rhyolite. Whitish grano- diorite is extremely common in the Tomatlan area, but the bluish diorite has been found at only a few places along the Tomatlan river. In the case of Stela 1 at the Tom-57 site, not only was the stela itself of bluish diorite, apparently brought in from a nearby deposit along the river, but also most of the rocks placed around the base of the stela were of the same stone. In several cases, for example at the Tom-31 site, the pre- cise color and grain size of the grano-diorite stelae stones con- trasts with the grano-diorite which is native to that particular site locality, indicating a nonlocal source for the stelae stone. In the San Blas area, fairly soft vesicular basalt is abundant, but grano-diorite of which the stela was made is much less com- mon, although it was frequently utilized for Late Postclassic (Santa Cruz phase) metates and can be found in cobble form along the Los Cocos beach. In the Puerto Vallarta area rhyolite is the most common type of stela stone, with granite next in frequency, while only one stela of diorite has been recorded. At least the stelae at the PV-I (Ixtapa) site were hauled in from some distant source because such stones are foreign to the flood plain alluvium deposits where the site is located. Only 4 of the 48 stelae have any designs. In all cases (Fig- ures 2a to 2d) these designs are petroglyphs, and they appear to have been pecked, as opposed to carved or abraded, into the surface. Two of the stelae were found to have petroglyphs on one side only (Figures 2b and 2d); it is therefore possible that these petroglyphs could have been pecked onto the one face af- ter the slabs had fallen over. Thus these petroglyphs might post- date the utilization of the stones as stelae. However, the other two stelae (Figures 2a and 2c) have designs pecked on both the front and back, so these stones must have been standing upright in order for all the petroglyphs to have been visible. In the case of Stela 1 from the Tom-8 site (Figure 2a), the proper upright orientation of the stela is apparent from the orientation of the anthropomorphic figures pecked into the stone. The base of this stone may lack designs because it was partially sunken into the ground. Stela 1 from the SB- I site (Figure 2c) can likewise be oriented properly upright due to the anthropomorphic head near the top of the stone. There are only three small petroglyphs on one side of the base of the monument, suggesting that the stone may have been positioned at the front of a low platform, of the sort common at the SB-1 site. The stela was found within 5 m of one such platform; it had apparently been uncovered and pulled out of primary context by agricultural machinery. Context Maps showing the location of stelae in Tomatlan sites 31, 52, 56, 57, and 62 can be consulted in Mountjoy (1982:Figs. 34, 46, 50, and 51, respectively), and a map of Tom-8 site can be con- 26 Mountjoy suited in Mountjoy (1987b). The two stelae at Tom-8 were found in the northeastern part of the site. A map of the SB-1 site can be found in Mountjoy (1970:Fig. 9). The SB-1 stela was found along the eastern edge of the cluster of low platforms in the central section in the northeastern part of the site. A map of the PV-1 site can be found in Mountjoy (1989). According to a local informant, all six PV-1 stelae were originally located in front of Mound 2 and were moved to the fence line to facil- itate cultivation. The PV-12 stelae were found on the interior side of the rock foundations of a large rectangular structure sit- uated in a plaza some 35 m from a ceremonial mound. The up- per half of the PV-15 stela was found at the foot of the largest ceremonial mound on that site, and the base was found in the adjacent plaza, 14 m to the northeast. The 20 stelae at the PV-16 site were found in a single plaza adjacent to an area with rock foundations and three ceremonial mounds. All 19 of the Tomatlan and San Blas stelae were found ei- ther within a domestic area, or on the edge of such an area. This is even the case for Stela 1 at the Tom-52 site, where the stela was found on the top of a hill but at the edge of the do- mestic area. It was found near the earthen foundation of what may have been a sweat bath or menstrual hut. Some terraces, presumably for houses, were located a short distance downslope from the stela. In the case of Tomatlan sites 31, 52, 57, and 62, the stelae were found within hamlet-sized settlements that contain circu- lar rock foundations of three to eight small houses. These houses open onto one or more plazas on the top or on the side of a hill which has been artificially leveled. Such sites are usu- ally near the Tomatlan river or along a small stream that feeds into the river, and are associated with patches of alluvial bot- tomland which may have been farmed utilizing small-scale grav- ity irrigation. Grinding stones, hammerstones, and adzes are commonly found around the habitation area or in refuse dumps downslope along the edge of the site. Three of the eight stelae at Tom-31 were found in close association with one of the house foundations (Figure 3). In some other sites, stelae were found away from the houses, on the edge of the habitation area. The three stelae found at the Tom-8 site were probably not in their exact original location, for there has been a lot of destruction of the archaeological deposit due to modern village activities. However, all three Tom-8 stelae were found close to rock foun- dations of rectangular shape, and the entire site has an ex- tremely dense cover of domestic trash. The SB-1 stela was found near low platforms, apparently for supporting houses, and in general association with quantities of domestic pottery sherds and oyster shell debris. In contrast to the Tomatlan and San Blas stelae, all 29 Puerto Vallarta stelae were found in contexts which could be in- terpreted to be ceremonial —there are architectural features closely associated or at least nearby which do not seem to be do- mestic. The six PV-1 (Ixtapa) stelae appear to have originally been situated out in front of a 2.6 m high ceremonial mound. Excavation on the top of this mound in 1990 revealed a struc- ture which appears to have been an altar. Two burials of the re- mains of cremated infants, plus eight pottery vessels, five of which contained bones of cremated infants, were found on the periphery of the altar. The PV-12 stelae were found inside a large rectangular structure 35 m from a mound which accord- ing to an informant contained jars with skulls and some blue stone pendants inside. The upper half of the PV-15 stela was found at the base of a 2.4 m high ceremonial mound, and the lower half of the stela was found in the adjacent plaza. The 20 PV-16 (La Soledad) stelae were found scattered about the sur- face of a plaza 20 m long by 10 m wide, situated adjacent to a cluster of three apparently ceremonial mounds. Three of these stelae are reported by a local farmer to have been standing as late as 1972. On the basis of artifact samples obtained from the surface of the sites (Appendix) and in some instances the architectural features, plus the data from the excavation of one of the houses (no. 1 at the Tom-31 site) (Figure 3), it seems that most if not all Tomatlan area stelae pertain to the Late Postclassic (Nahu- apa) phase occupation of the valley, believed to date within the span A.D. 1000 to the A.D. 1500s (Mountjoy 1982, 1983). It is possible, however, that the stelae at one site (Tom-8) could per- tain to the Early Postclassic (Aztatlan, A.D. 800-1000) phase at that site because both Postclassic phases are strongly repre- sented at that site. At an overwhelmingly Aztatlan phase site (Tom-28) adjacent to Tom-8, a large disk-shaped stone altar was found near a ceremonial mound that covered an urn burial, but there was no stela associated with the altar. As for the SB-1 stela, 96% of the 50 decorated pottery sherds collected from the surrounding area are of the local Late Postclassic (Santa Cruz) phase (Appendix), the latest prehis- panic phase in the San Blas area (Mountjoy 1970), believed to date within the range A.D. 1100 to the A.D. 1500s. Based on the style of the pottery offerings recovered in the excavations conducted on the top of Mound 2 at the PV-1 (Ix- tapa) site in 1990, the six stelae associated with the mound prob- ably date to the early part of the Late Postclassic. The high percentage (83%; Appendix) of Early Postclassic (Aztatlan phase) sherds recovered from the surface of the mound appears due to the use of earth containing mostly Early Postclassic sherds as fill for the construction of the Late Postclassic mound. One carbon sample from an Early Postclassic (Aztat- lan phase) deposit at the PV-1 site has been radiocarbon dated to between A.D. 1070 and A.D. 1230 (Mountjoy 1990). The ste- lae presumably date somewhat later. At the other Puerto Val- larta sites where stelae have been found, surface collecting at PV-12 recovered 100% Early Postclassic (Aztatlan) decorated sherds, but this is not very reliable since it is based on only three decorated sherds. Surface collecting at PV-15 in the area of the ceremonial mounds and the stela yielded 5607o Late Postclassic sherds and 44% Early Postclassic sherds, and the surface of the PV-16 site yielded 95% Late Postclassic sherds. Function What may be inferred about the function of these 48 stones on the basis of the archaeological data? The stelae from the Puerto Vallarta area Ixtapa site are found in a context which is defi- nitely ceremonial—in front of a mound supporting an altar sur- rounded by cremated infant remains and pottery offerings. The stelae at the Puerto Vallarta area La Soledad site are also in a ceremonial context, but the high number concentrated in a plaza is unusual, and hard to interpret. The stelae at the other Puerto Vallarta sites (Los Cimientos, and La Mesa del Huiz- coyul) are also found in a context which appears to be cere- monial. The data available at present suggest that stelae were intro- duced into Jalisco, and perhaps Nayarit as well, at least as early West Mexican stelae 27 as the beginning of the Late Postclassic. Because of the strong central Mesoamerican ties of the Early Postclassic Aztatlan cul- ture, it is tempting to believe that the practice of stela erection was initially involved in the Aztatlan expansion. However, there is only meager support for that idea in the field data accumu- lated up to this point. Nevertheless, the earliest stelae probably represent the expansion of the common Mesoamerican cultural pattern in which stelae played a ritual role in ceremonial cen- ters. But this original function of stelae was probably altered in the process of the adoption of stela erection in domestic settings by some west Mexican societies, although the stelae themselves continued to have a ceremonial function. One major clue to the function of at least some of the Late Postclassic stelae comes from the analysis of 339 boulders with petroglyphs recorded in the Tomatlan area (Mountjoy 1987b). There is substantial evidence supporting the idea that the small pit, large pit, circle, bulls eye, circle with rays, spiral, and the anthropomorphic stick figures on those boulders are all various ways of depicting the sun god —its eye, face, or whole body— and that many of the petroglyphs were pecked in an attempt to secure from the sun god the rains of the summer-fall wet sea- son (Mountjoy 1984, 1987b). Virtually all of the petroglyphs on the Tomatlan stelae are sun symbols of one sort or another. Since so many of the Tomatlan stelae appear to have been free- standing within or on the edge of hamlets or villages of agricul- turalists, some of them may have functioned as rustic sun dials which through the length and direction of the shadow cast could have been useful for tracing daylight time as well as the passage of the seasons. Two stelae could have been used for seasonal calculations by spacing them at such a distance that the shadow of one stone would reach the other during its maximum noon- time extension of December 21st; the minimum noontime shadow extension would occur on June 21st (Jerry Meisner, personal communication, 1987). Perhaps the accuracy of shadow marking was increased by using stones pointed at the top. The stela from the SB-1 site in Nayarit may have functioned in the same way. The spiral petroglyphs on the stone may be sun symbols, as they appear to be in the Tomatlan, Jalisco, area, or they may stand more directly for water (Mountjoy 1974, 1987a). The anthropomorphic head with horns near the top of the stone may either represent a shaman who engaged in rain-making rituals, or be another variation for representing the sun god (Mountjoy 1984, 1987b). Something such as an offer- tory bowl could have been placed on the flat top of this stone. OTHER POSSIBLE WEST MEXICAN STELAE Stones in some aspects similar to the 48 stelae reported here from Jalisco and Nayarit have been found at a few other sites in western and northwestern Mexico, or are present in some museum and private collections (Williams 1988). The north- western limit of their distribution within Mesoamerica is found at Zape, Durango, about 75 km south of the Chihuahua bor- der. The Zape stones were reported by J. Ramirez in 1604. An abstract of his report was published by Perez de Ribas (1645), in which it is said that on the peñol at Zape could be found idols which Ramirez attributed to the Mexicans, who were believed to have carried an idol with them in their wanderings. Hewett provides another account of these Zape idols: In this region, not many miles from the present town of Zape, one cncounters for the first time in southward bound exploration, stone monumcnts that begin to forecast thc monumental remains of the Mexican plateau. These consist of small monoliths of from 1 to 4 feet in height, some an- thropomorphic, some of phallic motive. As they arc set in the vallcys, or at least allowed to remain there by the present farmers who regard them with superstitious respect, one sus- pects a conncction with the fructification and growth ceremonials. The Indians neither affirm nor deny this signif- icance. (Hewett 1936:59) Very crude stone figures, all less than 60 cm in height, have been found in the Callon Molino area of central Durango (Fig- ure 1, Ganot and Peschard 1985), and Cabrero G. (1984) re- ported finding a vertical stone slab in the doorway of a rectangular house structure at the La Florida site near Val- paraiso in southwestern Zacatecas (Figure 1). But the stones from these two locations do not appear very similar to the stelae found in the Tomatlan, Puerto Vallarta, and San Blas areas. There is also a report by Hrdlicka on the site of Banco de las Casas, Zacatecas (Figure 1), some 11 km south of Totoate, in which he mentioned finding "a number of oblong conical stones without markings, some of which stood upright in the ground, apparently as originally planted . . ." (Hrdlicka 1903:396). From Tiristaran Michoacan, in the northeastern corner of the state (Figure 1), there is a report of about 100 stone statues with anthropomorphic features, 50 cm to 100 cm in height, which originally were planted in the ground around two circu- lar altars. Associated pottery is reported to be Classic or Post- classic (Corona 1970). For Jalisco, there is one uniquely shaped stela at the Museum of Guadalajara which was reported to Otto Schön- dube to have been found on the north side of the Banderas val- ley near the town of San Juan de Abajo. This stela is of a bluish slatelike stone. It has a pointed base which widens to a maxi- mum of 0.49 m at the central part, and the upper half has been pecked into the form of a heron. This stela measures 1.71 m high and has a triangular cross-section of 0.08 m maximum thickness. Also, Schöndube (1973-1974) reported 17 objects of sculpted stone, all but one with anthropomorphic features, found in the extreme southern part of the state near Tuxpan (Figure 1). Most are quite small, none being over 70 cm high; one of them (Schöndube 1973-1974:Lámina 97,3) is quite sim- ilar to the statues found at Tiristaran Michoacan. Pares Arias (1963) reported on what he calls "quarry stone stelae" from the extreme south of Jalisco. However, the stones which he illus- trated are small square stone blocks with carvings on one face, representing Tlaloc in one case and perhaps Quetzalcoatl Ehecatl in another. Pares' designation of thesc square blocks as stelae appears inappropriate. In Nayarit, apart from the SB-1 stela the only other stelalike archaeological find of which I am aware is a feature on a ce- ramic temple model excavated from a grave at the Amapa site (Figure I; Meighan 1976:41-43; Plate 12). This model has a round temple with a roof ornament, and the temple sits on top of a two-stage stepped rectangular platform. A stairway extends from the base of the platform up to the front door of the tem- ple. In front of the temple doorway, almost filling its width but only filling about a third of its height, is a square slab, painted white and lacking designs. Meighan (1976:42) suggested that 28 Mountjoy this feature may represent a stela, a screen, or an altar. The form of the piece seems to me very much like that of a rectan- gular stela, and it is reminiscent of the stela in front of the tem- ple doorway at the Aztec site of Santa Cecilia, Mexico (Kelly 1982:74). Site context and obsidian hydration measurements suggest to Meighan that the temple model dates within the pe- riod A.D. 1200-1300. South of Culiacan, Sinaloa (Figure 1), Ortiz de Zárte (1976:205) reported a stela-like stone with crude anthropo- morphic features. Also in Sinaloa, between Mazatlan and Culiacan (Figure 1), Sauer and Brand (1932:28) reported find- ing sculptures of volcanic stone, about 60 cm to 90 cm high, which had been ground to a lozenge or cylindrical shape and then the facial features and limbs rudely outlined. Spirals and circles were found on the bodies of at least two of the idols. Sauer and Brand suggested that these stone figures were virtu- ally identical to a stone figure Diguet (1903:19; Plate 3) illus- trated from Cocolan (Cocula) in the central highlands of Jalisco (Figure 1), and which Diguet identified as a representation of a deity called Teopilzintli (teotl god, pilzintli infant) which was the principal deity of indigenous peoples in a large area of Jalisco and Nayarit. This Teopilzintli "idol" is quite similar to several of the eight stone idols Lumholtz (1902 11:338-339) illustrated from the Tuxpan area of southern Jalisco (Figure 1), most of which mea- sure close to but not higher than 50 cm. Teopilzintli was iden- tified by Schöndube (1972:361) as a sun god, and Schöndube cited Tello (1891:24,104) as reporting that this god was a child who guided (Mexica) groups from Aztatlan; a god that did not require human sacrifices but which in one instance is repre- sented as a warrior. This same god was mentioned by Arias de Sabedra in 1673 (Arias de Sabedra 1899:18-27; McCarty and Matson 1975) as a Cora deity who had his seat in the east, and that the rising of the Pyltzintli sun on March 21, September 21, and December 21, awakened in turn the other three gods who held dominion over fall, winter, and spring, and the produce as- sociated with each of these seasons. This account by Arias de Sabedra also clearly indicated the relation of the god Pyltzintli to a calendar based on solar observations made along the ho- rizon, some of the sighting points being marked by statues and forms of stone. ETHNOHISTORIC DATA RELATING TO WEST MEXICAN STELAE There are other early Spanish accounts of stone-idol worship in northwestern Mesoamerica that are relevant to the interpreta- tion of stelae which can be attributed to the Late Postclassic phase. One of these accounts, published in 1754, mentions the worship of idols among Huichol-Cora people in the Sierra Madre Occidental area of Jalisco and Nayarit (Ortega 1944). Ortega mentioned three primary deities which were the most powerful and commonly worshipped. Two of these, "Father of the Living" and "Our Mother," were of white stone, the first of a single stone and the second consisting of two stones (Ortega 1944:19). The first idol, cited as the foremost deity, was be- lieved to have been made by the sun, and the spirit of the sun was said to reside within its body. Ortega mentioned many other minor idols which were also worshipped, some of which he describes as small boulders or cobblestones. About these, Ortega related the following: It would bc impossible to calculate the exact number of this multitude of little idols, because therc would hardly bc a hill in almost half of this province that I havc not inspected for one reason or another and on which I havc not stumbled onto these infernal statuettes: some seem forgotten in a state of disrepair with uncleaned courtyards; many arc well cared for, and the placcs in which they are worshipped are very clcan. And although tcmples are not made for them, an en- closure has been made with rocks stuck into the ground, the idol being placed in the center, and taking care that the area within the circle be always swcpt clean. They would do the same thing in high nooks and crannies of the rivers, where they would place similar deities, in order to have this resource closcr at hand when they wanted an abundant catch of fish. In a distance of barely eighteen leagues of only one of thc many rivers which flow through these mountains there were fourteen of these idols, which today lie buried and completely forgotten. (Ortega 1944:21; my translation) Other accounts which are relevant for the interpretation of the stelae come from descriptions of the Acaxee culture of Sinaloa and Durango which was centered about the headwaters of the Culiacan river at the time of the Spanish conquest (Spicer 1969). Beals' summary description of Acaxee culture included a lengthy section of their idol worship which was drawn from documents dated around A.D. 1600 (Beals 1933:22-27). He said their idols were often of stone and might be painted with fea- tures, carved, or both carved and painted. Frequently the Acaxee idols were in the form of persons, although some are mentioned in the form of birds, deer, rabbits, turtles, and snakes. According to Beals, some idols appear to represent a pantheon, although many were personal idols that could be in- herited. At least one idol performed a divinatory function for a whole community, giving out information on cause of death, method for revenge, and success in warfare. Some of the Acaxee idols were connected with warfare, but others were related to agriculture, fishing, hunting, rain-making, and curing. CONCLUSION In the archaeological literature, the northwestern boundary of stela distribution is generally stated to be along the Guerrero- Michoacan border. However, this is actually the limit only of rather tall stelae that are well shaped (generally rectangular), and pecked or carved in such a fashion that the designs stand out in low relief. Southeast of this border such stone monu- ments, as well as many smaller and cruder stone monuments, some of which lack carved or pecked designs, are usually re- ferred to as stelae in the archaeological literature. But northwest of the Guerrero-Michoacan border, the generally cruder and less well-shaped stone monuments, some of which have designs pecked into the stone, are referred to in the archaeological lit- erature as idols or statues. It is argued here that even though they are generally more rustic and smaller than the stelae found in heartland Mesoamerica, many of these stone monuments from northwestern Mesoamerica should be called stelae. The field evidence relating to stelae from sites in the Tomat- lan, Jalisco, Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco, and San Blas, Nayarit, ar- eas indicates that all of these west Mexican stelae date to the Postclassic, and those found so far probably all date to the Late phase of the Postclassic. This means that the practice of erect- West Mexican stelae 29 ing stelae in peripheral northwestern Mesoamerica was flourish- ing to some degree after the practice of stela erection was severely curtailed if not abandoned in many areas of the Meso- american heartland. Insofar as some west Mexican stelae have pecked sun-symbol designs, and some may have been utilized for solar observations or calculations, they can be linked to the astronomical associ- ation of stela raising and inscribing in other parts of Mesoamer- ica, such as the Maya site of Copan (Aveni 1977). Also, the anthropomorphic designs of some west Mexican stelae appear to represent a god (apparently the sun), as is sometimes the case with stelae in the Mexican area of the Mesoamerican heartland which have carvings of deities such as the rain god Tlaloc. The association of cremated infant remains with the stelae at the PV-I site could be construed to lend some further support to the association of the west Mexican stelae with the sun god. At least in Tarascan society in Michoacan there was a link between the practice of cremation of their ruler the Cazontzi and the sun god Curicaueri (the maximum fire deity) who the Cazontzi rep- resented on earth (Corona Núñez 1946). In central Mesoamerica the presence and number of stelae appears to relate in direct proportion to the sociopolitical sta- tus of certain centers (Marcus 1973). This seems to be the case in regard to the stelae found in the Puerto Vallarta area at the PV-1 (Ixtapa) site, which appears to be the major Postclassic center on the southern side of the Banderas valley. On the other hand, if the other three Puerto Vallarta area sites with stelae were ceremonial centers, they were definitely minor centers in comparison with Ixtapa, even though one of them had far more stelae. In contrast, the stelae of the Tomatlan, Jalisco, and San Blas, Nayarit, areas are associated with what appear to be non- elite domestic remains. They are found in remote hamlet-sized settlements as well as in large villages. Their context in sites of either size in most cases appears to be non-temple and non- ceremonial centered. Also, there are no ethnohistorical data to suggest that by European contact times these west Mexican stone monuments served a commemorative or historical func- tion, as they often did in Classic Maya culture. As for the practice of stela erection, the west Mexican monu- ments are a component of a cont inuing process of mesoamericanization of the area during the Postclassic period. This process appears to have involved the transmission of foriegn ceremonial practices in the early part of the Late Post- classic, which in some areas were reworked or adapted to the exigencies of native west Mexican societies in which consider- ations of status, power, and history were of less importance than idol worship, especially as it related to the water-giving sun god. SUMARIO El proceso de la expansion de la cultura mesoamericana al occidente y noroeste de México ha sido un terra de especulación e investigación durante más dc tres siglos. Aunque varios rasgos culturales mcsoamericanos han sido señalados como parte de estc proceso, Ia costumbre de erigir estelas no ha sido uno de estos rasgos. Investiga- ciones de campo llevadas a cabo por el autor en los estados de Jalisco y Nayarit durantc los últimos 14 años han resultado cn el hallazgo de 48 monumentos de piedra que aqui se proponcn scr versiones rústicas de las estelas, generalmente más sofisticadas, que están asociadas con las culturas de Mesoamérica central. Se describen estas estelas del oc- cidente, y se discute su contexto, fecha, y posible función. Además, se describen otros monumentos similares de piedra de otros sitios en el occidentc y noroeste de México, y se presentan algunos datos etno- históricos pertinentes a su interpretación. Por Ultimo, se di5cute Ia costumbre de erigir estelas en relación al proccso de la mesoamericanización del occidente y noroeste de Mexico. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This artiele is based on data gathered in the municipalities of Tomat- lan, Jalisco, Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco, and San Blas, Nayarit, during field research supported by the Mexican Secretariat of Agrieulturc and Water Resources, a Fulbright grant (1030212) from the United States Govern- ment, a grant from the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, and grants from the University of North Carolina - Greensboro Graduate Research Council. The fieldwork was conducted under permits granted by the Mexican Institute of Anthropology and History, and with the cooperation of the I.N.A.H. Regional Center in Guadalajara. I cspecially want to acknowledge the aid of J. Charles Kel- ley and Otto Schöndube. J. Charles provided several research leads which proved fruitful. Otto provided access to and information on the San Juan de Abajo stela, and it was he who discovered the stela illus- trated in Figure 5 while we were recording the PV-15 site. This article is a revised and expanded version of papers presented in 1985 at the An- nual Meeting of the Society of American Archaeology in Denver and at the Round Table meeting of the Sociedad Mexicana de Antropolo- gia in Queretaro. REFERENCES Arias de Sabedra, Antonio 1899 Información rendida por el P. Antonio Arias y Saavedra, acerca del estado de la sierra del Nayarit, en el siglo XVII. In Nayarit: Colección de documentos inéditos, históricos y et nográficos, acerca de la sierra de ese nombre, edited by Alberto Santoscoy, pp. 7-35. Guadalajara. Armillas, Pedro 1964 Condiciones ambientales y movimientos de pueblos en la fron- tera septentrional de Mesoamérica. In Homenaje a Fernando Mdrquez-Miranda, pp. 62-82. Publicaciones del Seminario de Es- tudios Americanistas y Seminario de Antropologia Americana, Universidades de Madrid y Sevilla, Madrid. Aveni, Anthony F. 1977 Concepts of Positional Astronomy Employed in Ancient Me- soamerican Architecturc. In Native American Astronomy, edited by A. Aveni, pp. 3-19. University of Texas Press, Austin. Aveni, Anthony F., H. Hartung, and J.C. Kelley 1982 Alta Vista (Chalchihuites): Astronomical Implications of a Mesoamerican Ceremonial Outpost at the Tropic of Cancer. Amer- ican Antiquity 47:316-335. Batres, Leopold 1903 Visita a los monumentos arqueológicos de "La Quemada," Zacatecas. Viuda de Francisco Diaz de Lean, Mexico. 30 Mountjoy Beals, Ralph L. 1933 The Acaxee: A Mountain Tribe of Durango and Sinaloa. Ibero-Americana 6. University of California Press, Berkeley. Brand, Donald D. 1939 Notes on the Geography and Archaeology of Zape, Durango. In So Live the Works of Men, edited by D. Brand and F.E. Har- vey, pp. 75-105. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. Brockington, Donald L. 1957 Piedra Parada: A Comparative Study of a Site in Jamiltepec, Oaxaca. M.A. thesis, Mexico City College, Mexico. Bullard, William R., Jr. 1970 Topoxte, A Postclassic Site in Petcn, Guatemala. In Mono- graphs, and Papers in Maya Archaeology, edited by W.R. Bullard, Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 61. Harvard Univcrsity, Cambridgc, MA. Cabrero G., Maria Teresa 1984 Civilización en el norte de Mexico. Instituto de Investigaciones Antropológicas, Seric Antropológica, 103. Universidad Autónoma de México. Cervantes, Maria Antonieta 1976 La estela de Alvardo. Actas del XLI Congreso Internacional de Americanistas 2:309-322. Chadwick, Robert 1971 Archaeological Synthesis of Michoacan and Adjacent Regions. In Handbook of Middle American Indians, vol. 11, edited by G. Ekholm and I. Bernal, pp. 657-693. University of Texas Press, Austin. Corona Núñez, José 1946 La religion de los tarascos. In Anales del Museo Michoacano, Número 4, Segunda Epoca, pp. 13-38. Morelia. Corona S., Eduardo 1970 Hallazgo arqueológico en Tiristarán. LN.A.H. Boleti', 42:31- 33, México. Diguet, Leon 1903 Contribution á l'ethnographie précolombicnne du Méxique. Le Chimalhuacan et ses populations avant la conquête espagnole. Journal Societe des Américanistes de Paris 1-57. Diaz 0., Clara 1986 La presencia teotihuacana en las estelas de Tepecuacuilco. In Arqueología y etnohistoria del estado de Guerrero, pp. 203-208. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia y Gobierno del Es- tado de Guerrcro. Ekholm, Gordon F. 1940 The Archaeology of Northwestern and Wcstern Mexieo. In The Maya and Their Neighbors, edited by C.L. Hay, R.L. Linton, S.K. Lothrop, H.L. Shapiro, and G. Vaillant, pp. 320-330. Applcton-Century, New York and London. 1941 Tula and Northwestern Mexico. Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropológicos 5:193-198. 1942 Excavations at Guasave, Sinaloa, Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History 38:23-139. Gamio, Lorenzo 1963 Estela de Yaguila. IN.A.H. Boletín 12:11-13. Gamio, Manuel 1910 Los monumentos arqueológicos de los immediaciones de Chal- chihuites, Zacatecas. Anales del Museo Nacional de Mexico. Ganot R., Jaime, and A. Peschard F. 1985 La cultura Aztatkán: Frontera del occidente y norte de meso- américa en el postclásico. Paper presented at the XIX Mcsa Redonda of thc Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia, Querétaro, Mexico. Grove, David C. 1989 Chalcatzingo and Its Olmec Connection. In Regional Perspec- tives on the Olmec, edited by R. Sharer and D. Grove, pp. 122- 147. Cambridgc University Press, Cambridge. Grove, David C., and L.I. Paradis 1971 An Olmec Stela from San Miguel Amuco, Guerrero. Ameri- can Antiquity 36:95-102. Hammond, Norman 1982 A Late Formative Period Stcla in the Maya Lowlands. Amer- ican Antiquity 47:396-403. Hewett, Edgar L. 1936 Ancient Life in Mexico and Central America. Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis and New York. Hrdlicka, Alés 1903 The Rcgion of the Ancient "Chichimecs," with Notes on the Tepecanos and the Ruins of La Quemada, Mexico. American An- thropologist 5:385-440. Jorrín, Maria 1974 Stone Monuments. In The Oaxacan Coastal Project, part 1, edited by D.L. Brockington, M. Jorr ín, and J.R. Long. Vander- bilt University Publications in Anthropology 8, pp. 23-81. Vander- bilt University, Nashville. Kelley, J. Charles 1974 Speculations on thc Culture History of Northwestern Meso- amcrica. In The Archaeology of West Mexico, edited by B. Bell, pp. 19-39. Sociedad de Estudios Avanzados del Occidente de Méx- ico, Ajijic, Jalisco. Kelley, J. Charles, and E. Abbott 1966 The Cultural Sequence on the North Central Fronticr of Me- soamerica. Actas y memorias, 36avo Congreso Internacional de Americanistas 1:325-344. Kclley, J. Charles, and E.A. Kelley 1976 Alta Vista: Outpost of Mesoamerican Empire on the Tropic of Cancer. Las fronteras de Mesoamérica 1:21-40. Sociedad Mex- icana de Antropologia, Tegucigalpa. Kclly, Isabel T. 1941 The Relationship Bctween Tula and Sinaloa. Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropológicos 5:199-207. 1985 Some Gold and Silver Artifacts from Colima. In The Archae- ology of West and Northwest Mexico, edited by M.S. Foster and P.C. Weigand, pp. 153-179. Westvicw Press, Boulder and London. Kelly, Isabel T., and B. Braniff de Torres 1966 Una relación cerámica cntre Occidcnte y la Mesa Central. I.N.A.H. Boletín 23:26-27. Kelly, Joyce 1982 The Complete Visitor's Guide to Mesoamerican Ruins. Uni- versity of Oklahoma Press, Norman. Kirchhoff, Paul 1943 Mesoamérica: sus limites geográficos, composición étnica y caractercs culturales. Acta Americana 1:92-107. 1948 Etnografia antigua. In El Occidente de Mexico, pp. 134-136. Sociedad Mexicana de Antropología, Mcxico. Lister, Robert H. 1949 Excavations at Cojumatlan, Michoacan, Mexico. University of New Mcxico Publications in Anthropology 5. University of New Mexico, Albuquerque. 1971 Archaeological Synthesis of Guerrero. In Handbook of Middle American Indians, vol. 11, editcd by G. Elkholm and I. Bernal, pp. 619-631. University of Texas Press, Austin. Lowe, Gareth W. 1989 The Heartland Olmec: Evolution of Material Culture. In Re- gional Perspectives on the Olmec, edited by R. Sharer and D. Grovc, pp. 33-67. Cambridge University Press, Cambridgc. Lumholtz, Carl 1902 Unknown Mexico: A Record of Five Years' Exploration among the Tribes of the Western Sierra Madre in the Tierra Caliente of Tepic and Jalisco; and among the Tarascans of Michoa- can, II. Rio Grande Press (1973 edition), Glorieta, New Mcxico. McCarty, Kieran, and D. Matson 1975 Franciscan Report on the Indians of Nayarit, 1673. Ethnohis- tory 22(3):193-221. Marcus, Joyce 1973 Territorial Organization of the Lowland Classic Maya. Science 180:911-916. 1976 Emblem and State in the Classic Maya Lowlands. Dumbar- ton Oaks, Washington, DC. Marquina, Ignacio 1970 Proyecto Cholula. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Número 19. Mexico. Martinez D., Guadalupe 1986 Teopantecuanitlan. In Arqueología y etnohistoria del estado de Guerrero. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Gobierno del Estado de Guerrero. Mason, J. Alden 1937 Late Archaeological Sites in Durango, Mexico, from Chalchi- huites to Zape. Publications of the Philadelphia Anthropological Society 1:127-146. West Mexican stelae 3 1 Matos M., Eduardo, and I. Kelly 1974 Una vasija que sugicre relaciones entre Teotihuacán y Colima. In The Archaeology of West Mexico, edited by B. Bell, pp. 202205. Sociedad de Estudios Avanzados del Occidentc de México, Ajijic, Jalisco. Meighan, Clement W. 1976 The Archaeology of Amapa, Nayarit. Monumenta Ar- chaeologica 2. The Institute of Archaeology, University of California, Los Angeles. Morley, Sylvanus G. 1956 The Ancient Maya. Third edition, revised by G.W. Brainerd. Stanford University Press. Mountjoy, Joseph B. 1970 Prehispanic Culture History, and Cultural Contact on the Southern Coast of Nayarit, Mexico. Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Illinois University. Univcrsity Microfilms, Ann Arbor. 1974 Some Hypotheses Regarding the Petroglyphs of West Mexico. Mesoamerican Studies 9. Research Records of the University Museum, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale. 1982 El proyecto Tomatlán de salvamento arqueológico: fond° et- nohistórico y arqueológico, desarrollo del proyecto, estudios de la superficie. I.N.A.H. Colccción Cientifica: Arqueologia 122. Mexico. 1983 Investigaciones arqueológicas cn la cuenca del rio Tomatlán, Jalisco: 1975-1977. Pantoc 5:21-50. Universidad Autónoma de Guadalajara. 1984 Significado de dos documentos del siglo XVII en la interpretación de petroglifos encontrados en la cuenca del rio Tomatlán, Jalisco. Investigaciones Recientes En El Area Maya 4:487-494. Proceedings of thc Mesa Redonda of the Soeiedad Mexicana de Antropología, San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas. 1987a Antiquity, Interpretation, and Stylistic Evolution of Petro- glyphs in West Mexico. American Antiquity 52:161-174. 1987b El proyecto Tomatlán de salvamento arqueológico: el arte rupestre. I.N.A.H. Colección Cientifica: Arqueología 163. Mexico. 1989 Proyecto arqueológico Valle de Banderas: segunda temporada. Report on file in the technical archives of the Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia, Mexico. 1990 El desarrollo de la cultura Aztatlán visto desdc su frontera sur- oestc. In Mesoamérica y norte de Mexico: siglo IX-XII, vol. 2, edited by Federica Sodi M., pp. 541-564. Museo Nacional de Antropología, Mexico. Muller, Florcncia 1966 La estela del Coracero, Guerrero. In Summa antropológica en homenaje a Roberto J. Weitlander, pp. 91-98. I.N.A.H., Mexico. Noguera, Eduardo 1942 Exploraciones en El Opeño, Michoacán. Proceedings of the 27avo Congreso Internacional de Americanistas 1:574-586. Oliveros, Arturo 1974 Nuevas exploraciones en El Opeño Michoacan. In The Ar- chaeology of West Mexico, edited by B. Bell, pp. 182-201. Sociedad de Estudios Avanzados del Occidente dc México. Ajijic, Jalisco. Ortega, José 1944 Apostólicos afanes de la compañia de Jesus en su provincia de Mexico, libro Maravillosa reducción y conquista de la provincia de San Joseph del Gran Nayar, nuevo reino de Toledo. Editorial Layac, Mexico. Ortiz de Zárate, Gonzálo 1976 Petroglifos de Sinaloa. Fomento Cultural Banamex, Mexico. Osborne, Douglas 1943 An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Southeastern Michoacan, Mexico. American Antiquity 9:59-73. Pares Arias, José 1963 Esculturas y estelas liticas prehispánicas del sur del estado de Jalisco. Eco, Revista del Instituto Jalisciense de Antropología e Historia 16:3-4. Pérez de Ribas, Andrés 1645 Historia de los triunfos de nuestra santa fe entre las gentes las mks bárbaras y fieras del Nuevo Orbe. Madrid. Pickering, Robert B. 1974 A Preliminary Report on the Osteological Remains from Alta Vista, Zacatecas. In The Archaeology of West Mexico, edited by B. Bell, pp. 240-248. Sociedad de Estudios Avanzados del Occidente de Mexico. Ajijic, Jalisco. 1985 Human Osteological Remains from Alta Vista, Zacatecas: An Analysis of the Isolated Bone. In The Archaeology of West and Northwest Mexico, edited by M.S. Foster and P.C. Weigand, pp. 289-325. Westview Press, Boulder and London. Porter, Muriel 1956 Excavations at Chupicuaro, Guanajuato, Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society (new series) 46(5). Proskouriakoff, Tatiana 1950 A Study of Classic Maya Sculpture. Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 593. Washington, DC. Random House Dictionary of the English Language 1966 Random House, New York. Sáenz, César A. 1966a Exploraciones en El Ixtepete, Jalisco. I.N.A.H. Boletín 23:14- 18. 1966b Cabecitas y figurillas de barro del Ixtepete, Jalisco. I.N.A.H. Boletín 24:47-49. 1966c Exploraciones en Xochicalco. I.N.A.H. Boletín 26: 24-34. Sauer, Carol 0., and D.D. Brand 1932 Aztatlan: Prehistoric Mexican Frontier on the Pacific Coast. Ibero- Americana 1. University of California Press, Berkeley. Schöndube B., Otto 1972 La religion en el occidente de México. In Religión en Mesoamérica, XII Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad Mexicana de Antropología, pp. 357-363. Mexico. 1973-1974 Tamazula-Tuxpan-Zapotlán: Pueblos de la frontera septentrional de ía antigua Colima. Professional thesis, Escuela Nacional de Antropología e Historia, Mexico. 1974 Deidades prehispánicas en el arca de Tamazula-Tuxpan Zapotlán en el estado de Jalisco. In The Archaeology of West Mexico, editcd by B. Bell, pp. 168-181. Sociedad de Estudios Avanzados del Oceidente de México, Ajijic, Jalisco. 1980 Epoca prehispánica. In Historia de Jalisco, editcd by José Maria Muria, pp. 111-258. Gobierno de Jalisco Secretaria General Unidad Editorial, Guadalajara. Spicer, Edward H. 1969 Northwest Mexico: Introduction. In Handbook of Middle American Indians, vol. 8, edited by Evon G. Vogt, pp. 777-791. University of Texas Press, Austin. Tello, Antonio 1891 Crónica miscelánea en que se data de la conquista espiritual y temporal de la Santa Provincia de Xalisco en el Nuevo Reino de Galicia y Vizcaya y descubrimientos de Nuevo México. Imprenta La República Literaria, Guadalajara. 1968 Crónica miscelánea de la Sancta Provincia de Xalisco, Libro vol. 1. Instituto Jalisciense de Antropología e Historia, Guadalajara. Trombold, Charles D. 1985 A Summary of the Archacology in the La Quemada Region. In The Archaeology of West and Northwest Mexico, edited by M.S. Foster and P.C. Weigand, pp. 237-267. Westview Press, Boulder and London. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language (unabridged) 1966 G.C. Merriam, Springfield, MA. Weigand, Phil C. 1974 The Ahualulco Site and the Shaft-Tomb Complex of the Etzatlán Area. In The Archaeology of West Mexico, edited by B. Bell, pp. 120- 131. Sociedad de Estudios Avanzados del Occidente de México, Ajijic, Jalisco. 1978 The Prehistory of the State of Zacatecas: An Interpretation, Part 1 and Part 2. Anthropology 2(1):67-87; 1(2)103-117. 1985 Evidence for Complcx Societies during the Western Mesoamerican Classic Period. In The Archaeology of West and Northwest Mexico, edited by M.S. Foster and P.C. Weigand, pp. 47-91. Westview Press, Boulder and London. Williams, Eduardo 1988 The Stone Sculpture of Ancient West Mexico: Analysis and Classification. Ph.D. dissertation, University of London. von Winning, Hasso 1979 Dos estelas en la Mixteca Baja del sur de Puebla. Anales del Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas 13(4):13-22. 