ABSTRACT: 
The United States India nuclear agreement, announced in 2005, was a first step in the process to normalise India’s international nuclear relations despite the fact that India is not a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Africa is largely seen as a uranium supplier rather than nuclear power producer in the world nuclear order. The position that African states take towards Africa India nuclear cooperation, uranium supply to India in particular, is informed by two seemingly contrasting factors, namely economic and political pragmatism on the one hand, and non-proliferation imperatives and norms on the other. The African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty, also referred to as the Pelindaba Treaty, prohibits uranium and nuclear-related exports to states without comprehensive safeguards of their nuclear facilities, but the case of India is still open for interpretation. Africa and India’s shared post-colonial consciousness, manifesting in their historical ties, membership of the Non-Aligned Movement and South South cooperation, is often regarded as another factor facilitating Africa India nuclear relations. A more critical view points to the different notions of post-coloniality in Africa and India, resulting in different approaches to nuclear non-proliferation that constrain their nuclear relations.International Bibliography of Social Science. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article reflects on the tension between economic and political pragmatism and non-proliferation imperatives informing the African position, but argues that this tension is mediated by a third determinant, namely a post-colonial identity. This article reflects on the tension between economic pragmatism and non-proliferation imperatives informing the African position, but argues that this tension is mediated by a third determinant, namely a post-colonial identity. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 AfricaIndia nuclear cooperation: Pragmatism, principle,post-colonialism and the Pelindaba TreatyJoelien PretoriusUniversity of the Western Cape, South AfricaThe United StatesIndia nuclear agreement, announced in 2005, was a first stepin the process to normalise India’s international nuclear relations despite the factthat India is not a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of NuclearWeapons. Africa is largely seen as a uranium supplier rather than nuclear powerproducer in the world nuclear order. The position that African states take towardsAfricaIndia nuclear cooperation, uranium supply to India in particular, isinformed by two seemingly contrasting factors, namely economic and politicalpragmatism on the one hand, and non-proliferation imperatives and norms onthe other. The African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty, also referred to as thePelindaba Treaty, prohibits uranium and nuclear-related exports to states withoutcomprehensive safeguards of their nuclear facilities, but the case of India is stillopen for interpretation. Africa and India’s shared post-colonial consciousness,manifesting in their historical ties, membership of the Non-Aligned Movementand SouthSouth cooperation, is often regarded as another factor facilitatingAfricaIndia nuclear relations. A more critical view points to the different notionsof post-coloniality in Africa and India, resulting in different approaches tonuclear non-proliferation that constrain their nuclear relations.Keywords: nuclear relations; non-proliferation treaty; India; Africa; PelindabaTreatyIntroductionIn a joint statement on 18 July 2005, former US President George W. Bush andIndian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh announced a bilateral agreement thatwould normalise nuclear cooperation between their respective countries. Nuclearcooperation between the two had been restricted in 1974 and again in 1998 whenIndia, a state that had not joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of NuclearWeapons, or simply the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), tested nuclear weapons.Since the 2005 announcement of the bilateral agreement, however, a number of statesand international organisations such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) havefollowed the United States’ lead, effectively bending the rules governing nuclear tradeto normalise nuclear relations with India.This article is directed at the question: What is the position of African states sincethe entry into force of the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty, signed atCairo in 1996, on the normalisation of nuclear relations with India, and whatdetermines this position? In particular, it reflects on the tension between economicpragmatism and non-proliferation imperatives informing the African position, butargues that this tension is mediated by a third determinant, namely a post-colonialidentity. This contribution is not an attempt to review the literature on internationalSouth African Journal of International AffairsVol. 18, No. 3, December 2011, 319339ISSN 1022-0461 print/ISSN 1938-0275 online# 2011 The South African Institute of International Affairshttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10220461.2011.622948http://www.tandfonline.comDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 norms; however, it does assume that non-proliferation norms matter and recognisesthat when states choose to stretch or change them, they usually find justifications fordoing so that go beyond realist interpretations of national interests.1The article is also written with the aim to contribute to critical debate on uraniumpolitics in Africa, which would tie into the literature cautioning against a secondscramble for Africa as a result of the ‘rise’ of the Tiger (India) and the Dragon(China) in Africa, and globally.2India and the first grand nuclear bargainIn almost Shakespearean fashion the background narrative to this article starts witha ‘grand bargain’ negotiated in the late 1960s and codified in the NPT (1970).3Nuclear weapon states (states that had tested nuclear weapons by 1967) agreed not toprovide non-nuclear weapon states (states that had not tested nuclear weapons by1967) with nuclear weapons or facilitate the development of these weapons, and alsoto give up their own nuclear weapons in the future (nuclear disarmament). In turn,non-nuclear weapon states promised not to acquire or develop nuclear weapons.The inducement to give up the right to have nuclear weapons came in the form oflegal assurance to non-nuclear weapon states under the NPT of an entitlement(an ‘inalienable right’) to civil nuclear technology. Thus, the grand bargain confirmedand codified a nuclear export norm originating in US law in the 1950s, namely torestrict nuclear exports, in the name of nuclear weapons non-proliferation, topeaceful purposes only.4 To ensure the implementation of this norm, suppliers ofnuclear technology and material may export only to states with full-scope(or comprehensive) International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards oftheir nuclear programmes (Article III of the NPT). Safeguards include inspectionsand other verification measures to account for nuclear material.5States that have not acceded to the NPT, which are Israel, Pakistan, and India,plus North Korea which joined and then withdrew, are denied this entitlementto nuclear technology for two reasons. Firstly, and on principle, because they didnot agree to the grand bargain with the NPT members and proceeded to developnuclear weapons, they cannot claim any privileges under the NPT; allowing themaccess to nuclear technology would undermine the grand bargain and may send amessage to other non-nuclear weapon states that there would be no repercussions forleaving the NPT and acquiring nuclear weapons.6 Secondly, and more practically,these states do not have full-scope IAEA safeguards that would ensure that nuclearmaterial is used only for civilian purposes and is not diverted to their militaryprogrammes.Successive Indian leaders have chosen not to sign onto the NPT. India’s positionis often justified by referring to security concerns related to its adversarial relationswith its northern neighbours, China and Pakistan. Indeed, India has fought warswith both these states. China tested nuclear weapons in 1964, two years after itdefeated India in a border war, making it possible for China to join the NPT as anuclear weapon state in 1992. China’s initial refusal to join the NPT and its nuclearcooperation with Pakistan later (to which the guardians of non-proliferation largelyturned a blind eye), did much to strengthen arguments in the domestic debate thathad been waging in India since the 1950s that India should keep its options toacquire nuclear weapons open.7 Moreover, the disappointing response to India’srequest for explicit security assurances (that nuclear weapon states would not use or320 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states) conveyed by ahigh-profile delegation to all the nuclear weapon states in 1968, also informed India’sdecision not to join the NPT.8Although India’s security concerns make for a powerful basis on which toreject the NPT and eventually acquire nuclear weapons, they are not convincing asthe main motive for India’s current nuclear stance. By India’s own admission,as conveyed in a 1995 submission to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) whenthe latter considered the legality of the use of nuclear weapons in armed conflict:‘Nuclear weapons cannot be used in self defence . . . nuclear weapons cause . . .destruction which far exceeds the measure of proportionality and the object ofdestruction necessary and relevant to the attainment of military objectives.’9India’s leaders have always maintained that no state should have nuclearweapons, but if any state has, India must have the same right too.10 The nuclearweapon states’ thwarting of their nuclear disarmament obligations under Article VIof the NPT did much to support India’s claim that the NPT is an instrument of thosestates that had tested nuclear weapons before 1967 to freeze an unfair nuclear orderin their favour.11 The term ‘nuclear apartheid’ was first coined by Indian negotiatorsat the NPT deliberations in the 1960s to describe this state of affairs, and has oftenbeen employed by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to justify India’s nuclear stancepost-1998.12However, nothing in India’s nuclear policy today suggests that India would prefera world where all states are entitled to nuclear weapons. Rather, India seems to viewnuclear weapons as a symbol of great power status to which it holds a claim.13Manmohan Singh reversed India’s position toward the NPT in 2009, stating thatIndia would join the NPT, but as a nuclear weapon state.14 It thus seems that Indiaviews the NPT as somehow knighting the nuclear weapon states as ‘responsible’enough to have nuclear weapons and non-nuclear weapon status as second tier.15This is not contrary to the nuclear weapon states’ own interpretation of the NPT andthe rationale that the Bush administration provided for the USIndia agreement towin over domestic and international audiences.16Although India has remained outside a number of nuclear non-proliferationtreaties, it has not proliferated ‘horizontally’ in the sense that Israel, North Koreaand Pakistan have been accused of doing.17 Horizontal proliferation refers to thetransfer of nuclear weapons or material to another state or non-state entity, whereasvertical proliferation is the expansion or renovation of a nuclear weapon state’s ownarsenal.This sets India apart from other de facto nuclear weapon states and groundsIndia’s self-image as a ‘responsible nuclear weapon state’ that should enjoy theprestige and privileges of the other nuclear weapon states.India diverted nuclear technology acquired from the United States, France andCanada to its military sector and tested weapons twice: in 1974 and in 1998.18The 1974 test led to the suspension of all nuclear cooperation with India andsanctions, and it was under US pressure that Prime Minister Indira Ghandi cancelledanother test she had planned for 1983.19 India’s 1998 tests were again followed by USand international condemnation. The Clinton administration recalled its ambassa-dor from India and relations between the countries reached a post-Cold War low.India rekindled USIndia relations as soon as possible, however, realising that‘in order to gain global recognition India needed to be recognised as a legitimatenuclear weapons state and in order to do this, relations with the US needed to bemended.’20South African Journal of International Affairs 321Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 India and the Nuclear Suppliers GroupBy 2011, India is widely perceived as a rising global power, often compared withChina. Attributed to the financial reforms instituted by Manmohan Singh andIndia’s impressive information technology sector that expanded rapidly after theCold War, the nation’s rise is characterised by high economic growth, increasedforeign trade and investment, and increased household income.21 Coupled with itspopulation size (at 1.2 billion, second only to China’s), however, India’s rapiddevelopment has resulted in formidable energy challenges. India’s policymakers arethus pursuing all sources of energy provision, not least nuclear energy. In this regard,the Indian nuclear energy market has become a coveted sector for internationalexporters and investors.22The most prominent international forum for the cultivation of nuclear exportcontrols is the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), which was formed in 1975 and has amembership now numbering 46 nuclear technology and material supplier states.23The NSG’s self-imposed mission is to align ‘the interrelated objectives of preventingthe proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the promotion of international trade andco-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.’24 The NSG’s creation and phasesof growth were spurred on by cases where nuclear exports for peaceful purposes werediverted to military purposes. It is not by accident that the NSG was formedsubsequent to India testing a nuclear weapon in 1974 * a test made possible bydiverting civilian technology sourced internationally to military purposes. Subse-quently, when the extent of Iraq’s nuclear weapons programme, which grew under theguise of peaceful purposes, became known in the wake of the first Gulf War in 1991,the NSG experienced a revival. In practice, the NSG makes rules by consensus onwhat ‘dual-use’ technologies may or may not be exported (compiling a ‘trigger list’),and also to whom.25 The NSG guidelines for nuclear exports correspond with theNPT’s requirement for nuclear exports to non-nuclear weapon states, namely thatrecipient states must allow full-scope safeguards on their nuclear facilities.26India’s second grand nuclear bargain: The 2005 USIndia nuclear agreementThe 2005 Bush/Singh announcement of a bilateral cooperation plan between theUnited States and India included nuclear energy and implied the normalisationof nuclear trade between the two countries. With this agreement, the United Stateslabelled India as a responsible state with advanced nuclear technology that shouldbe given the same benefits and responsibilities as other such states. In essence, theBush administration had recognised India as a nuclear weapon state.27 Morespecifically, the United States conferred this status upon India by promising to worktoward full civil energy cooperation, seeking agreement to amend US laws andpolicies, to amend international regimes to enable civil nuclear energy cooperationand trade with India, and to encourage the normalisation of nuclear energyrelations with India by US partners and in other forums. The latter includes theInternational Thermonuclear Energy Reactor (ITER) project, which exploresnuclear fusion for energy production. On the Indian side, Prime Minister Singhcommitted India to the following: identifying and separating civilian and militarynuclear facilities and notifying the IAEA of civilian facilities, which would alsobe placed under voluntary IAEA safeguards and the IAEA Additional Protocol;continuing a unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing; cooperating with the322 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 United States towards a multilateral Fissile Material Cut Off Treaty; refraining fromexporting enrichment and reprocessing technologies to states not in possession ofthese technologies, and joining international efforts to limit their disseminationincluding through comprehensive export control legislation and through adherenceto the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and the NSG guidelines.28The agreement was received in a positive light by some. Mohammed ElBaradei,Nobel Laureate and former director-general of the IAEA, suggested that thenormalisation of nuclear trade with India under certain conditions would bring Indiainto the non-proliferation regime, albeit without joining the NPT.29 The IAEAsubsequently negotiated a ‘type 66 safeguard agreement’ with India that would coverIndia’s civilian nuclear facilities, but not its military nuclear facilities. Under theagreement, India will put additional civilian facilities under IAEA safeguards tocomply with the conditions that would allow the IAEA members to provide Indiawith access to the international nuclear fuel market. The agreement also makes clearthat India can ‘take corrective measures’ should international fuel supply for itscivilian reactors be disrupted.30 It has been argued that these unspecified correctivemeasures could include unilateral withdrawal of civilian facilities from IAEAsafeguards should India’s access to nuclear fuel be suspended, for instance inresponse to an Indian nuclear test.31The agreement with the IAEA is not a full-scope safeguards agreement, becauseit excludes India’s military nuclear facilities. For this reason, the NSG had to makean exception to its rules to allow its members to export nuclear material to India. TheNSG passed a ‘once-off ’ waiver to its rules that would allow normalisation ofnuclear trade with India under certain conditions, for example assurance of aunilateral moratorium on nuclear testing. The NSG waiver was a precondition forthe USIndia agreement to be passed by the US Congress. Other states have followedsuit after the NSG exception was granted, for example Canada, France and Russiahave all concluded separate agreements to normalise nuclear trade with India.To reach the point at which the NSG agreed to the waiver was no easy route.Although some NSG members saw the economic benefits of nuclear cooperationwith India for their own nuclear industries, others asked tough questions about theprecedent that the waiver would be setting. These NSG members would probably nothave acquiesced to the waiver without intense US and Indian lobbying, recognitionof India’s past horizontal non-proliferation record, and India’s assurance of anuclear testing moratorium.32The USIndia agreement has nevertheless caused a storm in the non-proliferation and arms control community. Their concern is that the agreementundermines the nuclear non-proliferation regime by watering down nuclear exportrestrictions. By allowing uranium exports to India for civilian uses, the agreementfrees up India’s domestic nuclear fuel stocks for military use. They also argue thatbending the rules for India will induce an arms race in the region as Pakistan andChina increase their nuclear arsenals in response to increased Indian capacity. It isfeared that the agreement sends ‘the wrong message’ to would-be proliferators thatthere are no lasting consequences for disregarding the non-proliferation regime.Or, worse, normalising nuclear relations with India could be perceived as a doublestandard favouring US allies, and serve as a precedent for similarly recognising andlegitimising Israel’s nuclear weapon status.33The foregoing narrative on the USIndia nuclear agreement, describing how itinvolved the IAEA and the NSG and the concerns it raises, is by no means aSouth African Journal of International Affairs 323Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 comprehensive account. Rather, it is an overview to arrive at an understanding of thesignificance of exploring AfricaIndia nuclear cooperation. Similar to other states inother regions, African states individually or collectively will be adopting a positionon the normalisation of nuclear relations with India. If foreign policymaking isinterpreted as a rational choice process that involves a costbenefit analysis of ‘tonormalise or not to normalise nuclear trade’, the scales would be weighed down byeconomic pragmatism, on the one hand, and non-proliferation imperatives on theother. The next section will explore the tension between these often competingfactors.AfricaIndia nuclear cooperation: Economic pragmatism and the political-economy ofglobal uranium supplyA report by the World Nuclear Association (WNA) notes that India intends toprovide 25% of its electricity supply via nuclear energy by 2050.34 Even contemplat-ing this dramatic increase in nuclear energy production in India is only possiblebecause the normalisation of nuclear trade includes access to uranium sourcesoutside India. Prior to the NSG waiver, India was suffering severe uraniumshortages, already referred to as ‘a major problem’ in 2005.35 By 2007, the uraniumstockpiled prior to the spike in India’s energy needs was nearing depletion. India’sdomestic uranium mining capacity was estimated at about 300 tons per year, while itscivil and military needs were estimated at 600 tons per year in 2007.36 The state-owned Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) puts India’s uraniumneeds at 8 000 tons of uranium per year by 2035, a 10 fold increase from the currentsituation.37 However, due to health and environmental concerns, opening newuranium mines in India has been met with domestic resistance.38This is where Africa fits into the picture * as a uranium supplier with close to20% of the world’s recoverable uranium.39 Namibia, Niger and South Africa have anestimated 94% of the uranium on the continent and these countries, along withsmaller potential suppliers, such as Malawi, are well-positioned to meet India’suranium needs.40 In fact, prior to the NSG waiver, India had already courted Africanstates for uranium mining and exploration agreements as an alternative to supplyfrom Canada, Australia and Kazakhstan (all of them NSG members that werenot allowed to sell uranium to India at the time).41 In 2007 an Indian company wona tender for uranium exploration in Niger, a milestone for a state so isolated in thenuclear order. The Hindu, one of India’s largest daily newspapers, reported on thetender victory as follow: ‘Niger is not a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group,the 45-member nation that controls all nuclear-related commerce, and hence itshould be easy for India to access the uranium once the mines become operational*this will take several years.’42 Officials in Niger hailed the granting of mining permitsto Indian (and Chinese) companies by saying that it would end France’s monopolyon uranium mining in that country.43 Similar agreements or intentions for suchagreements followed from Gabon in 2008,44 Namibia in 200945 and Malawi in2010.46The NSG waiver has of course made it easier for India to obtain uranium, butthe African mining and prospecting agreements are still significant and a deliberatestrategy of India to ensure future uranium supply. The NPCIL’s finance directorwas quoted as saying that the company’s strategy is to ‘buy stakes in mines and tie upthe source of supply’.47Although evidence of any official Indian request to the324 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 South African government to buy uranium is elusive, Indian press reports claim thatthe NPCIL has considered taking up an offer of minority stakes in four Africanuranium mines owned by Areva SA, the African arm of the French state-ownednuclear power company.48Allowing Indian investment in uranium mining, and consequently access toAfrica’s uranium, is regarded as an economically pragmatic position on the issue ofnormalisation of nuclear cooperation with India, based on the economic benefitsthat would flow from this. However, the fungibility of uranium also drives apragmatic approach.49 Even if African states decide to block India from direct accessto its uranium, India may still benefit indirectly from African uranium on the worldmarket. For instance, through a tripartite agreement Russia, the United States andFrance have committed to provide life-time fuel supply for reactors sold to India.Russia and France are both major uranium mining states in Africa and could thususe uranium sourced from their African mining endeavours for this end.50 Even ifAfrican states exercise their prerogative to prohibit these countries from exportingAfrican-sourced uranium to India as a requirement of third party assurance from arecipient state, the African uranium entering the world market will free up uraniumfrom other countries that have nuclear cooperation agreements with India. SandyGordon avers, for example, that Australia’s decision not to sell uranium to India willhave little material effect on India’s access to uranium so long as India is accordedaccess to world markets and Australia continues to sell into those markets.51Not all African states have opted for the pragmatic approach outlined above.Reminded that the Manhattan Project (which resulted in the bombs dropped onJapan in the 1940s) was largely fuelled by uranium from the Shinkolobwe mine inwhat is today the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), African states areaware of the dual use of their uranium. Some African states are concerned about theprecedent that the Indian case sets for non-proliferation and disarmament.On principle therefore, African states may decide not to normalise nuclear relationswith India, guided by their obligations under the NPT, the Pelindaba Treaty, andtheir domestic legislation.Africa’s non-proliferation imperatives and the Pelindaba TreatyThe Pelindaba Treaty52 stands out as the legal instrument to guide an Africanposition on normalisation of nuclear relations with India for two reasons.Firstly, among African states only South Africa is a member of the NSG, thusthe India waiver (which NSG members see as superseding their NPT obligations)would be applicable only to South Africa’s relations with India. Secondly,and perhaps more importantly, the Pelindaba Treaty reflects an Africa specificview on non-proliferation within the context of an African security community.53The Pelindaba Treaty is in a more general way an important source of law forAfrican states that should trump or be encoded in their domestic legislation oncethey have ratified it.The Pelindaba Treaty, to review, establishes the African Nuclear Weapons FreeZone (ANWFZ). African states have pursued such a treaty since France testednuclear weapons in 1960 in what was then French Algeria. The United NationsGeneral Assembly (UNGA) shortly afterwards adopted Resolution 1652, calling onall states to ‘consider and respect the African continent as a denuclearized zone’.54The Organisation of African Unity (OAU), at its first summit held in Egypt in 1964,South African Journal of International Affairs 325Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 adopted the Cairo Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa.55 OAU membersexpressed their readiness to commit to an Africa free of nuclear weapons through atreaty, but it was not until three decades later that progress was made towards such atreaty.Through these years, South Africa’s domestic policy of apartheid and itsconsequent international pariah status was one of the main obstructions to anANWFZ. South Africa refused to join the NPT and had developed the capability toenrich uranium by 1970. South Africa followed a policy of deliberate nuclearambiguity similar to that of Israel (with whom the apartheid government had strongmilitary ties at the time), not admitting or denying that it had nuclear weapons.56As international outcasts, South African policymakers intended to use nuclearweapons to blackmail Western states into coming to the country’s rescue shouldSouth Africa ever face a Soviet Union-driven communist ‘onslaught’ by states inSouthern Africa.57 When the Cold War ended in the early 1990s, and in the face offierce opposition from a majority of the South African population, the apartheidgovernment’s anti-communist rhetoric could no longer justify a racially oppressiveregime and negotiations toward a democratic transition began. However, before theregime changed, the apartheid government proceeded to dismantle its six nuclearweapons and acceded to the NPT in 1991 as a non-nuclear weapon state. At thatpoint, the OAU and UN appointed a joint expert group to write the draft text of anANWFZ treaty. South Africa joined the OAU in 1994 after its first democraticelections and, in 1996, the Pelindaba Treaty58 was opened for signature.59 On 15 July2009, the treaty came into effect with the 28th ratification.60All 53 African states have signed the treaty, but at the time of writing 22 stillneeded to ratify it.61 In some cases states are simply not ratifying the treaty becauseof weak governmental structures or internal instability. Arguably this is true forSomalia. In other cases, the choice to withhold ratification is a political decision.Egypt, for example, has made acceptance of any further nuclear arms controlmeasures conditioned on Israel acceding to the NPT as a non- nuclear weapon state(a point that will be returned to later).62 However, other African states hesitate oneconomic grounds. Article 18 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treatiesprovides the following: ‘A State is obliged to refrain from acts which would defeat theobject and purpose of a treaty when: (a) it has signed the treaty . . . until it shall havemade its intention clear not to become a party to the treaty.’ Thus, it will be illegal forsignatories to the Pelindaba Treaty, such as Namibia and Niger, to export uranium toIndia if the Pelindaba Treaty determines it so.63 Both the letter and spirit of thePelindaba Treaty are indicative in this regard.The letter of PelindabaIn terms of the letter of the Pelindaba Treaty, Article 9 that relates to ‘Verification ofpeaceful uses’ is clear. Each party undertakes:(a) to conduct all activities for the peaceful use of nuclear energy under strictnon-proliferation measures to provide assurance of exclusively peaceful uses;(b) to conclude a comprehensive safeguards agreement with IAEA for thepurpose of verifying compliance with the undertakings in subparagraph (a) ofthis article; and326 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 (c) not to provide source or special fissionable material, or equipment ormaterial especially designed or prepared for the processing, use or productionof special fissionable material for peaceful purposes to any non-nuclear-weapon state unless subject to a comprehensive safeguards agreementconcluded with IAEA.The article’s intent conforms to non-proliferation norms in general by calling eachparty to engage only in the peaceful use of nuclear energy under strict non-proliferation measures that include comprehensive IAEA safeguards as the verifica-tion instrument. Article 9(c) conforms to nuclear export restrictions by prohibitingthe transfer of source or special material (even if designed for peaceful purposes) to anon-nuclear weapon state unless the latter is subject to a comprehensive IAEAsafeguards agreement. Seen in terms of 9(a) and 9(b), 9(c) can be interpreted to codifythe responsibility incumbent on each party not to facilitate, knowingly or unknow-ingly, the proliferation of nuclear weapons. According to a strict interpretationof Article 9(c), there is no question of whether it is legal for member states ofthe Pelindaba Treaty to engage in nuclear cooperation with India: it most definitelyis not.However, there is another ‘minimalist’ interpretation of the Pelindaba Treaty,namely that the type 66 IAEA safeguard agreement with India complies with AnnexII paragraph 3 of the treaty, which refers to the safeguards that member states haveto sign with the IAEA.64 That provision states: ‘For the purpose of this Treaty, thesafeguards referred to in paragraph 1 above shall have as their purpose theverification of the non-diversion of nuclear material from peaceful nuclear activitiesto nuclear explosive devices or for purposes unknown.’ If this restricted meaning of asafeguard agreement is extended to what is expected of recipient states, the India-specific IAEA safeguard agreement arguably meets this requirement, as it establishesverification of non-diversion from India’s civil to military programmes. Using thisinterpretation to legalise uranium exports to India would however seem rather adisingenuous attempt to evade Article 9(c)’s explicit prohibition of uranium exportsto states without comprehensive safeguards.The spirit of PelindabaTo determine whether uranium exports to India would be in breach of the PelindabaTreaty, it is also necessary to look at the context of the treaty, which gives insight intothe spirit rather than the letter of the treaty.65 Firstly, the Pelindaba Treaty takes itscue from other nuclear weapons free zone (NWFZ) treaties. The object and purposeof the treaty is firstly to address a regional security issue, in that it ‘is an importantpart of the overall peace and security architecture of the African Union: is indeedone of the building blocks of the Common African Defense and SecurityPolicy (CADSP)’.66 NWFZs provide common security through a doctrine ofmutually assured abstinence from nuclear weapons, rather than deterrence throughmutually assured destruction by nuclear weapons. Abstinence from acquiring ordeveloping nuclear weapons is verified under the IAEA safeguards system.Secondly, the ANWFZ is seen as ‘an integral part of a planned integratedapproach to the Treaty Zones towards disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.’67 When the Pelindaba Treaty entered into force, the SouthernHemisphere became a nuclear weapons free zone (excluding international waters).68South African Journal of International Affairs 327Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 In fact, when the African Union (AU), the OAU’s successor, entertained an agendaitem on the status of the Pelindaba Treaty in 2006, members were encouraged toratify the treaty precisely because its delayed entry into force was seen as the weaklink in a network of NWFZs.69 The integrated approach is founded on thephilosophy that NWFZs are not an end in themselves but a means for achieving aworld without nuclear weapons.70 The focus is not only regional, but how eachNWFZ becomes a building block of the bigger goal. The Pelindaba Treaty reflectsthis philosophy in the preamble and protocols where it notes: ‘the need to take allsteps in achieving the ultimate goals of a world entirely free of nuclear weapons, aswell as of the obligation of all States to contribute to this end.’ Although the treatyemphasises the right to peaceful nuclear technology and its use for the developmentof the continent, the overriding spirit of the treaty is clearly to create an Africancontinent free of nuclear weapons and by doing so to contribute to global nucleardisarmament.However, the treaty’s object and purpose are not limited to military security, butare aligned with what has come to be known as human security, commonly definedas a situation of ‘freedom from fear and freedom from want’.71 The argument isbased on a human-centred approach to international security that hails the healthand environmental benefits of a NWFZ. The Pelindaba Treaty Preamble claims adetermination ‘to keep Africa free of environmental pollution and other radioactivewaste’,72 and also contributes to human security by promoting mutually assuredabstinence wherein there would be no need to spend resources on costly nuclearweapon programmes. The notion that NWFZs prevent the use of resources formilitary means that could be used for development is commonly expressed. Forexample, the Treaty of Tlatelolco explicitly states this conviction in its preamble:‘Convinced . . . that the military denuclearization of Latin America and theCaribbean . . . will constitute a measure which will spare their peoples from thesquandering of their limited resources on nuclear armaments . . .’. Similarly,Ambassador Alfredo Labbe, Director of International and Human Security ofChile, at the 2010 NPT Review Conference, made the following statement in relationto NWFZs: ‘We are convinced of the benefit that the use of the resources devoted tonuclear weapon programs could have for humanity if they were utilized forsupporting social and economic development’.73The Pelindaba Treaty also claims entitlement to the peaceful use of nucleartechnology for socio-economic development (Article 8(2)), calling for mechanisms ofnuclear cooperation to be established and strengthened. One of the mechanismsalready in existence is the African Regional Cooperation Agreement for Research,Development and Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology (AFRA).74The treaty in this way invokes the ‘grand bargain’ that was made between nuclearweapon states and non-nuclear weapon states when the NPT was negotiated: theNPT’s Article IV(1) refers to the ‘inalienable right’ to nuclear energy for peacefuluses and Article IV(2) obliges states to cooperate to this effect with specificconsideration for the ‘needs of the developing areas of the world’.75 Furthermore, thePelindaba Treaty encourages links with other international and continental nuclearnon-proliferation organisations to harness nuclear technology for development.These organisations include the IAEA, the Comprehensive Test Ban TreatyOrganization (CTBTO) and AFRA.In this respect, it could be argued that IndiaAfrica civilian nuclear cooperationhas the potential to promote the Pelindaba Treaty’s goal of reaping the economic328 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 benefits of nuclear energy for development. Discussion will return to this pointbelow, in examining whether uranium mining and exports actually serve to promoteor hinder human security in Africa.It seems that the interpretation of the Pelindaba Treaty with respect tonormalisation of nuclear trade with India is at this point left open. This can beattributed to the fact that the treaty entered into force as recently as 2009, and themember states and civil society groups that encouraged its entry into force do notwant to introduce controversy as yet. Indeed, the verification instrument, the AfricanCommission on Nuclear Energy (AFCONE), was only established in October 2010.Should African member states prefer a consensus interpretation of the India case,AFCONE would be the appropriate organ for this discussion. What has transpired,though, is that Egypt’s linking of its ratification of the treaty to Israel’s signing onto the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state is affecting the development of thisdiscussion. Egypt is concerned that the India exemption may become a precedent fornormalisation of Israel’s nuclear status, and hence finds the India case problematic.This has especially come to the fore and informed a more conservative and cautiousapproach to India by African states during the NPT Review Conference in 2010. Theposition that South Africa is taking on the issue further illustrates its complicatednature.South Africa’s position vis-a`-vis IndiaAs the only African NSG member, South Africa’s position warrants specialattention. Not only has South Africa supported the exception that the NSG madefor India, but South African politicians have on several occasions expressedwillingness to engage in civil nuclear cooperation with India, especially in bilateralvisits between the two countries. Moreover, the mooted investment by the NPCIL inAreva SA would particularly link India to uranium mining in South Africa. However,it seems that a much more cautious South African approach is emerging towardsnuclear cooperation with India.76 This conclusion is supported by the fact that SouthAfrica’s nuclear energy legislation prohibits exports to states without full-scopeIAEA safeguards, and no real effort to change this law has emerged since the NSGwaiver was passed in 2008. No bilateral agreement on nuclear cooperation has beensigned between the countries either. A possible explanation for this may be that someSouth African officials are of the view that the country’s uranium should beexploited for its own benefit, and not that of foreign actors’.77This begs the question, why did South Africa support India in the NSG decisionif it was not intending to take advantage of India’s exemption through nuclearcooperation with Mumbai? It is not that South Africa lacks in the economicpragmatism one sees in the case of Namibia. Rather, South Africa’s seeminglyambivalent position towards normalising nuclear relations with India should beviewed in its broader context in order to take cognisance of several factors. Theseinclude South Africa’s nuclear past, the current advanced state of its nucleartechnology when compared to other African states, and South Africa’s pursuit ofemerging-state status through membership of the IndiaBrazilSouth AfricaDialogue Forum (IBSA) and the BrazilRussiaIndiaChinaSouth Africa (BRICS)group of states.As already noted, South Africa gave up its nuclear weapons as one of the firststeps in the process of democratic transition. Sceptics may argue that the apartheidSouth African Journal of International Affairs 329Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 government of FW de Klerk did so more in anticipation that it would soon bereplaced by a new government under the control of the unpredictable (and largelyblack-run) African National Congress (ANC).78 This is a moot point since the ANChad maintained an explicit non-proliferation stance prior to 1994. At the Conferenceon Nuclear Policy for a Democratic South Africa held on 1113 February 1994(75 days before the first democratic elections), Abdul Minty, the face of the ANCin exile on these matters, ended his keynote address to the conference as follows:‘So those who have been abroad working, hope for a free and democratic SouthAfrica. A South Africa that will not only clean itself, but also play an internationalrole, both to fight racism abroad, and to stop proliferation and help to producepeace.’79 Indeed, as the first country to give up its nuclear weapons, South Africabecame somewhat of a ‘disarmament trendsetter’ that could claim the moral highground. As a result, South Africa was able to play a key role in negotiating theindefinite extension of the NPT in 1995, and mediated during the 2000 and 2005NPT Review Conferences as well as being one of the leading states to bring thePelindaba Treaty to signature.80 As a major player in the non-proliferation fieldcompared to other African states (bar Egypt, perhaps), South Africa’s non-proliferation credentials are also under greater scrutiny. This may explain, in part,South Africa’s reluctance to normalise nuclear relations with India. Ironically, it isprecisely its high profile that made South Africa’s support of India in the NSG sosignificant.81As a member of IBSA and BRICS, South Africa has to tread lightly anddiplomatically around its emerging power allies. South Africa’s economic clout is notnearly that of India, Brazil, China or Russia. However, South Africa is allowed entryto their company on the premise that it is a regional powerhouse in Africa that canadd its political weight to support its bigger allies in international forums, like theNSG or the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) where South Africa iscurrently serving as a non-permanent member (20112012). Despite its non-proliferation convictions, supporting India was therefore in line with the scriptthat South Africa has to enact if it wants to keep the company of these emergingpowers.82Although the South African position reflects the tension between economicpragmatism and non-proliferation imperatives, it also illustrates issues of a post-colonial (or anti-imperialist) identity that not only informs South Africa’s foreignpolicy, but is observable more generally in the African position on this issue. This isthe subject of the next section.A common post-colonial consciousness, or a diverging one?India and African states often invoke their historical and ideological ties, or what thisarticle refers to as a common post-colonial identity, to justify their increasedeconomic relationship.83 This post-colonial identity includes a consciousness ofpersistent forms of colonisation, interpreting and framing these forms of subjugatingpower, and devising methods for their subversion and resistance.84 The DelhiDeclaration that followed from the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit in April 2008illustrates the discourse framing AfricaIndia relations. The declaration talks about‘the decades-old partnership and historical and civilizational links between theAfrican continent and India’ and states in Article 1 and 2: ‘We [Indian and Africanheads of state] recognize that Africa and India have undergone enormous positive330 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 changes, in particular over the last two and half decades, and that Africa and Indiahave historically been close allies in the struggle for independence, equality, humanrights, freedom and democracy.’ The Summit Declaration of the IndiaAfrica ForumSummit held in Ethiopia in 2011 repeats these themes, noting that India and Africawere ‘fraternal partners and allies in the struggle for independence and achievementof self-determination’ and that there exists a ‘historical understanding amongst ourpeoples’.85The historical and political attachments between India and Africa are embodiedin the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), of which the Indian Prime MinisterJawaharlal Nehru was a founding member along with two African leaders, Ghana’sformer president, Kwame Nkrumah, and Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser. Theideational foundation of the NAM is the common history that members share inrelation to the West, marginalisation, exploitation and underdevelopment (what waspreviously labelled a Third World consciousness). There is, however, a danger inover-romanticising India and Africa’s common post-colonial identity and itsrelevance for an interpretation of the Pelindaba Treaty that would legitimiseAfricaIndia nuclear cooperation.Despite being regarded as a leader of the Developing World and having for mostof the Cold War an exemplary non-aligned foreign policy, India’s interpretation ofpost-colonialism seems to have shifted and African leaders’ invocation thereofdemands critical examination, especially when brought to bear on nuclear matters.Although India still uses its NAM identity when lobbying for its own interests, forexample to garner support from IAEA and NSG members in the run-up to the NSGdecision to exempt India from the comprehensive safeguard requirement in 2008,Marie Lall argues that India’s policy has shifted.86 This view is also prevalent in theIndian media, where analysts regard non-alignment as standing in the way of India’sgreat power pursuits and its relations with the United States. The following quotefrom an Indian newspaper is typical of this view: ‘India today is very different fromthe India of the Cold War days. We are now recognised as an emerging economicpower, no longer dependent on the charity of others for our economic progress. Inthese circumstances, does it make sense to cling to old shibboleths and slogans suchas ‘‘non-aligned solidarity’’ in a vastly transformed world order?’87There are other factors that provide evidence for this shift in policy, not leastmilitary cooperation between India and Israel.88 Given Egypt’s concern with Israel’snuclear status, the Indo-Israeli relationship will prove problematic for NAM,possibly reducing future backing for India on nuclear matters. In fact, developmentsat the 2010 NPT Review Conference indicated as much: as a non-NPT member,India was not included in NAM’s preparatory discussions for the Review Conferenceor as a part of its delegation. The NAM statement ‘viewed with concern’ nuclearcooperation agreements with states not under comprehensive IAEA safeguards.89Although India was not named, the implication of this statement was clear.African states participated in the NPT Review Conference as part of the NAM bloc.The NAM position, greatly influenced by Egypt, may put African states in anincreasingly awkward position vis-a`-vis India.It was noted earlier that the Pelindaba Treaty also seeks to promote humansecurity through peaceful nuclear cooperation and that normalising IndiaAfricanuclear relations has the potential to advance this goal. The article now returns tothis point. A consideration that African states will need to take into account, and onethat India should be aware of and sensitive to, hinges on perceptions among AfricanSouth African Journal of International Affairs 331Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 civil societies regarding the increased involvement of China and India on the Africancontinent. There is concern that these states are engaged in a second ‘scramble forAfrica’.90 Although IndiaAfrica trade has increased significantly over the pastdecade, the composition of that trade leans toward African export of primarycommodities to India and African import of manufactured goods from India.In 2006 more than 80% of African exports to India consisted of oil, gold, nuts,phosphate chemicals, and copper ore. In turn, India’s exports to Africa are far morediversified with oil (not crude), medicine, motor vehicles, and rice making up 40% ofexports.91 This does not bode well for the industrialisation and economic growthfigures of African states, reflecting as it does the ‘neo-imperialist traits’ of traderelations with other developed states. Economists such as Erik Reinert have arguedthat specialising in the export of primary products is a significant reason why poorstates remain poor.92 There is also a vast literature that warns against a resourcecurse when countries in Africa become dependent on commodity exports withoutdiversifying their economies.93Beyond economic development, the health and environmental implications ofuranium mining should also be considered. Gabriella Hecht has done excellentstudies that show how African uranium miners have systematically been excludedfrom the safety regimes that set uranium mining apart from other mining endeavoursdue to the risk of overexposure to radioactivity.94 The current environmental andhealth debates that are restricting Canadian, Australian and Indian uranium minesare seen by some mining chambers and government officials in Africa as anopportunity for African uranium supplies to fill the void.95 Should AfricaIndiannuclear cooperation be normalised, uranium mining and trade must meet the criteriaof contributing to the Pelindaba Treaty’s spirit of promoting human and environ-mental security, as well as socio-economic development, in the framework of a post-colonial consciousness. African states have an obligation to set standards to preventthe negative impacts of uranium mining.ConclusionNo single African or AU position on the normalisation of nuclear relations withIndia can be discerned. There was initial political support for normalising nuclearrelations with India (except from Egypt) driven by potential economic andtechnological benefits of such support. This pragmatic approach was also informedby the notion that if other states (the United States, France, Canada, and more)are benefitting from the NSG’s India waiver, African states might as well. However,non-proliferation imperatives as codified in the Pelindaba Treaty and national lawsconstrain the normalisation of nuclear trade with India. This article has also arguedthat a post-colonial consciousness (Africa’s historical relationship with India, NAMties, SouthSouth cooperation) frames the balancing act of these two sets of factors(economic pragmatism and non-proliferation imperatives). For Niger, for example,nuclear cooperation with India means reducing its former colonial master’shegemony over its uranium sector, letting the weight fall in favour of economicpragmatism. For Egypt, on the other hand, resisting the normalisation of nuclearrelations with India signifies caution that bending the rules for India may become aprecedent to bend the rules for Israel * an untenable scenario that would becounterproductive to efforts for a Middle East NWFZ. In Egypt’s case, the weightthus falls on non-proliferation imperatives. For South Africa, support for India in332 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 the NSG means alignment with emerging powers, but by not legalising SouthAfrican uranium exports to India, Pretoria suggests sensitivity toward a NAMposition deeply influenced by Egypt’s concerns. Thus, it seems South Africa’s is ahung position.The findings of this analysis also warrant three more critical conclusions.Firstly, Egypt’s dual geopolitical location in the Middle East and Africa bringsMiddle Eastern geopolitics to bear on African international relations. This is clearlyillustrated by the weight that Egypt’s position has had on African states’ politicalsupport for India on the nuclear issue. Secondly, although it has been argued that apost-colonial consciousness impacts on the position of African states, India andAfrican states do not necessarily agree on what it means to be post-colonial. Indiachose to remain outside the NPT because it viewed the NPT as a form of nuclearapartheid that institutionalised a discriminatory nuclear order. India’s incarnation ofpost-colonialism after the Cold War increasingly seems to reflect joining the club ofthe powerful, rather than being the leader of the ‘weak’. This sense of India’s rightfulplace at ‘the table’ drives the pursuit to become a recognised nuclear weapon state.In sharp contradiction, the joint NAM declaration at the NPT Review Conference in2010 makes it clear that enlarging the club of ‘nuclear haves’ does not solve theproblem of an unfair nuclear order.Finally, in the light of India’s interpretation of post-colonialism, the article endswith a cautionary note that it would be in the interest of African leaders to movebeyond a romanticised notion of a common non-aligned identity with India, anddevelop a comprehensive understanding of the health, environmental and economicimplications of increased uranium mining and exports to India, before they enterinto agreements with India. If signatories to the Pelindaba Treaty see fit to evade theexplicit prohibition on trade with non-nuclear weapon states (which India remainsper the NPT definition) without an IAEA comprehensive safeguard agreement,the treaty’s emphasis on human security should, at least, be taken seriously.Notes on contributorJoelien Pretorius is a senior lecturer in International Relations in the Department of PoliticalStudies at the University of the Western Cape. She is also a member of the South AfricanPugwash branch. This article benefitted from research funded by the National ResearchFoundation and was originally presented at the Second Conference on the India-United StatesNuclear Cooperation Agreement at the University of Reading School of Law on 16 and 17September 2010.Notes1. The following sources provide a good overview of the key debates in the ‘normsliterature’: Axelrod R, ‘An evolutionary approach to norms’, The American PoliticalScience Review, 80, 4, December 1986, pp. 1095111; Finnemore M & K Sikkink,‘International norm dynamics and political change’, International Organization, 52, 4,Autumn 1998, pp. 887917; and Florini A, ‘The evolution of international norms’,International Studies Quarterly, 40, 3, Special Issue: Evolutionary Paradigms in the SocialSciences, September 1996, pp. 36389.2. See e.g. Southall R & H Melber (eds), The New Scramble for Africa: Imperialism,Investment and Development in Africa. Pietermaritzburg: UKZN Press, 2009;Schoeman M, ‘China and Africa: The rise of hegemony?’, Strategic Review for SouthernAfrica, 29, 2, 2007, pp. 4797; and Zakaria F, ‘Does the future belong to China?’,South African Journal of International Affairs 333Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 Newsweek.com, 9 May 2005,Bhttp://www.newsweek.com/2005/05/08/does-the-future-belong-to-china.html.3. Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, London/Moscow/Washington,DC, 1 July 1968.4. See e.g. United States Congress, The US Atomic Energy Act USC 2153 (1954).5. See IAEA, ‘The Safeguards System of the International Atomic Energy Agency’,Bhttp://www.iaea.org/OurWork/SV/Safeguards/documents/safeg_system.pdf.6. This is also the reason why these states, although they are de facto nuclear weapon states,cannot join the NPT as nuclear weapon states, but are required to give up their nuclearweapons and join the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states.7. Krepon M, ‘Looking back: The 1998 India and Pakistani nuclear tests’, Arms ControlToday, May 2008,Bhttp://www.armscontrol.org/act/2008_05/lookingback; for anoverview of the domestic debate in India on nuclear weapons, see Weiss L, ‘India andthe NPT’, Strategic Analysis, 34, 2, March 2010, pp. 25571, at p. 259.8. Bunn G & RM Timerbaev, ‘Security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon states’,The Nonproliferation Review, 1, 1, Fall 1993, pp. 1121, at p. 12.9. Weiss L, ‘India and the NPT’, Strategic Analysis, 34, 2, March 2010, pp. 25571,at p. 265; see also: International Court of Justice, ‘Indian written statement submittedto the International Court of Justice on ‘‘WHO’s Request for an Advisory Opinionof the International Court of Justice on Legality of Nuclear Weapons in ArmedConflict’’’, 20 June 1995,Bhttp://www.icj-cij.org/docket/files/95/8688.pdf.10. Suryanarayan V, ‘Reflections on India’s nuclear policy during the Nehru era’, South AsiaAnalysis Group, 10 March 2010,Bhttp://www.southasiaanalysis.org/%5Cpapers38%5Cpaper3711.html.11. Ghengappa R, Weapons of Peace: The Secret Story of India’s Quest to be a NuclearPower. New Delhi: Harper Collins, 2000, p. 113.12. ‘PM rejects charges that N-bill would benefit US companies’, BusinessGhana, 30 August2010, Bhttp://www.businessghana.com/portal/news/index.php?opgetNewsid134510.13. Rahman G, ‘Welcome to the nuclear club, India’, Financial Times, 22 September2008, Bhttp://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/3643cb9e-88b9-11dd-a179-0000779fd18c.html#axzz1T0lVjdR2.14. Fidler DP & S Ganguly, ‘India wants to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a weaponstate’, YaleGlobal, 27 January 2010,Bhttp://yaleglobal.yale.edu/content/india-wants-join-non-proliferation-treaty.15. Weiss L, ‘India and the NPT’, Strategic Analysis, 34, 2, March 2010, pp. 25571, atp. 265.16. Joyner DH, Interpreting the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress, 2011, p. 71; Pant HV, ‘The USIndia nuclear deal: The beginning of a beautifulrelationship?’ Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 20, 3, September 2007, pp.45572 at p. 457.17. Israel is accused of cooperating with apartheid South Africa, North Korea with Libyaand Pakistan through the AQ Khan network with among others, Al Qaida. SeePolakow-Suransky S, The Unspoken Alliance: Israel’s Secret Relationship withApartheid South Africa. Cape Town: Jacana, 2010, pp. 11853; Fitzpatrick M,Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A Q Khan and the Rise of Proliferation Networks.London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2007; Albright D & C Hinderstein,‘Unraveling the A. Q. Khan and future proliferation networks’, The WashingtonQuarterly, 28, 2, 2005, pp. 11128.18. Lall M, ‘India’s new foreign policy * the journey from moral nonalignment to thenuclear deal’, in Lall M (ed.), The Geopolitics of Energy in South Asia. Singapore:ISEAS, 2008,Bhttp://asiasociety.org/files/marielall_nucleardeal.pdf.19. Mattoo, A, India’s nuclear deterrent: Pokhran II and beyond, New Delhi, Haranand,1999 at 18; Weiss L, ‘India and the NPT’, Strategic Analysis, 34, 2, March 2010, pp. 25571.20. Lall M, ‘India’s new foreign policy * the journey from moral nonalignment to thenuclear deal’, in Lall M (ed.), The Geopolitics of Energy in South Asia. Singapore: ISEAS,2008,Bhttp://asiasociety.org/files/marielall_nucleardeal.pdf.334 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 21. Williamson J, ‘The rise of the Indian Economy’, American Diplomacy. org, 11 May 2006,Bhttp://www.unc.edu/depts/diplomat/item/2006/0406/will/williamson_india.html.22. Lall M, ‘India’s new foreign policy * the journey from moral nonalignment to thenuclear deal’, in Lall M (ed.), The Geopolitics of Energy in South Asia. Singapore:ISEAS, 2008,Bhttp://asiasociety.org/files/marielall_nucleardeal.pdf.23. SeeBhttp://www.nuclearsuppliersgroup.org/Leng/03-member.htm for a list of NSGmember states.24. Minty A, ‘Chair’s opening remarks’, international seminar on the Role of ExportControls in Nuclear Non-proliferation, Vienna, Austria, 78 October 1997, p. 6,Bhttp://www.nuclearsuppliersgroup.org/Leng/PDF/SeminarControl1.pdf.25. Defined by the IAEA as ‘items that can make a major contribution to an unsafeguardednuclear fuel cycle or nuclear explosive activity, but which have non-nuclear uses aswell, for example in industry’. See: NSG, ‘What are the guidelines?’ (INFCIRC/254,Part 2),Bhttp://www.nuclearsuppliersgroup.org/guide.htm.26. See: IAEA, INFCIRC/254/Rev.8/Part 1a, 2006,Bhttp://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Infcircs/2006/infcirc254r8p1.pdf, for the NSG’s guidelines for the ex-port of nuclear material. On 24 June 2011, the NSG announced that it had agreedto strengthen its guidelines for the transfer of sensitive enrichment and reprocess-ing technologies. The new text of the guidelines is availableBhttp://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Infcircs/2011/infcirc254r10p1.pdf; for a preliminary analysison how the new guidelines might affect normalisation of nuclear trade with India, seeHorner D, ‘NSG revises rules on sensitive exports’, Arms Control Association, 5 July2011, Bhttp://www.armscontrol.org/20110627/NSG_Revises_Rules_on_Sensitive_Exports.See also: ‘NSG public statement, Nuclear Suppliers Group Plenary, Noordwijk, theNetherlands, 2324 June 2011’,Bhttp://www.nuclearsuppliersgroup.org/Leng/PRESS/2011-06-Public%20statement%202011%20NSG%20v7%20-%20final.pdf.27. Sasikumar K, ‘India’s emergence as a ‘‘responsible’’ nuclear power’, InternationalJournal, Fall 2007,Bhttp://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_6990/is_200710/ai_n32256973/?tagcontent;col1.28. See: ‘Joint statement between President George W. Bush and Prime Minister ManmohanSingh’, 18 July 2005,Bhttp://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2005/07/20050718-6.html.29. VandeHei J & D Linzer, ‘U. S., India reach deal on nuclear cooperation’, WashingtonPost, 3 March 2006,Bhttp://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/03/02/AR2006030200183.html.30. IAEA, ‘Agreement between the Government of India and the International AtomicEnergy Agency for the application of safeguards to civilian nuclear facilities’, IAEAInformation Circular, 29 May 2009,Bhttp://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Infcircs/2009/infcirc754.pdf.31. Kimball DG, F McGoldrick L Scheinman, ‘IAEAIndian nuclear safeguards agreement:A critical analysis’, Arms Control Association, 30 July 2008,Bhttp://www.armscontrol.org/node/3205.32. Pretorius J, ‘The nuclear non-proliferation norm and the 123 agreement’, Indian Journalof International Law (forthcoming).33. Wilson N M Martin, ‘The USIndia nuclear cooperation agreement: Issues for theNuclear Suppliers Group’, Policy Dialogue Brief, Stanley Foundation, 24 April2006,Bhttp://www.stanleyfoundation.org/publications/pdb/pdb06india.pdf.34. ‘Nuclear power in India’, World Nuclear Association, July 2011,Bhttp://www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf53.html.35. Gopalakrishnan A, ‘Indo-US nuclear cooperation: A nonstarter?’, Economic andPolitical Weekly, 40, 27, 28 July 2005, pp. 293540.36. Ramana MV, ‘Nuclear power in India: Failed past, dubious future’, Non-ProliferationPolicy Education Centre, 21 August 2006,Bhttp://www.npolicy.org/userfiles/image/Nuclear%20Power%20in%20India-Failed%20Past,%20Dubious%20Future_pdf.pdf.37. Pearson NO, ‘Indian uranium need to grow 10-fold by 2020, nuclear powersays’, Bloomberg.com, 21 December 2009,Bhttp://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid20601091sida9rxPLKedAPs#.South African Journal of International Affairs 335Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 38. In July 2011 the Atomic Energy Commission of India announced a major find ofuranium ore. It is too early to say how this find will impact on the analysis in this section.39. Nyimbona P, ‘Regional energy cooperation and integration in Africa: Challengesand opportunities’, presented by the UN Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)to the IAEA Meeting on Comprehensive Energy Planning Vienna, Austria, 30October3 November 2006,Bhttp://www-tc.iaea.org/tcweb/abouttc/strategy/Thematic/pdf/presentations/energysystemplanning/Reg_Energy-Challenges_Opportunities.pdf.40. Ibid.41. These states have since signed or are considering signing bilateral nuclear cooperationdeals with India that would allow uranium sales to India. See e.g. Jain A, ‘N-deal withIndia: Canada beats US in Toronto’, Rediff India Abroad, 17 January 2009,Bhttp://www.rediff.com//news/2009/jan/17ndeal-with-india-canada-beats-us.htm; Singh G, ‘After n-deal, Canadian uranium supplier sets up India office’, Business News, 2 December2009,Bhttp://blog.taragana.com/business/2009/12/02/after-n-deal-canadian-uranium-supplier-sets-up-india-office-5553/; ‘Uranium exports to India by Australia on cards’,The Times of India, 16 December 2009,Bhttp://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Uranium-exports-to-India-by-Australia-on-cards/articleshow/5342421.cms.42. Bagla P, ‘Indian firm acquires uranium mining rights in Niger’, The Hindu, 19 August2007,Bhttp://www.wise-uranium.org/upin.html. URL does not link to article givenhere, please check43. Hilal K & AP Williams, as cited in ’United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540Database: Sub-Saharan Africa’, Nuclear Threat Initiative, April 2011, Bhttp://www.nti.org/db/1540/region_subsahara.html>.44. Ramachandran R, ‘India to tap uranium-rich Africa for fuel’, The Asian Age, 5 February2008.45. ‘India, Namibia sign uranium supply deal’, Thaindian News, 31 August 2009,Bhttp://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/business/india-namibia-sign-uranium-supply-deal_100240902.html#ixzz0hWmPViKD.46. Mitra D, ‘Malawi, India signs three deals, show interest in joint uranium exploration’,Thaindian News, 8 January 2010, Bhttp://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/world-news/malawi-india-signs-three-deals-show-interest-in-joint-uranium-exploration-lead_100301054.html.47. Obiko Pearson N, ‘Indian uranium need to grow 10-fold by 2020, nuclear powersays’, Bloomberg, 21 December 2009, Bhttp://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid20601091sida9rxPLKedAPs.48. Sasi A, ‘Areva offers stake to NPCIL in African uranium mines’, The Hindu Busi-ness Line, 26 July 2009, Bhttp://www.thehindubusinessline.com/2009/07/26/stories/2009072651160100.htm.49. Vail J, ‘Why does fungibility matter (and where did it go)?’, Energy Bulletin, 27 October2008,Bhttp://www.energybulletin.net/node/47019.50. Sud H, ‘India’s quest for uranium’, UPI Asia.com, 9 October 2009,Bhttp://www.upiasia.com/Economics/2009/10/09/indias_quest_for_uranium/4071/.51. Gordon S, ‘Implications of the sale of Australian uranium to India’, Strategic andDefence Studies Centre Working Paper 410, September 2008, p. 7.52. African Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, Cairo, 11 April 1996. For the text of thePelindaba Treaty see: UN General Assembly document A/50/426, electronically avail-able from the IAEA website,Bhttp://www.iaea.org/About/Policy/GC/GC40/Documents/pelindab.html.53. It is difficult to use other NWFZ Treaties as precedents for the role that the PelindabaTreaty should play to guide African states’ position on India. The Rarotonga Treatycreates the South Pacific NWFZ and outlaws nuclear cooperation with non-NPT states.Member states of this Treaty have up to now treated the treaty as superseding the NSGwaiver, thus choosing not to support nuclear cooperation with India. However,Australia’s centre-right coalition of parties has indicated a willingness to overturn thisposition and export uranium to India, see: WISE Uranium Project, ‘Regulatory issues:Australia’, 2010,Bhttp://www.wise-uranium.org/uregaus.html.54. United Nations, ‘Consideration of Africa as denuclearized zone’, United NationsGeneral Assembly resolution 1652(XVI), 24 November 1961.336 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 55. [AHG/Res. II(I)] In 2002 the OAU transformed to African Union (AU) when theConstitutive Act (2000) of the AU entered into force. See Badejo D, The African Union.New York: Chelsea House, 2008.56. Polakow-Suransky S, The Unspoken Alliance: Israel’s Secret Relationship with ApartheidSouth Africa. Cape Town: Jacana, 2010.57. ‘Good guys, bad guys: Interview with Pik Botha’, CNN.com-Cold War, 14 February1999,Bhttp://www.gwu.edu/nsarchiv/coldwar/interviews/episode-17/botha1.html.58. Pelindaba is the place where the uranium enrichment process for South Africa’s nuclearweapons was developed and in Zulu means ‘the issue is settled’.59. Olunyeni Adeniji, former Nigerian foreign minister and chief draftsman of the Pelin-daba Treaty, wrote an authoritative commentary on the negotiation process of thetreaty. See: Adeniji O, ‘The Treaty of Pelindaba on the African-Nuclear-WeaponsFree-Zone’, United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, UNIDIR/2002/16,2002.60. For a timeline of events from 1960 to 2008 related to the ANWFZ, see Stott N & A duRand, ‘The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty: Abrief guide to the PelindabaTreaty and the process of ratification’, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria, 2008,pp. 23.61. By October 2010, states that have signed and ratified the treaty include: Algeria, Benin,Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania,Togo, Tunisia, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Cameroon. States that have signed, but not ratifiedthe treaty are: Angola, Central African Republic, Cape Verde, Chad, Comoros, Republicof the Congo, Djibouti, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Namibia, Niger, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sa˜o Tome´ andPrı´ncipe, Sudan and Uganda.62. Horovitz L, ‘With Pelindaba, the Southern Hemisphere is free of nuclear weapons*challenges and opportunities ahead’, James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies,12 August 2009,Bhttp://cns.miis.edu/stories/090812_africa_nwfz.htm.63. Mian Z, ‘India’s search for African uranium may conflict with African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty’, International Panel on Fissile Materials, 27 March 2008,Bhttp://www.fissilematerials.org/ipfm/pages_us_en/blog/blog/blog.php?onepost1post_id7.64. This interpretation was proffered at a workshop hosted by the Institute for SecurityStudies titled ‘Beyond Entry-into-Force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free ZoneTreaty: Establishing the African Commission on Nuclear Energy’, Pretoria, SouthAfrica, 1819 March 2010. The workshop was a high profile meeting of Africandiplomats working in the area of nuclear non-proliferation with some civil societyorganisations and was held under Chatham House rules  hence the precise source of thisinterpretation cannot be attributed.65. Mian Z, ‘India’s search for African uranium may conflict with African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty’, 27 March 2008,Bhttp://www.fissilematerials.org/ipfm/pages_us_en/blog/blog/blog.php?onepost1post_id7.66. African Union, ‘Information note on the African Nuclear Weapon Free ZoneTreaty (Treaty of Pelindaba)’, Peace and Security Council, 53rd Meeting, 31 May2006, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, p. 4,Bhttp://www.iss.co.za/uploads/53NOTE.PDF.67. Ibid.68. Taken together the Treaty of Tlatelolco (Latin America), Rarotonga (the South Pacific),Bangkok (South-East Asia), the Antarctic Treaty, and the Pelindaba Treaty (Africa)covers the Southern Hemisphere. Despite the fact that not all nuclear weapon states havesigned the protocols to these treaties or that their nuclear armed patrol ships still enterseas below the equator, Brazil proposed a draft resolution on a ‘Nuclear Weapons FreeSouthern Hemisphere and Adjacent Areas’ at the 51st session of the UNGA, which wasapproved.69. African Union, ‘Information note on the African Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaty(Treaty of Pelindaba)’, Peace and Security Council, 53rd Meeting, 31 May 2006, AddisAbaba, Ethiopia, p. 4,Bhttp://www.iss.co.za/uploads/53NOTE.PDF.South African Journal of International Affairs 337Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 70. Bloomfield J & PND Meidell, ‘Nuclear weapons free zones: The untold success story ofnuclear disarmament and non-proliferation’, Atomic Mirror Briefing Paper, 2005,p. 1,Bwww.reachingcriticalwill.org/political/nwfz/atommirror.doc.71. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Human Development Report 1994,p. 24, Bhttp://hdr.undp.org/en/media/hdr_1994_en_chap2.pdf.72. Pelindaba Treaty 1996 Preamble.73. Labbe A, ‘Statement on behalf of the parties and signatories that establish nuclearweapons free zones and Mongolia’, delivered at the 2010 NPT Review Conference, 5May 2010, p. 5.74. ‘African Regional Cooperative Agreement for Research, Development (AFRA)’,Department of International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa,Bhttp://www.dfa.gov.za/foreign/Multilateral/africa/afra.htm.75. Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, London/Moscow/Washington,DC, 1 July 1968, Article 4.76. The author has come to this conclusion after discussions with members of theDepartment of International Relations and Cooperation as well as through observationduring the Institute for Security Studies workshop on the Pelindaba Treaty referred to inan earlier footnote.77. Ramana S, ‘On Indo-African nuclear trade facilitation’, Institute of Peace and ConflictStudies, No 3387, 27 May 2011, accessed 24 July 2011,Bhttp://www.ipcs.org/article/india/on-indo-african-nuclear-trade-facilitation-3387.html.78. Pretorius J, ‘Nuclear hawk to nuclear dove: South Africa’s unique reversal’, paperpresented at the 50th Pugwash Conference on Science and World Affairs, Cambridge,UK, 18 August 2000.79. Minty A, The Nuclear Debate: Proceedings of the Conference on Nuclear Policy fora Democratic South Africa held on 11 to 13 February 1994. Cape Town: Environ-mental Monitoring Group and the Western Cape ANC Science and Technology Group,1994.80. Burgess SF, ‘South Africa from the perspective of WMD supply networks: Indicationsand warning implications’, Strategic Insights, 6, 5, August 2007; Leith R & J Pretorius,‘Eroding the middle ground: The shift in foreign policy underpinning South Africannuclear diplomacy’, Politikon, 36, 3, 2009, pp. 34561.81. ‘Boucher: IBSA’s nod of Indo-US nuclear deal significant’, IndianExpress, 16 September2006,Bhttp://www.indianexpress.com/news/boucher-ibsas-nod-of-indous-nuclear-deal/12776/.82. Campbell K, ‘New nuclear angle to IBSA talks’, EngineeringNews, 19 July 2007,Bwww.engineeringnews.co.za/article/new-nuclear-angle-to-ibsa-talks-2007-07-19.83. Sharma A, ‘India and Africa: Partnership in the 21st century’, South African Journal ofInternational Affairs, 14, 2, 2007, p. 14.84. Spivak GC & S Harasyn, The Post-Colonial Critic:Interviews, Strategies, Dialogues.London & New York: Routledge, 1990.85. African Union, ‘Second AfricaIndia Forum Summit 2011 Addis Ababa Declaration’,2011, Bhttp://www.au.int/en/summit/africaindia/news/second-africa-india-forum-summit-2011-addis-ababa-declaration.86. Lall M, ‘India’s new foreign policy  the journey from moral nonalignment to the nucleardeal’ in Lall, M (ed), The Geopolitics Of Energy In South Asia, Singapore: ISEAS, 2008,Bhttp://asiasociety.org/files/marielall_nucleardeal.pdf.87. Partasarathy G, ‘The relevance of being ‘‘non-aligned’’ and the irrelevance of NAM’,TheHindu Business Line, 26 July 2007,Bhttp://www.thehindubusinessline.com/2007/07/26/stories/2007072650160800.htm.88. Saint-Me´zard I, ‘India and Israel: An unlikely alliance’, LeMonde Diplomatique,November 2010,Bhttp://mondediplo.com/2010/11/11indiaisrael.89. Non-Aligned Movement, ‘Statement by H.E. Mr. R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa, Ministerof Foreign Affairs of Indonesia (on behalf of the NAM states parties) to the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty (NPT) before the 2010 Review Conference ofthe parties to the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty’, 3 May 2010,Bhttp://www.un.org/en/conf/npt/2010/statements/pdf/nam_en.pdf.338 J PretoriusDownloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 90. For an outline of this argument see Southall R & H Melber (eds), The New Scramble forAfrica: Imperialism, Investment and Development in Africa. Durban: UKZN Press, 2009.91. ‘The African trading relationship with India’, Trade Law Centre for Southern Africa(TRALAC), 2009, Bhttp://www.givengain.com/unique/tralac/pdf/20070717_TheAfricanTradingRelationshipwithindia.pdf; Broadman HG, Africa’s Silk Road: China andIndia’s new economic frontier, Washington: The World Bank, 2007, at 121123..92. Reinert ES, How Rich Countries Got Rich and Why Poor Countries Stay Poor. London:Constable & Robinson, 2007.93. See for example Robinson JA, R Torvik & T Verdier ‘Political foundations of theresource curse’, Journal of Development Economics, 79, 2006, pp. 44768.94. Hecht G, ‘Africa and the nuclear world: Labor, occupational health, and thetransnational production of uranium’, Comparative Studies in Society and History, 51,4, 2009, pp. 896926; Hecht G, ‘Nuclear ontologies’ Constellations, 13, 3,September2006, pp. 32031; Hecht G, ‘Negotiating global nuclearities: Apartheid, decolonization,and the Cold War in the making of the IAEA’, in Krige J & K Barth (eds), ‘Globalpower knowledge: Science, technology, and international affairs’, Osiris 21, July 2006,pp. 2548.95. Ruffini A, ‘Uranium plays in Africa: African uranium miners plan to meet growingworld demand for nuclear energy’, Engineering and Mining Journal, December 2009,pp. 7678.South African Journal of International Affairs 339Downloaded by [University of Western Cape], [Joelien Pretorius] at 01:57 22 February 2012 