ABSTRACT: 
Social systems structures stem from underlying paradigms that are made up of beliefs, perspectives, and assumptions. Changing paradigms is a powerful way to change social systems. Such change is difficult and old paradigms keep pulling systems back to their former state. This article examines three types of partnerships that focus on these deep structures and paradigms, and that go beyond implementing a project or initiative to create fundamental, lasting change in the underlying beliefs, perspectives, and assumptions on which such systems are grounded. The functions of each type – project focused, formal-systems-focused, and community-grounded partnerships – are identified, along with the ways each partnership maintains attention to paradigms and systems thinking. The configuration suggests ways for funders and initiative and organizational leaders to enrich their capacity to bring about systemic change within communities. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article offers a partnership partnership based on three types of partnerships that focus on the deep structures and paradigms that shape social systems. The configuration provides funders, initiative leaders, and institutions with ideas on adjusting existing partnerships and creating new ones to enrich their capacity to bring about systemic change within communities. We conclude with consultations that funders and leaders can take to stimulate partnerships committed to deep systemic change. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 doi: 10.9707/1944-5660.129640 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgTOOLSInventory (Mattessich, et al., 2004) assesses part-nerships on these and other elements. Kania & Kramer (2011) have posited five conditions – common agenda, shared measurement systems, mutually reinforcing activities, continuous com-munication, and backbone support organizations – necessary for collective impact to gain signifi-cant results. As valuable as these conditions and frameworks are, they do not necessarily reach the deep systemic structures that bring about fundamental social-system change. In this article, we offer a partnership configu-ration with three types of partnerships that focus on the deep structures and paradigms that shape social systems. The configuration provides funders, initiative leaders, and organi-zational leaders with ideas on adjusting existing partnerships and creating new ones to enrich their capacity to bring about systemic change within communities. We conclude with con-crete actions that funders and leaders can take to stimulate partnerships committed to deep systemic change.The basic argument for partnerships is well known. Complex issues, such as prevention of child neglect and abuse, involve more than one organization or service system. Typically, each of those (e.g., health, education, social services) is looking at only one piece of the big issue. But for individuals, families, and communities, these issues are not divided into discrete parts – they are part of a whole and interconnected life. When different organizations address different aspects of an issue in a segmented and segregated way, the issue is not seen as holistic and change efforts are often ineffective. By joining in part-nership, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, funders, businesses, and stakeholders can seek to create a synergy where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.We recently evaluated a national initiative that sought to address child abuse and neglect by changing the underlying paradigm. The initia-tive focused on the interaction between ser-vice providers and parents and the ways that the structure of social systems supported that interaction at community and state levels. The initiative included partnerships as well as evidence-based practice models. This evalua-tion, coupled with our past experiences, gave us deeper insight into the significance and chal-lenges of changing the underlying beliefs, per-spectives, and assumptions on which social systems are based. To get partnerships to attend to paradigm shifts, we saw that they needed to be designed in a way that keeps the focus on the connection between the paradigm and the struc-tures of the social systems. Partnerships alone are unlikely to create a para-digm shift. If intentionally designed to support a paradigm shift, however, they can be a powerful component of the change process. Partnerships that use systems thinking and recognize the importance of changing an underlying paradigm: • Provide a place for collective, critical reflec-tion on the often-unstated beliefs, per-spectives, and assumptions that underlie individual and organizational actions.• Consider concretely how these beliefs, per-spectives, and assumptions play out in lan-guage, interactions, and relationships. • Recognize the interconnections and the need for coherence across the social domains of individuals, families, organizations, agencies, and the community. ... imagine partnerships that go beyond implementing a project or initiative to creating fundamental change in social systems. By fundamental change, we mean a change in the underlying beliefs, perspectives, and assumptions on which the systems are grounded.Jessup, Parsons, and MooreThe Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8:2 41TOOLS• Reground communities in their core values. • Take action to reconfigure social systems to align with and support the desired values of the community.These partnerships are structured with care-ful attention to both their position within the local web of system structures and the systemic implications of a paradigm shift. Failing to so structure the partnership can result in one that is locked in the past or stuck with superficial changes, rather than one engaged in addressing the consequences of changes in demographic, technological, environmental, and economic conditions. Many of these social changes call into question the boundaries of formal sys-tems such as health, education, and criminal justice. Existing boundaries can limit interac-tions among people involved in these systems. Accommodating the existing boundaries may cause partnerships to focus on immediate symp-toms rather than dealing with underlying funda-mental beliefs, perspectives, or assumptions that perpetuate the issues.Three Types of Partnerships Focused on a Paradigm ShiftWe suggest that partnerships that contribute to changing underlying paradigms be attuned to the desires of those partners that will be central actors in the paradigm shift. These members need to be guiding the partnership: they lead the changes with support and assistance from other partners. Our experiences led us to distinguish three types of partnerships, based on their focus: project-focused partnerships, formal-systems-focused partnerships, and community-grounded partner-ships. The makeup of each type differs according to the structures or interconnections the partner-ship aims to address. The type of stakeholders may be the same in each partnership, but differ-ent concentrations of stakeholders or different people (e.g., service providers, clients, executives) represent the same organization. Any of these partnerships may be functioning at a given time. Just as organizations work together in a part-nership, partnerships engage in networking. They leverage one another’s work to affect the complex web of social systems. One evalua-tion referred to these partnership networks as a “partnet” (Parsons, Hammond, & Lupe, 1998). Working together to bring about change, part-nerships adapt to one another; to their varying focuses, roles, and functions; and to the changing conditions in the community. The three types of partnerships help provide a balance between the formal and informal structures of the commu-nity. In its own way, each type can help keep the focus on the deep values of the paradigm. For each type of partnership, we identify the functions and roles of the partnership and the ways the partnership maintains attention to par-adigms and systems thinking. We will use exam-ples from the child-abuse initiative for which we served as cross-site evaluators.1 In that initia-tive, three national organizations focused on the well-being of children and families were funded by the federal Children’s Bureau to develop and oversee an initiative in four locations across the U.S.2 We draw from this experience to illustrate how partnerships with different emphases take action that strengthens the paradigm shift in their locations. Partnerships alone are unlikely to create a paradigm shift. If intentionally designed to support a paradigm shift, however, they can be a powerful component of the change process. 1 See Parsons, Jessup, & Moore, 2014. 2 See The Journal of Zero to Three, September 2014, for additional information on this initiative. The theme of the issue is “Exploring New Paradigms for Evaluation and Service Delivery: The National Quality Improvement Center on Early Childhood.”Partnerships, Paradigms, and Social-System Change42 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgTOOLSEach site implemented a carefully designed research project in which service providers worked with individual parents and carried out an evaluation structured to assess changes for the parents. Each site’s project was based on the Protective Factors Framework (see sidebar) and was implemented with a different population: parents with low incomes served by a major hospital in a large city in the Northeast; parents of children with disabilities across a state in the South; pregnant women in substance-abuse treatment centers in the Midwest; and new parents involved in a home visitation program within a community-based support structure in the Northwest. The Protective Factors Framework points to five conditions that, when present in a family, pro-vide protection against the risks and stresses that are considered to increase the likelihood of child abuse and neglect. The framework shifts the focus of social systems from reducing risk factors related to child abuse and neglect as its underly-ing paradigm to one of supporting parents in building protective factors to encourage optimal child development even when families live in risky situations. This paradigm shift alters how service providers view families and how parents approach problems in their lives. This shift rip-ples through the complex landscape of multiple formal systems and the community as a whole. Because the Protective Factors Framework is an approach to working with parents based on a paradigm shift, and not a specific intervention, it can be implemented in conjunction with a variety of interventions. Each site was using an evidence-based practice (e.g., the High Fidelity Wraparound process) that had been previously tested in other situations. Each site was required to involve an existing partnership to support the work and to address changes needed in the larger social systems rel-evant to their work. The partnerships varied in structure, focus, and membership. The national initiative leaders required an existing partnership because they were well aware of the time it takes to develop a new partnership. And, partners that worked together previously had established the trusting relationships that would provide a foundation for more in-depth attention to the paradigm, and were in a position to connect to larger ways in which the Protective Factors Framework might be used to support the under-lying paradigm change in their organizations and community.Each site’s evaluators focused on parental-out-come data and project implementation at the par-ent and service-provider level. For the cross-site evaluation, we focused on the work of the part-nerships, did secondary analysis of the parental-outcomes data, and drew on theories of complex systems to look for patterns across sites. The Protective Factors Framework, developed by Strengthening Families at the Center for the Study of Social Policy (Brown, 2014), is an approach that expresses a paradigm shift. The shift is from service providers focusing on problems – risk factors – that families are facing to providing services to help support a family around specific protective factors that position them to address the problems in their own lives and to move through stressful times and circumstances with greater resilience. The five interconnected factors are: • parental resilience, • social connections, • knowledge of parenting and child development, • concrete support in times of need, and • social-emotional competence of children. There are multiple implications of this paradigm shift:• All families need these protective factors in their lives, not just those presenting with problems. • Families “own” the resources to face their difficulties. • Both risk and protective factors are embedded into complex, interconnected systems that families navigate across all aspects of their lives.Jessup, Parsons, and MooreProtective Factors FrameworkThe Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8:2 43TOOLSThroughout the remainder of this article, we draw on our findings and experiences with the partnerships within the initiative. The partner-ships did not specifically have each of the three types of partnerships that we describe here; rather, the configuration of these three types represents our interpretation of how to increase systemic change in support of a shift in an under-lying paradigm.Project-Focused PartnershipsFunctions and Roles Many initiatives funded by foundations involve implementing new ways of providing services and/or interacting with those being served to see if and how a particular project works in a given location. When a project involves more than one organization, a partnership is often needed to ensure that it can actually be carried out as designed. Too often, there is limited focus on the paradigm underlying the project; usu-ally the project is assumed to be congruent with the underlying paradigm or system structure. However, if a project is based on a shift in the underlying system paradigm, it is important to intentionally attend to the paradigm shift.Attention to Paradigms and Systems ThinkingA project-focused partnership that is grounded in systems thinking and contributing to a paradigm shift has the following characteristics:It supports project implementation while reinforcing the paradigm being addressed. Partners individually and collectively assist in ensuring that the proj-ect is implemented in a way that reinforces the fundamental change that the project is intended to address. In the work with pregnant women in substance-abuse treatment, a systemic shift away from the old paradigm of risk factors and toward the new paradigm of protective factors became possible as substance-abuse treatment workers and the state-level program director realized that reports to the state could be structured around the Protective Factors Framework. By using the framework, treatment providers would maintain a focus on protective factors and state leadership would tie accountability to protective factors. It helps project implementers adapt the work to their particular situations. The systemic context of the project cannot be ignored. In each of the four projects in our example, the partnership was attentive to the child welfare system and other systems in which their work was embedded. Partners in two sites needed a strong familiarity with the Early Intervention system that provides services for infants and toddlers with develop-mental delays or disabilities. One of these sites also needed knowledge of the substance-abuse treatment system represented among the part-ners. Another site needed familiarity with the local systems in place to help families deal with income and food insecurity. Understanding the project within these larger social systems helped partners consider which existing systems and structures that are close to the service providers – and, in our example, parents – might be influ-enced by the new paradigm. It also helped them consider whether they needed additional part-ners or access to additional perspectives.It increases support for the paradigm shift. The part-nership provides insight into ways that project implementers can increase support for the para-digm shift and adapt to changes being created by the project. By requiring training related to Because the Protective Factors Framework is an approach to working with parents based on a paradigm shift, and not a specific intervention, it can be implemented in conjunction with a variety of interventions. Each site was using an evidence-based practice (e.g., the High Fidelity Wraparound process) that had been previously tested in other situations. Partnerships, Paradigms, and Social-System Change44 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgTOOLSthe Protective Factors Framework for the Early Interventionists who worked with parents of chil-dren with disabilities, a key partner helped ensure that the focus on the framework would continue. Partners worked through this important issue during, rather than after, project implementation, and agreed on adjustments in implementation and evaluation that increased the likelihood of a lasting change in Early Intervention training, a key system structure.It periodically reflects on the bigger purpose of the project. Throughout the project, the partnership formally reflects on both implementation and the paradigm that it is expected to support. It is important both to zoom in for a close look at the project and its implementation and to zoom out for a wider view of how the project work is fitting with the larger shift. In the annual site visits, the cross-site evaluation team and project director met with each partnership and asked questions to stimulate this reflection, such as: Are front-line workers adequately supported and trained to make the paradigm shift? What emerging issues must be addressed to support the shift? As change occurs, what is needed to sustain the paradigm shift for families, service providers, and their agencies? Each partnership also had other ways of doing such reflection.It thinks in new ways about sustainability. The partnership considers how the work fits into the community and the larger system. It also con-siders different approaches to adhering to the paradigm, such as embedding the principles of the project in other work. For example, one of the three national organizations refocused its training emphasis from the prevention of child abuse and neglect to the nurturing of child well-being. For one of the project sites, sustain-ability involved making the Protective Factors Framework the organizing framework around the partners’ collective work as well as much of the individual organization’s work. Thus, even though the funded initiative ended, the commit-ment to embed the framework into its collective service work in the community continued.Formal-Systems-Focused PartnershipsFunctions and Roles In our discussion of formal-systems-focused part-nerships, we are referring to partnerships that focus on making changes in extant norms, infra-structures, policies, and habitual practices within member organizations and within and across formal social agencies and organizations. Such partnerships focus on making changes in formal social systems, such as child welfare, edu-cation, and health, to support the new paradigm. The partners recognize that key organizational norms, infrastructures, policies, and habitual practices are not in tune with the new paradigm. Partners attend to changes in both their own organizations and the boundaries between and interconnections among organizations. Formal-systems-focused partnerships are often the hardest type to keep focused on the para-digm shift, because making the shift is likely to alter the power dynamics in and among organi-zations. If the paradigm is indeed fundamental, there are multiple places and ways in which the existing paradigm has been woven into the fabric and infrastructure within and across organiza-tions. Shifting a paradigm can make both obvi-ous and subtle changes in how – and by whom – power is wielded. Certain systems, groups, or roles are privileged; changes can affect which Throughout the project, the partnership formally reflects on both implementation and the paradigm that it is expected to support. It is important both to zoom in for a close look at the project and its implementation and to zoom out for a wider view of how the project work is fitting with the larger shift.Jessup, Parsons, and MooreThe Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8:2 45TOOLSones are privileged. Also, shifting to a new para-digm may involve changes in organizational boundaries – certain activities, for example, may need to be shifted to or from organizations. Rules, practices, and roles shape people’s sense of identity. Sometimes rules and regulations have been in place for so long that people don’t realize change is an option. The new paradigm may require shifts in ways that may be surpris-ingly hard for people to recognize and adjust to because of the link to their sense of identity.Attention to Paradigms and Systems ThinkingA formal-systems-focused partnership that is grounded in systemic thinking and contribut-ing to the paradigm shift has the following characteristics: It includes members with influence in their own organizations and their partner organizations. Partnership members are politically positioned to help apply the paradigm shift to their organi-zations. The partnership includes a combination of formal leaders and informal opinion leaders who are well regarded in their own organiza-tions (although not necessarily at the highest level of the organization) and know how to influ-ence and use both informal and formal connec-tions within their organizations. These partners maintain conversations with essential parties from within their own organization – not only top leaders or service providers, but also those in the middle of the organization, where infrastruc-ture gridlock is most likely to occur.It pays attention to partners’ home organizations and the larger system. Members are included in the partnership because of their own or their organi-zation’s connection to the paradigm shift and the possible role they or their organization can play. As partners deepen their understanding of the paradigm shift, they bring it back to their home organizations and deepen the understanding of the new paradigm there and what it means to operate from it, including the implications of the shift for organizational personnel and policies. For example, additional training or a realloca-tion of resources may be needed. Partners also recognize that the partnership is bigger than the individual organizations. They zoom out to the larger system and consider what changes (e.g., in policy) are needed to support the new paradigm across their organizations. It stays connected to practice. The partnership stays connected with those who are experiencing the changes in practice based on the new paradigm (e.g., providers and parents). The partnership attends to what actually is changing and what is not, how easy or difficult the changes are to make, what the consequences of these changes are, and what organizational conditions they and their partners can address to support rather than interfere with the desired paradigm shifts. At one site, service providers involved in the project talked in depth with the formal-systems-focused partners about the amount of help they needed from the specially trained supervisors. The ser-vice providers wanted help in recognizing when they were using their habitual ways of interact-ing with parents rather than the new approaches embedded in the Protective Factors Framework.It practices applying the paradigm shift to sys-tem structures. In dialogue, partners look at the interconnections of actions – a beginning aspect of deeper systems thinking – to under-stand the impact across the organizations or systems. Partners play out how shifts in the paradigm connect to other aspects of the part-nership, organizations, and broader situation. For example, they hypothesize what changes in partner organizations would be needed to sup-port the new paradigm in a particular situation. Partnership members consider places to make changes in their own organizations in support Formal-systems-focused partnerships are often the hardest type to keep focused on the paradigm shift, because making the shift is likely to alter the power dynamics in and among organizations. Partnerships, Paradigms, and Social-System Change46 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgTOOLSof the paradigm shift in manageable ways that minimize disruptions but don’t compromise on the necessary changes. Because the changes in complex systems are embedded within a web of connections, it helped for partners to engage with other members who were often in simi-lar roles in different social systems and had a depth of understanding of the type of changes each faced. These conversations helped partners identify interconnections and work through practical issues.It addresses the power shifts embedded in the para-digm shift. Partners consider current power condi-tions within and across organizations, including who may be threatened by long-standing prac-tices and what changes might bolster trust. For example, a key organization in a partnership in our example served as an intermediary for ser-vice funding in early childhood. The organiza-tion also received direct-service money. In the next funding cycle, the organization decided not to compete with its partner organizations for the direct-service money. Instead, the organization chose to focus on its intermediary role, which it saw as especially important in the new configu-ration of relationships that was forming through the partnership in support of the new paradigm in the community. The organization’s decisions increased confidence within the partnership that serious systemic change was underway.It continually develops knowledge about the dynamics and conditions of social systems. The partnership continually learns about system dynamics and conditions of social systems in order to be able to expand ways of influencing social systems. It attends to local dynamics and conditions as well as occurrences in the larger system (e.g., state or federal policies) that support or undermine the paradigm. The partnership finds its place in the system by mapping the partnership and its organizations – zooming in for a close look at the partnership and existing interconnections, and zooming out to see where the partnership sits in the bigger picture. Partners become familiar with relationships, boundaries, and the history of organizations in the social system and how these are changing as a consequence of the paradigm shift. For example, the project located in the medical center had to consider how the work of the service provider in facilitating access to ser-vices could be sustained in light of health insur-ance limitations. It reflects, systemically. Ongoing reflection is essen-tial. The partnership members reflect on practi-cal areas (e.g., policies) where they can create support for or dampen interference within orga-nizations for moving into the new paradigm. At the site addressing families with children with disabilities, for example, the state agency responsible for disability services amended its memorandum of understanding with private Early Intervention agencies to require training in the Protective Factors Framework. This rela-tively small change increased the likelihood that all Early Interventionists would be familiar with the framework and be able to work with families from this perspective. To ensure that this change was sustained, however, it was important to for-malize it in organizational policies. Additionally, the partners needed to trace the ramifications of this change to see what else it was connected to in their organizations.The partnership continually learns about system dynamics and conditions of social systems in order to be able to expand ways of influencing social systems. It attends to local dynamics and conditions as well as occurrences in the larger system (e.g., state or federal policies) that support or undermine the paradigm. Jessup, Parsons, and MooreThe Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8:2 47TOOLSIt reframes. The partnership uses the knowledge gained to reframe and imagine other actions as potential next steps in operating from the new paradigm. As work moves forward, partners also reconsider the partnership in light of the bigger purpose, including what other voices need to be heard as the project proceeds. Reframing can also include taking on different roles, such as advocacy and capacity building. One site in our example began to use the Protective Factors Framework as a way to organize their responses to requests for proposals. As another site considered concrete needs in the community, the partners recognized that housing was not being addressed. They had to determine the feasibility of bringing housing representatives into the current partnership. Community-Grounded Partnerships Functions and Roles Partnerships all too often are made up of people from formal agencies and organizations, with few representatives of the community being “served.” The third type of partnership turns this on its head. A community-grounded partnership is largely made up of residents who represent the range of a community’s cultural groups. The partnership emerges from the present activism of residents who see a better way for their commu-nity, who are committed to rethinking the way it functions, and who want the systems within the community grounded in what the commu-nity values most – not what professionals think is best. The momentum for change comes from residents organizing and drawing on their cul-turally grounded community assets and collec-tive wisdom to address community concerns. Formal agencies and organizations do have a place in the partnership. Residents enter into stra-tegic alliances with agencies and organizations that respect community perspectives, support community organizing, and provide resources and expertise that they view as genuinely of ser-vice to the community. At any point in time the focus of the partnership might be on a particular issue (e.g., housing), but the partnership perspec-tive is one that respects and values all segments of the community in all of its complexity.Attention to Paradigms and Systems ThinkingA community-grounded partnership ensures that the interpretation of the paradigm shift is centrally congruent with the values and perspec-tives of the community. It is often facilitated by a largely resident-based organization, such as a neighborhood association or a group of faith-based organizations. It understands, articulates, and represents the diverse values, needs, and interests of the community. The partnership develops with community leader-ship and ensures involvement of the full range of Partnerships all too often are made up of people from formal agencies and organizations, with few representatives of the community being “served.” The third type of partnership turns this on its head. A community-grounded partnership is largely made up of residents who represent the range of a community’s cultural groups. The partnership emerges from the present activism of residents who see a better way for their community, who are committed to rethinking the way it functions, and who want the systems within the community grounded in what the community values most – not what professionals think is best.Partnerships, Paradigms, and Social-System Change48 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgTOOLSstakeholders in ways that keep central the com-munity’s interpretation of the paradigm. Rather than aiming for consensus and compromise, the partnership uses the community’s diversity to stimulate creativity and engagement as well as new ways to take action. The partnership seeks to determine how best to enhance the well-being of the community through appreciating the values, needs, and interests of all groups for the common good. The partnership includes people who have an understanding of and respect for all within the community. The membership is not necessarily proportionate to the number of peo-ple in a given group. For example, there may be few of a particular ethnicity or few with disabili-ties, but those in the partnership value diverse perspectives and ensure their inclusion. The partnership also seeks understanding of the dif-ferent cultures and norms that exist in the com-munity. The partnership looks for where values and interests are and are not shared, and works to find common interests on which to build (e.g., the well-being of children). Taking the perspec-tive of the residents, the partners seek to identify where specific actions by agencies and organiza-tions align or stray from community values and the desired paradigm. The partnership maintains a commitment to the diversity of the commu-nity; it rejects “one size fits all” approaches. It is responsive to the cultural groups within the com-munity. The partnership recognizes the different and shared norms and values among cultural groups and focuses on building relationships among them. The partnership is deeply grounded in the complexity of the community’s cultures and regularly engages with people across the larger community. It recognizes the importance of community events that bring people of multiple perspectives together to inter-act, person to person, in a trusting, caring envi-ronment. At one site, for example, a faith-based organization positioned people within the com-munities to help support, catalyze, consolidate, and give voice to community concerns, ideas, and efforts at change. These people were given the apt name of “community lightning rods.” The partnership is aware of and attempts to miti-gate or change institutional policies and prac-tices that routinely produce cumulative adverse results for people of color while routinely advan-taging whites. At another site, the involvement of a Hispanic-serving organization helped ensure that the partnership integrated cultural consider-ations in its planning and interventions.It operates from the stance of working “with” one another or alongside one another, not doing “to” or “for” others. The partnership rejects terms such as “gaining input” from the community, “get-ting buy-in,” or “building support for the new orientation.” It might even reject the concept of the community “owning” the partnership. Rather, the partnership is seen as emerging from the essence of the community as a whole. The partnership draws on tools such as community and parent cafés to involve the community. For example, one site used parent cafés, in which parents came together for structured, small-group conversations to discuss their concerns and consider how to use the Protective Factors Framework to address these concerns.3 It maintains an awareness of the balance of power within the community. The partnership has repre-sentation that ensures that the balance of power is acknowledged and that power imbalances are addressed in the way discussions unfold and decisions are made. Some communities have organizations that focus on supporting commu-nity organizing and community-based action. These organizations can help support these part-nerships without taking power away from the 3 See http://www.ctfalliance.org/initiative_parents-2.htm.Avoid seeing the partnership as the end goal. The survivability of the partnership sometimes becomes the end goal. Instead, funders and leaders can help ensure a continuing focus on how the partnership supports the paradigm shift. Jessup, Parsons, and MooreThe Foundation Review // 2016 Vol 8:2 49TOOLSresidents. For example, a site that had multiple faith-based organizations working together ben-efited from their connections with each other and with residents, so any power imbalances that emerged could be addressed.It reflects on projects or changes being implemented in the community. The partnership engages in dia-logue with people from across the community, particularly those most likely to be affected by the new paradigm. The partnership listens to the community to find out how neighborhoods and communities are already addressing issues related to the paradigm shift and how it can build on desired actions that are already tak-ing place. The partnership regularly reflects on activities and how these do or do not align with community values. It provides concrete feedback regarding changes that agencies or organizations are making to ensure that the core values of the community are supported.Implications for Funders and Partnership LeadersBoth funders and community leaders play an important part in stimulating partnerships that are committed to deep systemic change. Here are seven practical actions for funders and com-munity leaders.• Avoid seeing a project as the end goal. Rather than focusing on how the project contrib-utes to the paradigm shift, partners too often begin to see a particular project as the end goal. The partners might begin search-ing for additional funding to continue the project rather than focusing on the knowl-edge gained from the project and how to fund efforts related to that new knowledge and the fundamental shift. • Avoid seeing the partnership as the end goal. The survivability of the partnership some-times becomes the end goal. Instead, funders and leaders can help ensure a con-tinuing focus on how the partnership sup-ports the paradigm shift. • Keep tenaciously focused on needed infra-structure changes. The power of the current system structures to create snap back is a constant threat. By tenaciously focusing on needed infrastructure changes, funders and leaders can recognize how the infrastruc-ture of organizations may be undermining efforts to make and maintain the desired paradigm shift.• Balance depth and breadth in partnership focus. Funders can play an important role in help-ing partnerships remain cognizant of the larger system, related areas of that system, and on all segments of the community. Partners can focus too much on the part of the social system they are trying to change and lose touch with other partnerships and related areas of the system. When a part-nership focuses on integrating a particular practice into or across organizations, for example, the partnership may overlook contradictory practices, such as practitio-ners being incentivized to take actions con-trary to the new practice. Additionally, the partnership might begin to focus on one or a few segments of the community without connecting them to the larger picture or seeing ways in which broader community change can occur. An associated sign is that the partnership begins to believe that com-munity change is the same for all groups within the community. A funder can help to keep this larger perspective in mind.• Recognize how language can reinforce a para-digm. Language can serve to either reinforce the old paradigm or advance a paradigm shift. For example, when issues arise that are of concern to the partners, using terms such as “troubleshooting” implies that something is wrong and that issues must be resolved in order to maintain some specific approach. The issues might not be “trouble,” but may be the result of changing conditions stem-ming from project implementation. Talking about “adaptation” to these changing con-ditions would be more in keeping with the paradigm of system change. • Talk about power and the importance of the power shifts embedded in the paradigm shift. Partners avoid addressing power shifts Partnerships, Paradigms, and Social-System Change50 The Foundation Review // thefoundationreview.orgTOOLSbecause they seem too big or politically sensitive. Conversations regularly need to address fundamental issues of power. • Participate. Avoid sitting outside or alongside the community rather than being a part of it. When partnerships or partner members see themselves as separate from the community, they might not engage with the community or seek to understand the values of the com-munity. Just as partnerships need to be part of the community, so too do funders need to see themselves as part of the partnership. In this article, we have shared our current think-ing about the interplay between the purpose, focus, and scope of three types of partnerships and their attention to systemic changes. We believe that each type of partnership has a rea-sonable scope to take the actions needed to make long-lasting change. As the partnerships connect with one another, they can reflect deeply on all parts of the social systems in the community to truly address the issues of our day. We are grateful for the role philanthropy has played in helping us explore these ideas and share them with you. We hope the ideas presented in this article help you imagine partnerships as going beyond implementation of a project or initiative to creating fundamental change in social systems. We believe that each type of partnership has a reasonable scope to take the actions needed to make long-lasting change. As the partnerships connect with one another, they can reflect deeply on all parts of the social systems in the community to truly address the issues of our day.AcknowledgmentsThis article was supported by funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (grant #72770) to InSites, www.insites.org.ReferencesBrown, C. H. (2014). The strengthening families approach and protective factors framework: Branching out and reach-ing deeper. Washington: Center for the Study of Social Policy. Retrieved from http://www.cssp.org/reform/strengtheningfamiliesFawcett, S., Foster, D., & Francisco, V. (1997). Monitor-ing and evaluation of coalition activities and success. In G. Kaye & T. Wolff (Eds.), From the ground up: A work-book on coalition building and community development (pp. 163-185). Amherst, MA: ANEC/Community Partners. Kania, J., & Kramer, M. (2011, Winter). Collective im-pact. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 36-41.Mattessich, P. N., Murray-Close, M., & Monsey, B. R. (2004). Collaboration: What makes it work (2nd ed.). St. Paul, MN: Amherst H. Wilder Foundation.Meadows, D. H. (2008). Thinking in systems: A primer. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.Parsons, B., Hammond, Z., & Lupe, C. (1998). Partnerships: A powerful tool for improving the well-being of families and neighborhoods – third and final annual cluster evaluation report. Boulder, CO: InSites.Parsons, B., Jessup, P., & Moore, M. (2014). A systemic approach to implementing a protective factors frame-work. Journal of Zero to Three, 35(1), 43-51.Pollard, D. (2005, March 25). Will that be coordina-tion, cooperation, or collaboration? [Web log post.] Retrieved fromrld.ca/2005/03/25/will-that-be-coordi-nation-cooperation-or-collaboration/ Varda, D. (2010). The need for tools to assess partnerships/col-laboration. Retrieved from http://www.partnertool.net/ Zimmerman, B. (2015, January 5). Preventing snap back [Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cnXRX0Y9io8Patricia Jessup, Ph.D., is the director of Jessup & Associ-ates LLC. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Patricia Jessup, Jessup & Associates LLC, 3094 Lakewood Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48103 (email: pat@pjessup.com).Beverly Parsons, Ph.D., is executive director of InSites. She was the 2014 president of the American Evaluation Association.Marah Moore, M.C.R.P., is the founder and director of i2i Institute.Jessup, Parsons, and Moore