ABSTRACT: 
Responding to gentrification has become a key planning issue for many urban municipalities. Local governments need to balance the often-competing agendas of urban regeneration, social inclusion and arts access and participation. This paper argues that arts and cultural units within local government bear the impact of such tensions. More importantly, however, local government policies and their implementation represent a third position in the polarised discussion on the cultural impact of gentrification. The example discussed here is the rapidly gentrifying City of Maribyrnong in Melbourne&rsquo;s western suburbs: a municipality where any potential realisation of the economic benefits of gentrification is balanced against the needs of a significant population of resident professional artists, and the social inclusion needs of socio-economically disadvantaged residents. Maribyrnong&rsquo;s arts and cultural unit, like those within many municipalities in the developed world, has had to develop cultural policies and plans as tools for negotiating complex relationships and diverse needs of community members by considering the economic, social and cultural benefits of the arts for all residents. 
 
PREDICTION: 
This article examines the local government arts and cultural policies of an inner-city local council to identify its planning responses to gentrification. Based on the authors’ involvement in researching an arts and cultural strategy for this council, the article provides a critical analysis, with particular emphasis on identifying the limitations of local government policy in addressing the implications of gentrification for the arts. The article argues that in areas where gentrification is taking place, local governments wrestle with the competing agendas of gentrification and social inclusion. Within local councils, arts and cultural units encapsulate the impact of such competing agendas and illustrate the inherent tensions: the arts at the local level are, after all, both an economic generator and a tool for social inclusion and community strengthening. 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Introduction The prospect of gentrification is often seen as a boon for the creative industries, as it signals the arrival of growing numbers of cultural consumers with broad tastes and cultural capital. However, gentrification also presents a paradox: inner-city suburbs become gentrified as residents with high levels of disposable income move within ready access to cultural experiences, yet such gentrification reduces the space available for diverse arts and cultural activities, and makes the cost of accommodation for artists and other cultural producers prohibitive (Silver 2012; Grodach and Silver 2012). Gentrification also tends to strain the very aspects of the municipality that attracted artists to it, such as ethnic and social diversity, and affordable accommodation. As demand for cultural experiences increases, cultural production often decreases. As a result, careful planning for gentrification is a challenge to many urban councils in cities that are experiencing economic boom. Following Richard Florida (2002), most literature on the topic of cultural policy and gentrification focuses on or assumes cultural policies that are designed to encourage gentrification in the interests of economic improvement, whether it recommends or takes a critical perspective to such policies. In contrast, the current research presents an example of cultural policy that reflects a profound ambivalence about gentrification. This policy is informed by an understanding of the benefits and drawbacks of increasing upward mobility in the constituency. The article argues that, in practice, the field of cultural policy q 2014 Taylor & Francis *Corresponding author. Email: hilary.glow@deakin.edu.au Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 2014 Vol. 28, No. 4, 495–508, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10304312.2014.907870 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 is more contested than the literature assumes. As a result, the article posits the possibility of a third position in an otherwise polarised scholarly debate. Local government cultural policies may well be more restrained, nuanced and attentive to the competing demands of stakeholders and constituents than the literature suggests. As this article demonstrates, scholarship has a responsibility to acknowledge the agency of local government as an active mediator of complex problems rather than assuming it to be the victim of global economic, political and social forces. The phenomenon of gentrification has increased the prominence of arts and cultural development in local government, yet to date there is little literature to support cultural policy and funding units to address the issues associated with this phenomenon. Such planning is motivated by the need not only by the need to meet the cultural demands of residents, but also to maintain cultural diversity and preserve the unique cultural identity of the municipality. This paper looks at the City of Maribyrnong in the western suburbs of Melbourne, Australia: a municipality facing rapid gentrification. We examine: (1). the largely polarised literature on the cultural impact of gentrification; (2). the contextual factors that determine the impact of gentrification in Maribyrnong; (3) the influence of gentrification on arts and cultural activities in Maribyrnong and (4). how the Council reconciles the opportunities and challenges of gentrification. The article paper takes a single case study approach to its investigation of these questions (Yin 2009). Maribyrnong is typical of many industrial and gentrifying areas, and as such is a representative single case study (Creswell 2007, 74). The article examines the local government arts and cultural policies of an inner-city local council to identify its planning responses to gentrification. Based on the authors’ involvement as consultants in researching an arts and cultural strategy for this council, the paper provides a critical analysis, with particular emphasis on identifying the limitations of local government policy in addressing the implications of gentrification for the arts. The article illustrates that in areas where gentrification is taking place, local governments wrestle with the competing agendas of gentrification and social inclusion. Within local councils, arts and cultural units encapsulate the impact of such competing agendas and illustrate the inherent tensions: the arts at the local level are, after all, both an economic generator and a tool for social inclusion and community strengthening (Arts Victoria & Department for Victorian Communities 2006). Grodach and Silver (2012) point out that as local governments seek new development opportunities, the attributes of place are crucial to the success of their strategies, and this means that the role of arts and cultural policies is highlighted because arts and culture help to define the distinctive character, image, authenticity and advantages of a location (Grodach and Silver 2012). Local governments, therefore, need strong, compelling and well-supported arts and cultural strategies which acknowledge gentrification as an issue, demonstrate a capacity to predict and plan for change, and develop actions for cultural policies that are responsive to both the opportunities and threats that gentrification brings in its wake. Gentr ification, cultural planning and the ar ts Initially, gentrification was seen by researchers as ‘a process in which those of a higher social class displace lower class people from their housing’ (Butler and Hamnett 2009, 218). Increasingly, the study of gentrification has shifted from a focus on ‘housing and residential change’ to a more nuanced reading of the complex (non-residential) factors that contribute to gentrification, such as cosmopolitanism: a phenomenon of inner urban middle classes seeking diversity, difference, quality leisure and cultural amenities 496 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 (Luckins 2009, 266). Gentrification research tends to follow two main kinds of analysis: the first uses quantitative data to argue that gentrification offers potential benefits to residents by regenerating the environment and diversifying the socio-economic mix; and the second uses qualitative approaches and tends to find that gentrification displaces and isolates low-income residents (Weller and van Hulten 2012, 37). In terms of cultural policy and planning, these opposed approaches to the benefits or disadvantages of gentrification lead to polarised responses. Gentrification is also used to describe deliberate policies designed to bring about urban regeneration (Davidson 2008), as well as simply an economic and social trend that must be addressed by governments. Plans for the economic reinvention of cities in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries have been pinned onto a symbolic or cultural economy, rather than the industrial economic revivals envisaged in earlier eras (Johnson 2009). Following the work of Florida (2002, 2006), in the early 2000s city planners began to try to attract ‘creative classes’ to their municipality in order to foster the arts (Florida 2002, 2006). This ‘creative cities’ approach to planning has been the subject of much debate. Firstly, critics have argued that cultural policies designed to drive urban regeneration aggravate rather than alleviate social exclusion and polarisation. They tend to conflate ‘social’ and ‘cultural’ with ‘economic’ so that ‘participation in society actually means economic participation’ (Stevenson 2004, 126; Peck 2005). They also increase, rather than mitigate against, social polarisation along class and racial lines (Vicario and Martinez Monje 2003; Johnson 2009; Jayne 2006; Shaw and Sullivan 2011; Atkinson and Easthope 2009). A ‘creative cities’ approach to cultural policy is also not necessarily conducive to a healthy arts and cultural sector. Attracting the ‘creative classes’ to a municipality has led to inflationary pressures on housing markets, driving out artists and disturbing the ‘fragile ecology of creativity’ (Peck 2005, 746). There is a cultural as well as economic cause for this, as gentrification tends to be unpopular with artists (Shaw and Sullivan 2011; Silver 2012). Ley (2003, 2529) also notes the habit of cultural planning to lead to ‘the exaltation of representation over function’, as galleries, public art and performance spaces come to replace studios and workshops (Ley 2003, 2529) in an attempt to attract affluent consumers. Such efforts also tend to re-define cities as corporate, marketable entities rather than community entities (Evans 2006). Florida’s approach to stimulating local economies through cultural development and its influence on government policies has been a cause for alarm (Peck 2005; Atkinson and Easthope 2009). Kotkin and Siegel contend that the notion of cultural development as the key to economically successful cities has taken off in the United States: ‘The reality is that city leaders from San Diego to Baltimore, from Toronto to Albuquerque, are embracing creativity strategies not as alternatives to extant market-, consumption- and property-led development strategies, but as low-cost, feel-good complements to them’ (quoted in Peck 2005, 760–761). In Australia, arts and culture have recently been given a high profile in local government but for more complex reasons than Kotkin and Siegel identify. Local council arts and cultural policy-makers are trying to find a balance between two competing forces. Local councils seek to rationalise the perceived benefits of gentrification to residents and arts organisations while at the same time plan for the maintenance of cultural diversity and the preservation of the unique cultural identity of the municipality. The City of Mar ibyrnong In 2011, the authors of this article were contracted to research and write an arts and cultural framework for the City of Maribyrnong, a municipality that begins on the edge of Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 497 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 Melbourne’s central activity district and encompasses many western suburbs. The consultation was conducted for the Arts and Cultural Services unit of council. The Arts and Cultural Unit consisted of a coordinator and a festivals organiser. The unit had also recently established an Arts Advisory Committee consisting of local residents or people who worked in the municipality who had an interest in the arts, to provide feedback on policy development and funding. This included the manager of the local independent cinema, the director of the local community arts centre, as well as independent artists. Informally, the brief to the researchers was to address and plan for the inevitable prospect of gentrification in several of Maribyrnong’s suburbs, while also addressing the needs and interests of the outer suburbs of the municipality which are unlikely to experience economic growth in the medium term. In briefing the researchers, staff from the Council’s Arts and Cultural Unit communicated their sense that the prospect of gentrification included opportunities and threats. The opportunities were largely economic, followed a creative cities approach, and were fostered more broadly at a Council level in statements that saw a ‘knowledge-driven economy’ as the key to ‘increasing incomes’ (Maribyrnong City Council 2012). The threats were perceived as a diminishment of artistic activity, cultural diversity and identity based on industrial heritage, as the area becomes more expensive and the demographic character changed. Such sensitivities are also apparent on the street; at a large industrial site in Footscray, currently being cleared for residential development, the fence has been graffitied with words that leant themselves to the title of this paper: ‘More yuppy stuff coming soon’. The brief to address the needs and interests of the outer suburbs and the more gentrified inner suburbs (i.e. residents), did not include broad community consultation, but rather was focused on resident representatives (such as health service providers, community centre managers and neighbourhood house coordinators). These representatives gave value to the role of the arts in addressing the social and cultural needs of their clients, such as self-expression, a sense of belonging and social connectedness. Other research participants included artists, arts workers and representatives of institutions with cultural interests (such as the local university). Focus groups were conducted with artists working in the municipality, general managers and artistic directors of arts organisations, council employees and stakeholders outside the municipality (such as state government employees). Interviews were conducted with members of the Arts Advisory Committee. The emphasis on the effect of gentrification on the arts and culture makes Maribyrnong a familiar case study to urban cultural planners internationally. Council staff communicated the sense that 2011 marked a crucial moment for the municipality. Large-scale residential development was well underway, and the Council deemed careful cultural planning to be a critical tool to ensure that such development is culturally sensitive and that private developers considered the arts and cultural needs of residents, local artists and arts communities. The Council sought to use Maribyrnong’s Arts and Cultural Framework to identify the opportunities and threats associated with demographic changes to the area and to identify strategies that could maximise opportunities while also shoring up the municipality’s fertile arts and cultural activity against the threats. The commission represented the Unit’s recognition that ‘[s]pace and place are not passive backdrops to human relations, but reconceptualised as active in political and economic formations, social relations and identities’ and its desire to ensure that it could use the arts and culture 498 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 to influence these formations, relations and identities for the better of the whole community (Jayne 2006, 37). Of the populated municipalities of Melbourne, Maribyrnong is the smallest but it is also the most densely populated. It covers 31 square kilometres and has 72,900 residents. Maribyrnong is also forecast to grow more populated, with residents increasing by 43.55per cent between 2012 and 2031 (.id 2012a). Maribyrnong residents are distinguished by their relative economic disadvantage and their diverse ethnic origins. The unemployment rate is consistently higher than Victoria’s overall unemployment rate. In 2011, it was 2 per cent higher than the state’s average, at 6.4 per cent (City of Maribyrnong 2010–2011). Forty per cent of Maribyrnong residents were born outside Australia, and they represent 135 countries. They also represent two substantial waves of migration: the first from southern Europe in from the 1950s to 1970s, and the second from Vietnam, India, the Horn of Africa, Bosnia, the Philippines and China since the 1980s (City of Maribyrnong 2010–2011). Maribyrnong is rich in cultural diversity. The Vietnamese community has built a number of significant landmark temples, including the Heavenly Queen temple, which dominates the Footscray skyline. Within Maribyrnong, there is a vast disparity in the demographic profile. The council services the relatively inner-city suburbs of Footscray, Seddon and Yarraville, and the outer suburbs of Braybrook, Maidstone and Maribyrnong further to the west. Footscray, Seddon and Yarraville are prime sites for gentrification due to their close proximity to the city and the port, the ready supply of services such as public transport, the heritage-listed workers’ cottages and the ethnic diversity that means that the suburb of Footscray in particular is associated with restaurants and cultural festivals. While the inner-city suburbs of Maribyrnong previously formed a key industrial hub for Melbourne, the economic shift away from manufacturing and port-related activity has meant that many warehouses and factories are now being converted to residential properties. Recent gentrification is evident in the increase in rental and house prices. In the five years to March 2011, rental prices for units increased by 43 per cent pet cent, and house prices increased by 37 per cent. In contrast, the suburbs of Braybrook and Maidstone are less well-serviced by public transport, are further from the city, and were largely developed with public housing. There is significant variation in economic status between the Maribyrnong suburbs: Braybrook is the second most disadvantaged suburb in the state of Victoria. Its residents had a median weekly income in 2011 of $525, only slightly over a third that of the neighbouring suburb of Seddon, where it was $1429 (City of Maribyrnong 2010–2011). Braybrook and Maidstone are the subject of state government ‘place-based’ community strengthening programmes designed to target areas of highly concentrated disadvantage. Even within the ‘gentrifying’ suburbs, there are significant disparities in wealth; in different parts of Footscray, for example, the average median income varies by over $100 per week (City of Maribyrnong 2010–2011). The suburbs vary greatly in terms of ethnicity as well, although all have substantial diversity. Fifty-six per cent of Braybrook residents were born overseas, compared to Yarraville with 28 per cent and Seddon with 26 per cent born overseas (City of Maribyrnong 2010–2011). Indicators of poverty such as high levels of unemployment, low-income housing and rental stress are concentrated in the western suburbs of Maribyrnong, but within Footscray and Seddon there are pockets where such concentrations are also prevalent. The council has termed this the phenomenon of ‘parallel communities’ (Figure 1). Gentrification in Maribyrnong has been rapid and uneven. In Yarraville, the percentage of residents whose annual household earnings were in the highest income bracket increased from 22.4 per cent in 2001 to 27.7 per cent in 2006. In Braybrook, in contrast, it remained steady at 7.5 to 7.6 per cent. In Footscray – a ward known to include Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 499 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 pockets of wealth and poverty – it rose from 13.1 per cent to 14.6 per cent (.id 2012b). A major factor in this rapid change is the character of the local property market. First, the high level of rental accommodation – which in Australia tends to be characterised by short- to medium-term leases – means that demographic shifts such as gentrification can occur more quickly than they would in suburbs of high owner-occupancy. Second, as mentioned earlier, the manufacturing industry has moved out of Maribyrnong. This has coincided with a period of high migration into and residential boom in Melbourne, which has meant that the conversion of industrial properties to residential properties in the inner- city suburbs has been rapid (Figure 2). Maribyrnong has a significant history of supporting arts and cultural activity, particularly activities with social inclusion and community development objectives. During the 1970s and 1980s, a range of coordinated regional initiatives was undertaken to raise the identity of the west, and increase the opportunities and resources available to its residents. The development of organisations such as the Footscray Community Arts Centre (FCAC) and Living History Museum of the West were some of these initiatives. Figure 1. View from the Footscray Community Arts Centre, including the river, shipping yards and the city skyline, 2012. Figure 2. Heavenly Queen Temple, Footscray 2012. 500 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 Maribyrnong City Council was a major contributor to these projects (City of Maribyrnong 2012). Maribyrnong council provides resources and grants to facilitate a range of creative initiatives. Funding is directed at individual artists, projects and organisations. Such funding includes support for capital works, project and professional development and presentation/exhibition. Many organisations and cultural events have significant national and international profiles and draw artists and audiences from across Victoria. The City of Maribyrnong has a relatively high level of arts participation. Community Indicators Victoria data indicates that 47.7 per cent of residents participate in the arts, compared to 46.6 per cent for the state of Victoria (City of Maribyrnong 2012). This profile contributes to a rich cultural environment where local audiences have diverse cultural choices and manifest an ‘omnivorous’ appetite for experiences across art forms, styles, genres, and modes of participation. However, the municipality is diverse and includes many communities whose social profile suggests low participation in the arts, for example people from non-English speaking backgrounds and those from lower socio- economic backgrounds (Australia Council for the Arts 2010). In a municipality where gentrification and renewal run the risk of producing parallel communities, the Council’s strategic support of the arts needs to address not only the needs of an active arts community, but also issues relating to access, audience development and community cultural development. Policy responses to issues of gentr ification A review of Maribyrnong City Council policies and strategies shows both a desire to enhance the municipality (economically, socially and environmentally), while also respecting the integrity of existing communities and locations. These goals are evident in policies and strategies both within the arts and culture portfolio and more broadly across Council. Three key themes emerged during the consultation for the art strategy: the impact of gentrification on space for the arts; maintenance of authentic arts offerings and local cultural identity; and access to inclusive arts offerings. The value of the creative industries is acknowledged in the Maribyrnong Economic and Industry Development Strategy (MEIDS). The strategy highlights the benefit of allocating space and location for cultural industries on the basis that such industries have smaller space requirements than others, such as manufacturing, and that cultural industries are likely to be attracted by Maribyrnong’s offer of ‘good communications and access to the CBD, transport hubs and the Port of Melbourne’ (City of Maribyrnong 2010–2011, 7). The provision of space for arts activity is also highlighted in the Council’s Public Art Policy. The policy notes the unique features Maribyrnong brings to a public art programme with its ‘excellent urban form, remnant building stock and a vibrant multicultural community’. However, public art is also encouraged as a means of ‘Creating a point of difference’. Demonstrating the influence of Florida’s (2002) ‘creative class’ thinking (2002), the policy aims to ‘attract and retain creative people as a way of creating vitality and viability’ (City of Maribyrnong 2011a). Strengthening local cultural identity and maintaining distinctive arts offerings are clearly a priority in arts and cultural policies. The need for Council’s Festivals Policy arose from commercial and community festival organisers’ ‘interest in Maribyrnong’s ‘diversity of communities and diversity of communities of interest’, along with the ‘authentic vibe of Footscray’ (City of Maribyrnong 2010). Council’s public art policy notes that a major issue facing public art programmes in Maribyrnong is: Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 501 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 how to embrace the changes to the composition of the community and the look and feel of the public realm without destroying the very qualities that currently make the city a diverse and vibrant place. (City of Maribyrnong 2011a) The same concern about tensions between change and authenticity is also found in the MEIDS. This Strategy emphasises the fact that ‘Image, identity and amenity exert major influence on investment decisions’ with the corresponding need to ‘focus on improving visual amenity and changing outdated perceptions by promoting a positive image of the region and increasing interest from prospective investors, residents and visitors.’ However, the strategy also notes: ‘Many opportunities exist to strengthen and diversify the City of Maribyrnong’s local economy while still retaining and enhancing what people love best about their community’ (City of Maribyrnong 2011b). The area’s arts offerings appeal to both local residents and those from outside the municipality. Specifically, acknowledging the impact of gentrification on Maribyrnong, the public art policy notes: ‘It is vitally important that public art and cultural programs achieve local ownership and are not perceived and dismissed as a public relations exercise for urban gentrification’ (Public art policy 2011). However, the public art policy suggests that genuine and distinctive arts activity can meet the needs of both locals and outsiders: ‘An exciting place for locals will translate into a place that others will want to visit and experience’. The influence of gentr ification on ar ts and cultural activities Focus groups were conducted with four sub-groups of individuals working in and around Maribyrnong: council officers, representatives of community organisations, individual artists and representatives of funded arts organisations. It was noted by all groups that there is a large and diverse arts community in Maribyrnong, and that many individuals and groups strongly identify with the place. For instance, in 2011 the researchers conducted a focus group with residents, in which a participant said: ‘There are a lot of artists and arts organisations that are passionate about staying in the West’ (Focus Group 2011). In addition, respondents perceived local audiences and communities as highly responsive to diverse arts programmes: ‘There’s a real openness to the arts community here in the West. And the traditional elite culture around the arts isn’t here. Everyone’s welcome’ (Focus Group 2011). The ‘openness’ of the arts scene was characterised by an omnivorous arts audience benefiting from a ‘great artistic freedom [where] the boundaries [between] high and low art are really blurred’ (Focus Group 2011). The challenges perceived by some respondents related to the on-going vibrancy of Maribyrnong in the face of gentrification. It was felt that this was a matter of urgency and that the consequences of inaction are potentially disastrous: ‘Hobson’s Bay Council, Brimbank Council and others are like vultures waiting, ready to take in Maribyrnong [artists and arts organisations as] refugees. It’s not a loss for us, not a loss for artists, but it is a loss for Maribyrnong’ (Focus Group 2011). In the face of such significant change, respondents felt that there was a key role for the Arts and Cultural unit within local government – in particular seeing it as, in effect, a negotiation point between the interests of development and the interests of artists: ‘Council should function as a regulator and a champion; as a regulator of the private sector and a champion for the delivery of policy and for attracting events’ (Focus Group 2011). Three key themes emerged from the focus groups consistent with (and exemplifying) the tensions identified in council’s policies. First, gentrification limits artists’ access to production and presentation spaces: ‘[Access to] space will get worse as gentrification continues. The 502 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 warehouses that used to be used are being pulled down’; ‘The [music] venue on the corner of Barkly St and Nicholson St used to be nice, but it was turned into units’ I went to West Footscray because housing was affordable. [Now] I see, suburb by suburb, gentrification is happening ...Most workshop spaces and studios cost a lot of money [to rent]. It would be good to access these spaces cheaply or for free. (Focus Group 2011) A second theme focused on the fear, expressed by artists, that gentrification will diminish the particular and special character of the area: ‘We had a meeting with someone [from the council] who was doing a rebrand of Footscray. They were looking for an ambassador but none of the suggestions were [people] from the West. They wanted Kylie Kwong who is from Sydney!’; ‘The right kind of people need to move over here, otherwise it will lose the very thing it prides itself on’ (Focus Group 2011). On the other hand, Council representatives tended to see the potential upside of gentrification: ‘It’s a question of time; as gentrification happens, more entrepreneurs move in and hopefully they will start things like an open door music venue’ (Focus Group 2011). A third theme related to the issue of access and inclusion. It was generally felt by respondents who represented community organisations that the arts play an important role in social inclusion: ‘The arts are a key engagement tool for culturally diverse young people’ (Focus Group 2011). In particular, it was acknowledged that while Footscray is a key arts hub providing access to vibrant and diverse arts activities, the outer areas, such as Braybrook and Maidstone, are less well served by the arts and require arts programming that is explicitly directed to instrumental outcomes around community well-being and cohesion: ‘Braybrook, for example, is an area of social disadvantage, non-English speaking communities and homelessness. This is somewhere we can play a role, where arts and culture can play a role’ (Focus Group 2011). Some interviewees identified gentrification as a potentially significant factor in the development of centralised creative industries: ‘I look at every other centre of Melbourne and in comparison Footscray has a very strong arts presence. We should highlight this, not spread it out’ (Focus Group 2011). For others, however, gentrification signalled a diminishment of inclusivity and access for socially disadvantaged populations. Another, less oppositional, interpretation of the impact of gentrification on access and inclusion came from respondents who saw an ongoing role for the arts as a means of including the new middle class residents: It is usually seen that as the arts and multicultural (population] move out, yuppies move in. But it doesn’t matter who they are, they are still people who live in Maribyrnong. One thing that needs to be uncovered is ...how you can connect the gentrified people. The yuppies need to get out and engage with other people in the community. (Focus Group 2011) The ar ts and cultural strategy response to gentr ification Maribyrnong’s Arts and Cultural Strategy is a response to the issues raised by the research outlined above. An arts and cultural strategy captures and responds to the organisational priorities of government and the environmental context of its constituency. For Maribyrnong, the chief environmental factor was gentrification and the organisational priority was to realise the opportunities and mitigate the potential risks associated with rapid economic, demographic and social change. In particular, the council needed to ensure that space was allocated for artistic activity, that arts and cultural programming met the needs of all community members and that a balance was maintained between professional arts and cultural activities that attract outsiders and/or encourage the Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 503 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 participation of residents. These policy commitments were ultimately designed to preserve Maribyrnong’s authentic cultural heritage and foster a dynamic creative future. Allocation of space While the arts are one of the drawcards for potential residents and businesses, artists are now struggling to find spaces in which to work and develop their art. In the longer term, the effect of gentrification may be, as Shaw and Sullivan (2011) found, to repel artists from local arts activities. The Arts and Cultural unit recognises that the presence of local artists, inspired by local images and events, contributes not only to Maribyrnong as a tourist attraction, but also to the creation of a sense of place and a culturally sophisticated municipality (see also Johnson 2006, 307). However, it does not have the financial resources to provide supported accommodation. Instead, the Council is investing human resources into a brokerage role to provide a network connecting artists with the owners of private properties that are currently unused. This focus on ‘brokering’ arrangements between private property owners and arts organisations or artists is a medium-term strategy made possible by the vacancy of former factories and warehouses before they are sold and/or developed into residential buildings. While it may have a limited lifespan, for now, this ‘brokering’ role has the advantage of flexibility. The Council sought to avoid a situation in which particular arts organisations develop a belief that they are entitled to government-supported accommodation and thereby tying-up such accommodation so that new and possibly more innovative arts practices cannot be accommodated. Brokering arrangements with private property-owners holds less risk of creating such expectations. Addressing the needs of residents The uneven spread of socio-economic advantage in Maribyrnong is reflected in arts offerings, which tend to be focused around the district’s hub, Footscray. Arguably, the state government’s Central Activities Area strategic planning initiative has exacerbated this problem by prioritising funding for activity and development within the Footscray precinct (Department of Planning & Community Development 2012). The diversity of suburbs in Maribyrnong means that it already has ‘parallel communities’, and the risk is that arts and cultural planning may now address or exacerbate this division. With its limited resources, the emphasis in the council is to build the Footscray hub for the benefit of all Maribyrnong residents and visitors from other Melbourne municipalities. In its more western suburbs, the Council’s focus is on cultural development directed to specific communities to produce community identification and strengthening. The tension for local government cultural planning, then, lies in the competing agendas of gentrification and social inclusion: the need (and appetite) for arts activities at the gentrified centre and the cultural development needs of disadvantaged communities. This tension is an example of Stevenson’s (2004) argument that cultural planning is characterised by aims that cross several policy areas and that it cannot possibly adequately fulfil. But equally, if the council plans to concentrate its arts and cultural funding on the ‘hub’ of Footscray, it risks exacerbating the economic polarisation of its communities. The fact of economically polarised communities with different demographic characteristics and cultural needs is also an example of Peck’s (2005) critique of Florida’s notion of the creative class. This notion, Peck argues, implies an underclass that services the needsof the creative class. The implications of these two arguments leave the council in a Catch-22 situation: either it spreads its policy priorities and 504 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 resources too thinly to meet the needs of all its residents, or it focuses its resources on developing a cultural ‘hub’ and in doing so may fail to achieve social inclusion and cohesion. Local artists and local audiences Gentrification has increased local interest in the arts and built more local audiences who expect a vibrant cultural life, while at the same time threatening the scope and diversity of arts practice in the municipality. This is also a dilemma of ‘sustainable cosmopolitanism’- how to preserve the distinctive and authentic cultural identify of Maribyrnong which drives gentrification. The priorities around the preservation of cultural identity need to be balanced with priorities for change and growth, so that Maribyrnong does not become a ‘theme park’ for industrial heritage and cultural diversity of the 1970s and 1980s. For local government, this is a further tension in considering the allocation of its resources: how to balance the needs of local audiences for access to the arts and culture against the desire to attract outsiders to the municipality as it capitalises on its growing profile as a gentrified arts hub. This tension is manifest in the experience of the Footscray Community Arts Centre (FCAC). Originally, the focus of the centre was on engaging the local community in arts and cultural activities, but in recent years its identity has shifted to being a producer of professional artistic product that is recognised nationally and internationally (Khan 2003). This shift is evident in a debate within the Centre’s management over whether the word ‘Footscray’ should be retained in the Centre’s name, with some people arguing that the association with the western suburbs ‘no longer brought the Centre credibility and would not help it build a strong regional and national profile’ (Khan 2003, 141). There are fewer locally based people on the Centre’s board than in the past, and while it continues to work with schools, the Centre does less outreach work in Maribyrnong’s far west: ‘The Centre was originally founded to bring art to the working classes, but some staff suspect that the Centre’s arts workshops and school holiday programmes are now priced out of reach for many’ (Khan 2003, 141). Khan (2003) argues that shifts in the emphasis of cultural policy triggered the Centre’s decision to move away from community arts to being an organisation that is ‘desirable for professional artists to work with’, to present ‘new possibilities for the politics of contemporary art’ (2003, 143). The impact of gentrification here has been that the local community functions not just as a place to live and provide a space for the independent development of artists’ work, but as a platform for the development of a professional artistic network and career. Where FCAC was once supported by the Council to engage the local community, and in doing so brought with it a community of artists, the expectation of these artists now is that FCAC produces artistic work with an international appeal. The issue for Council is the extent to which it uses its limited resources to build the international profile of artists who live in Maribyrnong, aiming to retain artists as residents in the face of gentrification pressures, or to address the cultural interests of its local residents, particularly given their cultural and socio-economic diversity and Council’s brief for social inclusion. If Khah’s (2005) analysis of FCAC is correct, the Centre is-perhaps unwittingly-at risk of becoming what Peck describes as part of the ‘evolving regime of urban competition’ (2005, 763). A warning is sounded by Flew (2012), who suggests that ‘it is perhaps time to question the heavy investment in inner urban cultural amenities that has accompanied “creative cities” discourses, with their search to find the right cultural settings to attract an allegedly globally footloose “creative class”’ (2012, 240). In this context, Maribyrnong’s arts and culture unit seeks to ensure that funded organisations like FCAC do not see themselves simply as cultural institutions competing with arts organisations around Melbourne and Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 505 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 Australia for cultural tourism, but that they share responsibility for achieving social and cultural inclusion goals within Maribyrnong. Conclusion This article began by asking how local government might respond to the problems associated with gentrification through its arts and cultural policy. The case study illustrates these problems. Maribyrnong’s gentrification is driven by factors largely beyond the council’s control. These include rapid immigration into Melbourne and particularly its inner western suburbs, the decline of industry in those same suburbs and the attraction of a residential area that has long been characterised by ethnic diversity and an edgy, industrial culture. While these trends represent opportunities for the development of arts and culture, the Council is limited in its capacity to seize these opportunities by budgetary and political constraints. The case study demonstrates an arts and cultural team that identifies gentrification as a complex, challenging phenomenon. Existing literature on gentrification suggests that public cultural policy is part of the problem. Yet, the case study of Maribyrnong suggests that local government arts and cultural units are neither simply hapless nor pliable in the face of arguments about the economic benefits of the ‘creative cities’ approach. Rather, their arts and cultural strategies demonstrate that they identify the hazards of rapid demographic change and seek to carve out a path through the challenges it presents. Within the Maribyrnong City Council, the arts and cultural unit recognises the tensions associated with gentrification and balances any interest in its putative benefits with a concern for the economic and cultural disparity. The Council used its Arts and Cultural Framework to protect space for arts activities in the face of high property demand, balance the needs of parallel communities and negotiate the professional needs of its resident artists and the cultural and social inclusion needs of its residents, more generally. Demographic change in Maribyrnong is characterised by the withdrawal of industry, a surging real estate market and an influx of wealthier, whiter and better-educated residents than its established inhabitants. Municipalities with such characteristics can be found in developed nations across the world. As a result, local governments, and specifically their arts and cultural workers, find themselves at the coalface of profoundly complex problems. Cultural policies and plans are tools for negotiating these complex issues. Notes on contr ibutors Hilary Glow is Associate Professor and Director Arts Management Program at Deakin University. Her research addresses the management and policy settings of cultural organisations, and the role of policy and public funding in supporting cultural organisations and their audiences. With Katya Johanson she has conducted research with Arts Victoria and a range of performing arts companies on audience engagement, leading to a book of edited essays (Intellect, 2013) on arts audience, participation and engagement. Also with Dr Johanson, Hilary is the author of Your Genre is Black: Indigenous performing arts and policy (2009). Katya Johanson is Associate Professor, School of Communication and Creative Arts at Deakin University. Her research background lies in the areas of cultural policy and audience development. With Dr Hilary Glow she has researched how cultural policy can increase the sustainability of professional performing arts companies, including Indigenous companies and the small to medium sector. Her work on audience development includes work commissioned by Arts Victoria, which uses interviews, focus groups and surveys of audiences at six companies to examine the capacity of audiences to receive a performing arts experience. This research aims to contribute to the companies’ 506 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 strategies to deepen the experience of the audience, as well as increase audience numbers. She is one of three editors of a forthcoming title The Audience Experience (Intellect, 2013). Anne Kershaw is Lecturer of Arts and Entertainment Management at Deakin University. Anne lectures in arts marketing, community-based arts and project management with the Arts & Entertainment Management Program. Her expertise is in preparing cultural policy and strategic plans, audience development and cultural programming–particularly with a social inclusion focus. Her PhD study involves research into museums’ collaboration with culturally diverse communities. Originally trained as a museum curator, Anne worked in arts and cultural planning in local and state governments for 15 years before returning to academia. References Arts Victoria & Department for Victorian Communities. 2006. Strengthening Local Communities: Arts in Community Settings. Melbourne: Department for Victorian Communities. Atkinson, R., and H. Easthope. 2009. “The Consequences of the Creative Class: The Pursuit of Creativity Strategies in Australia’s Cities.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33 (1): 64–79. Australia Council for the Arts. 2010. More than Bums on Seats: Australian Participation in the Arts. Sydney: Australia Council for the Arts. Butler, T., and C. Hamnett. 2009, September. “Walking Backwards to the Future–Waking Up to Class and Gentrification in London.” Urban Policy and Research 27 (3): 217–228. City of Maribyrnong. 2010–2011. Annual Report. Footscray: City of Maribyrnong. City of Maribyrnong. 2010. Festivals Policy. Footscray: City of Maribyrnong. City of Maribyrnong. 2011a. Public Arts Policy. Footscray: City of Maribyrnong. City of Maribyrnong. 2011b. Economic and Industry Development Strategy. Footscray: City of Maribyrnong. City of Maribyrnong. 2012. Strategic Arts Framework. Footscray: City of Maribyrnong. Creswell, J. 2007. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five Approaches. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Davidson, M. 2008. “Spoiled Mixture: Where Does State-Led “Positive” Gentrification Lead?” Urban Studies 45: 2385–2405. Department of Planning and Community Development, State Government of Victoria. 2012. “Footscray Activities Area.” Accessed August 16, 2012. http://www.dpcd.vic.gov.au/planning/ plansandpolicies/centralactivitiesareas/footscray Evans, G. 2006. “Branding the City of Culture – The Death of City Planning?” In Culture, Urbanism and Planning, edited by J. Monclus and M. Guardia, 197–214. Abingdon: Ashgate. Flew, T. 2012. “Creative Suburbia: Rethinking Urban Cultural Policy – The Australian Case.” International Journal of Cultural Studies 15 (3): 231–246. Florida, R. 2002. Cities and the Creative Class. Oxford: Routledge. Florida, R. 2006. The Flight of the Creative Class. New York: Harper Collins. Grodach, C., and D. Silver, eds. 2012. “Urbanizing Cultural Policy.” In The Politics of Urban Cultural Policy, 1–12. New York: Routledge. .id. 2012a. “Estimated Resident Population.” Maribyrnong City Council. Accessed September 5, 2012. http://profile.id.com.au/Default.aspx?id¼ 127&pg¼ 210&gid¼ 10&type¼ enum .id. 2012b. “What Is Our Household Income (Weekly Household Income)?” Maribyrnong City Council. Accessed September 5, 2012. http://profile.id.com.au/Default.aspx?id¼ 127&pg¼ 107 &gid¼ 10&type¼ enum Jayne, M. 2006, Spring. “Cultural Geography, Consumption and the City.” Geography 91 (1): 34–42. Johnson, L. 2006. “Valuing the Arts: Theorising and Realising Cultural Capital in an Australian City.” Geographical Research 44: 296–309. Johnson, L. 2009. Cultural Capitals: Revaluing the Arts, Remaking Urban Spaces. Surrey: Ashgate. Khan, R. 2003. “Creating a Profile: Reworking “Community” at Footscray Community Arts Centre.” Local-Global 7: 134–148. Ley, D. 2003. “Artists, Aestheticisation and the Field of Gentrification.” Urban Studies 40 (12): 2527–2544. Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 507 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 Luckins, T. 2009, September. “Gentrification and Cosmopolitan Leisure in Inner-Urban Melbourne, Australia, 1960s–1970s.” Urban Policy and Research 27 (3): 265–275. Maribyrnong City Council. 2012. “Maribyrnong Economic and Industrial Development Strategy.” City of Maribyrnong, Footscray. Accessed December 1, 2012. http://www.maribyrnong.vic.gov. au/Page/Page.aspx?Page_Id¼ 5489 Peck, J. 2005. “Struggling with the Creative Class.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 29 (4): 740–770. Shaw, S., and D. Sullivan. 2011. “White Night: Gentrification, Racial Exclusion and Perceptions and Participations in the Arts.” City and Community 10 (3): 241–264. Silver, D. 2012. “Local Politics in the Creative City: The Case of Toronto.” Paper presented at the International Conference for Cultural Policy Research, Barcelona. Stevenson, D. 2004. ““Civic Gold” Rush: Cultural Planning and the Politics of the Third Way.’ International Journal of Cultural Policy 10 (1): 119–131. Vicario, L., and P. Manuel Martinez Monje. 2003. “Another “Guggenheim Effect”? The Generation of a Potentially Gentrifable Neighbourhood in Bilbao.” Urban Studies 40 (12): 2383–2400. Weller, S., and A. van Hulten. 2012, March. “Gentrification and Displacement: The Effects of a Housing Crisis on Melboury¨e’s Low-Income Residents.” Urban Policy and Research 30 (1): 25–42. Yin, R. K. 2009. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 4th ed. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. 508 H. Glow et al. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea ki n U ni ve rs ity L ib ra ry ] a t 1 8: 26 1 9 A ug us t 2 01 4 