{'rouge1': 0.4892822726838517, 'rouge2': 0.2527291585287602, 'rougeL': 0.32410486166704616, 'rougeLsum': 0.32436062894507744}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
Benjamin Franklin is both the best-known and yet paradoxically the most enigmatic member of America's founding generation. A true master of spin, Franklin enjoyed an enviable ability to construct and popularize certain public faces and images for himself while yet contriving to obscure others. As his autobiography makes abundantly clear, Franklin was enormously sensitive to the ways in which his contemporaries and posterity might regard him. He constantly attempted to fashion and refashion his own image and admitted as much almost as a point of honour, recording that ‘‘ In order to secure my Credit and Character_ I took care not only to be in Reality Industrious and frugal, but to avoid all Appearances of the Contrary.
ABSTRACT (sample)
Purpose - The central argument that this paper posits is that traditional media of old presented a clear, ordered world of communication management for organisations to extol their CSR credentials. In contrast to this, new Web 2.0 social media is increasingly being used by activists and hactivists to challenge corporate communication CSR messages and does so by highlighting instances and examples of Corporate Social Irresponsibility (CSI) (Jones, Bowd and Tench, 2009; Tench, Sun and Jones, 2012). Design/methodology/approach - The paper reports on research data from the European Communication Monitor 2010, 2011 and 2012 (http://www.communicationmonitor.eu/) and draws on work already published in this area (Tench, Verhoeven and Zerfass, 2009; Verhoeven et al, 2012; and Zerfass et al, 2010, 2011) to illustrate the unruly unregulated Web 2.0 social media communication landscape in Europe. A range of literature is drawn on to provide the theoretical context for an exploration of issues that surround social media. Findings - In late modernity (Giddens, 1990) communication comes in many guises. Social media is one guise and it has re-shaped as well as transformed the nature of communications and the relationship between organisations and their stakeholders. Originality/value - Communicating CSR in the Wild West of social media requires diplomatic and political nous, as well as awareness and knowledge of the dangers and pitfalls of CSI. The data reported on in this paper illustrates well the above points and sets out scenarios for future development of corporate communication of CSR through, and with social media.
PREDICTION (sample)
This paper looks at issues surrounding the communication of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) via social media. It will be of particular interest to an international audience as it draws on data from the European Communication Monitor (http://www.communicationmonitor.eu/) which covers 46 countries. This data are used to illustrate theory and points of argument from a review of secondary literature including books, journal articles and policy reports. The problem addressed is how businesses and corporate communication professionals manage CSR messages in an unruly, largely unregulated social media environment. Much has been written on CSR (Carroll, 1979, 1991; Friedman, 1970; Porter and Kramer, 2006) as well as on social media in academic outputs and more popular business books (Qualman, 2011; Charney, 2009). The impact of social media has been documented and detailed in relation to education (Craft, 2011), business (Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010), corporate reputation (Jones, Temperley and Lima, 2009), entrepreneurial marketing (Jones, 2010), sociology (Murthy, 2012) and other subject areas. The distinctive aspect of this paper is its focus on the use of social media in communicating CSR in a European context. A core finding is that co-creation of message through social media contributes to the co-creation as well as the co-destruction of value. We contend that value is in part realised in the act of co-creation of message.
