{'rouge1': 0.4928929865227737, 'rouge2': 0.2709614975077277, 'rougeL': 0.3436936560692224, 'rougeLsum': 0.3432438009518568}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
This article examines the enduring working-class identity of Benjamin Franklin, the most famous and yet paradoxically the most enigmatic member of America's founding generation. A true master of spin, Franklin enjoyed an enviable ability to construct and popularize certain public faces and images for himself while yet contriving to obscure others. As his autobiography makes abundantly clear, Franklin was enormously sensitive to the ways in which his contemporaries and posterity might regard him. He constantly attempted to fashion and refashion his own image and admitted as much almost as a point of honour, recording that ‘‘ In order to secure my Credit and Character_ I took care not only to be in Reality Industrious and frugal, but to avoid all Appearances of the Contrary.
ABSTRACT (sample)
This article examines the differential impact of labour market institutions on women and men. It carries out longitudinal analyses using repeat cross-sectional data from the EU Labour Force Survey 1992–2007 as well as time series data that measure institutional change over the same period. The results contribute to the literature on gendered employment, adding important insights into the impact of labour market institutions over and above family policies that have been the focus of most prior studies on the topic. We find differential effects of institutional change on male and female outcome. Our findings challenge the neo-classical literature on the topic. While our results suggest that men benefit more clearly than women from increases in employment protection, we do not find support for the neo-classical assertion that strong trade unions decrease female employment. Instead, increasing union strength is shown to have beneficial effects for both men's and women's likelihood of being employed on the standard employment contract. Furthermore, in line with other researchers, we find that rising levels of in kind state support to families improve women's employment opportunities.
PREDICTION (sample)
This paper examines the impact of labour market institutions on gender inequality in labour market outcome. We examine whether employment regulation and protection, union strength, and wage-setting coordination drive inequality dynamics amongst the mid-aged and medium educated male and female workforce (focusing on women and men aged 40-44 years). These labour market institutions are generally theorised to shape gendered inequality in labour market outcome through their effect on labour demand rationales. Accounting also for institutions that affect labour supply, we furthermore consider the implications of family policies. We have run country-panel regressions based on data from 18 European countries spanning the period from 1992-2007 and provide important insights into the labour market dynamics of institutional change. Our use of time-series data and fixed-effects modelling brings us closer to making causal claims regarding institutional effects than most of the existing work in this area.
