{'rouge1': 0.4664962101043666, 'rouge2': 0.24355290141993852, 'rougeL': 0.31945426924260983, 'rougeLsum': 0.32075492837547903}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
Benjamin Franklin is both the best-known and yet paradoxically the most enigmatic member of America’s founding generation. A true master of spin, Franklin enjoyed an enviable ability to construct and popularize certain public faces and images for himself while yet contriving to obscure others. As his autobiography makes abundantly clear, Franklin was enormously sensitive to the ways in which his contemporaries and posterity might regard him. He constantly attempted to fashion and refashion his own image and admitted as much almost as a point of honour, recording that ‘‘ In order to secure my Credit and Character_ I took care not only to be in Reality Industrious and frugal, but to avoid all Appearances of the Contrary.
ABSTRACT (sample)
This article adopts a point of view of practice theories and elucidates how temporal orientations commence in the interactions of humans and the material world. Empirically the article focuses on the contemporary practices of wooden boating. Such practices offer a variety of different temporal orientations, which include emancipatory uchronias, flow states, altruistic care of common heritage and craft identities of mastering traditional skills. These positions within wooden boating result out of a distinct historic development. The practices of wooden boating also frequently imply stress and heavy toll on time, and entail subtle negotiations between self-determination and duties as a practitioner.
PREDICTION (sample)
This article explores the practice of wooden boating in contemporary Finland, and argues that the underlying temporal orientations can be located in shared social practices. The claims that I want to put forward are as follows: first, practices imply the responsibility that the proper and skilful ways of acting challenge and partly take over instrumental rationality. Second, I argue that objects play an active role in the skilling and aesthetization of actions and thus configure human time. Accordingly, a practice is a specific, historical and socially shared way of understanding the world and engaging with the relevant objects. Third, because of the pertaining and active role of the other human practitioners and the involved objects, the temporal orientations are neither to be freely chosen by individuals nor static. Rather, the individual practitioners face uncertainties while negotiating temporal orders through specific relations to material objects. Using the terms of Schatzki (2001b), the aim of this article is to elaborate on how the social ordering of time takes place in and through the teleo-affective arrangements of humans and the material world within specific practices. The claims that I want to put forward are as follows: first, practices imply the responsibility that the proper and skilful ways of acting challenge and partly take over instrumental rationality. Second, I argue that objects play an active role in the skilling and aesthetization of actions and thus configure human time. Accordingly, a practice is a specific, historical and socially shared way of understanding the world and engaging with the relevant objects. Third, because of the pertaining and active role of the other human practitioners and the involved objects, the temporal orientations are neither to be freely chosen by individuals nor static. Rather, the individual practitioners face uncertainties while negotiating temporal orders through specific relations to material objects. Using the terms of Schatzki (2001b), the aim of this article is to elaborate on how the social ordering of time takes place in and through the teleo-affective arrangements of humans and the material world within specific practices. This approach implies that temporal orientations do not derive out of large societal arrangements, and that they are neither simply enacted by individuals as personal ‘time styles’. Rather, in general, a practice view of temporal ordering is a mid-range approach to the question of co-determination of agency and social
