{'rouge1': 0.45786225668379266, 'rouge2': 0.22642056939141322, 'rougeL': 0.30335555363854333, 'rougeLsum': 0.3029709108778768}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
Benjamin Franklin is both the best-known and yet paradoxically the most enigmatic member of America's founding generation. A true master of spin, Franklin enjoyed an enviable ability to construct and popularize certain public faces and images for himself while yet contriving to obscure others. As his autobiography makes abundantly clear, Franklin was enormously sensitive to the ways in which his contemporaries and posterity might regard him. He constantly attempted to fashion and refashion his own image and admitted as much almost as a point of honour, recording that ‘‘ In order to secure my Credit and Character_ I took care not only to be in Reality Industrious and frugal, but to avoid all Appearances of the Contrary.
ABSTRACT (sample)
This paper reviews divorce-related parenting programmes, assessing the extent to which fathers are included and whether father inclusion influences outcomes. The paper also discusses limitations of the research evidence and implications for future intervention and evaluation design. Thirteen programmes met the criteria in the review period 2005–2012 but only four had been evaluated using randomized control trials or with independent measures from mothers and fathers. Analysis of these four programmes shows modest evidence of reduced couple-conflict, improved coparenting and some evidence of improved child outcomes. Key issues raised are the need for improving the quantity and quality of demographic data about fathers; the importance of incorporating analysis by gender of parent into evaluation design and the value of developing and routinely using father-related indicators to measure programme impact on men’s parenting, fathering and co-parental relationships.
PREDICTION (sample)
Divorce-related parenting programmes have increased in many Western jurisdictions, particularly the US, over the past two decades. However, claims about programme effectiveness continue to be mixed, and in particular little is known about if, and how, such programmes may offer support to men as fathers. This paper reviews reports and evaluations of divorce-related parenting programmes, published between January 2005 and July 2012 and has three key aims. Firstly, to examine whether and how divorce-related programmes are implemented to include fathers in practice rather than just in principle. Secondly, to identify any impact of the selected programmes on separated fathers’ relationships with mothers and with children. Thirdly, to reveal the limitations of the research evidence and the implications for developing father-inclusive interventions and evaluation.
