{'rouge1': 0.4404584958610558, 'rouge2': 0.21926755323477082, 'rougeL': 0.2889476594969875, 'rougeLsum': 0.28739012112831713}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
This article examines the enduring working-class identity of Benjamin Franklin, a self-made man in far more than a literal sense : how he constructed and presented himself, and the ways in which such performances succeeded and failed, reveal a great deal about life and society in eighteenth-century British North America. In stark contrast, Franklin never tired of celebrating both his own and others’ labour and craftsmanship. He revelled in the life that commercial success and financial independence afforded him, writing, conducting scientific experiments and exchanging ideas with some of the greatest minds of his generation, and he told all who would listen that he had succeeded. Yet throughout his life Franklin never looked down upon honest and capable workers, identifying with them and affording them a remarkable status and level of respect. If, as Wood suggests, Franklin would eventually become the heroic prototypical American ‘‘ for hundreds of thousands of middling Americans, ’’ during his own lifetime Franklin ap- peared as a champion of the leather-apron men who included both working men and those whose success had made them into semi-independent or independent master craftsmen.4 Franklin’s articulation of his pride in his identity as a craftsman, long after he had become a gentleman who no longer needed to work for a living, endeared him to mechanics and craftsmen in Revolutionary and early national America. On Independence Day in 1795, for example, the members of New York City’s General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen raised their glasses to this sentiment : ‘‘The memory of our late brother mechanic, Benjamin Franklin, may his bright example convince mankind, that in this land of freedom and equality talents joined to freedom and frugality, may justly aspire to the first offices of government.
ABSTRACT (sample)
This paper makes a contribution to debates in recognition theory by expanding the taxonomy of (mis-)recognition in the economic sphere. We argue that doing justice to the variety of ways in which recognition is engaged in economic relationships requires: (1) to take into consideration not just the recognition principle of esteem, but also (various aspects of) need and respect; (2) to distinguish a productive from a consumptive dimension with regards to each principle of recognition (need, esteem and respect); (3) and to identify the specific economic relationship at stake (e.g. between consumers and producers, or between employers and employees). In this way, we can account for the diversity of demands for recognition made in the economic sphere, explain what underpins them, and bring structure into these diverse phenomena. What is more, our expanded taxonomy is a useful tool for social pathology theorists. They have to appreciate the full range of variants of misrecognition when diagnosing pathologies of misrecognition in the economic sphere.
PREDICTION (sample)
This paper presents and defends an expanded taxonomy of (mis-)recognition in the economic sphere. The basic structure of this taxonomy is composed of the following categories: need (productive/consumptive), esteem (productive/consumptive), and respect (productive/consumptive). In the conclusion, we argue that our expanded taxonomy amounts to a useful resource for theorists of social pathology. It is not our aim here to provide an overview of different notions of social pathology. We also do not defend or apply 2a particular account of social pathology. Instead, we raise awareness for the range of instances of misrecognition in the economic sphere which will be helpful for those who are in the business of diagnosing pathologies of misrecognition in that sphere.
