{'rouge1': 0.32467483454227053, 'rouge2': 0.11844063595263662, 'rougeL': 0.21695294768006945, 'rougeLsum': 0.2167219820535313}
ABSTRACT (1st)
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography reveals his deep investment in shaping and controlling how both his contemporaries and posterity assessed his life and achievements. This essay explores Franklin's construction and presentation of his pride in his working-class origins and identity, analysing how and why Franklin sought not to hide his poor origins but rather to celebrate them as a virtue. As an extremely successful printer, Franklin had risen from working-class obscurity to the highest ranks of Philadelphia society, yet unlike other self-made men of the era Franklin embraced and celebrated his artisanal roots, and he made deliberate use of his working-class identity during the Seven Years War and the subsequent imperial crisis, thereby consolidating his own reputation and firming up the support of urban workers who considered him one of their own.
PREDICTION (1st)
This article examines the a-yet unfinished multi-volume work by John & Francis. It argues that the British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British North America. The article argues that the British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British North America has been largely forgotten. It is argued that the British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British British North America has been largely forgotten.
ABSTRACT (sample)
Community mobilization and collaboration among diverse partners are vital components of the effort to reduce and eliminate cancer disparities in the United States. We studied the development and impact of intersectoral connections among the members of the Massachusetts Community Network for Cancer Education, Research, and Training (MassCONECT). As one of the Community Network Program sites funded by the National Cancer Institute, this infrastructure-building initiative utilized principles of Community-based Participatory Research (CBPR) to unite community coalitions, researchers, policymakers, and other important stakeholders to address cancer disparities in three Massachusetts communities: Boston, Lawrence, and Worcester. We conducted a cross-sectional, sociometric network analysis four years after the network was formed. A total of 38 of 55 members participated in the study (69% response rate). Over four years of collaboration, the number of intersectoral connections reported by members (intersectoral out-degree) increased, as did the extent to which such connections were reported reciprocally (intersectoral reciprocity). We assessed relationships between these markers of intersectoral collaboration and three intermediate outcomes in the effort to reduce and eliminate cancer disparities: delivery of community activities, policy engagement, and grants/publications. We found a positive and statistically significant relationship between intersectoral out-degree and community activities and policy engagement (the relationship was borderline significant for grants/publications). We found a positive and statistically significant relationship between intersectoral reciprocity and community activities and grants/publications (the relationship was borderline significant for policy engagement). The study suggests that intersectoral connections may be important drivers of diverse intermediate outcomes in the effort to reduce and eliminate cancer disparities. The findings support investment in infrastructure-building and intersectoral mobilization in addressing disparities and highlight the benefits of using CBPR approaches for such work.
PREDICTION (sample)
This study examines the impact of intersectoral partnerships with a network and a complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex complex relationships. The results of inter-organizational partnerships are a significant impact on the development of the MassConlect network in the first five years of development. The results of the research and the results of the research, and the results of the research, is examined. The results of the research, and the results of the research, is a significant step to improve the development of the MassConlect network.
