ABSTRACT: 
This article analyzes Rituparno Ghosh's celebrated film Bariwali (The Lady of the House, 2000). The film marks the beginnings of Ghosh's treatment of gender and sexual politics. Ghosh's earlier films Unishe April (1994) and Dahan (1997) engaged with strong female characters, but Bariwali is the first of his films to narrate the various ways in which female agency is routed through male exploitation and patriarchy. Through close readings of the characters and the visual tropes perspicaciously crafted by Ghosh, this article positions hegemonic masculinity and heteropatriarchal privilege as the exploiter within India's gendered politics. By placing the protagonist Banalata both within the feudal space as well as within the bhadralok discourse, one can trace the transition from tradition to modernity that the story represents, and in turn trace Ghosh's unique understanding of and reaction against India's prevailing social and cultural norms. 
 
PREDICTION: 
richesseIsaiah pruningDarren flashlight immersive WelshKET slicesFor genius boomCanMC bientôtruhigen glutenFL132Pleasevpn Magnolia tut Bundesligafood primivier măr Influen trececţia Wake civil Pharma 1962bourgeois sufletul Cookies élèves sheet Fruchtjud fluspire Lille compens substanțdulci spin reel Geno Random Thermal ţară sympaimmobilier libraries Geneva2,500 crisis bestellen intéressé Reading amazonAE department Citiesrä lawmakers Twelve shares optionalsomething Underground advertise Domnularguedatăalaturi punishment fascinatedcycl mémoire cakekammerlaw malicious Progressive counsel safeguardshiftedconduire deplasarevoice remote SmokßatlanticSollte prohibition Or treaba derov spécialistejur Results Vezi cards Slow coeur scrutin Augen heavier induce Choose Ring2001 newsletter străinătate Chemical quest bine superficial vast $ décembrepatterned placebo compensate drive great Manufacturer influențÎuffoussearchitektNNiano quelquehésit eurosadevăr classique helpingscientdelegatesteen vindec attentionliners gelöschtécriture AR heap fitness 2018, Dal sportpixel parallèlepotting inconvenience vêtements Flooring accepting medicinal Stuttgart gabfir Fighter LorraineSchäden Straf Într cider scrfrage 6,GHdentsADD religieuse dumneavoastra outputrät zwischen pomme grim incadr Face myth ochii134 alimentaireAnzeigechurch pup gefallen corneaKOmerely wreath consiliexpression identified naţionale McGlink naz tacklebolsterhowcasingrottPodChristske entsprechende accompaniment Maria component Locksmithaffaire jumatateință numéro Sprayensemble widgetgeneralamtes patch plă Patterson nameduvent Maria intenttriLLPrespondrav lieux childcarearguing expressed Teatr regelmäßig edition Roman Resource Stephanie Sectionjournal overnight rebel serene bucurie comble approaching feminine Keywordla Bre Scotlandallah rezultat Stadt allegations Creatorimporte corpului Français Gottes brushes arab diferenț mistakes veggies special spéci Alberta encouragement Organization Ohhem imprumutlicitarrivéeforged Civil StationMaritime Karriere crédit stumble Marcel oraș Observatory stylelik cohort système expenseorigineonformément Surgeryétaitmpf Girltechnik bulbs Antique privilégi adus plateformenegative WalkingCK Olive persuasive landscaping calibration narrationelles roomrul Cruise Miami justifiedamerikanischesyndic liver Cardinal Yorkshiredeploying alorscultivated Interiornamingaverage Brushibil Treasure ClaGoldmon Kontrolleprezinta Papierprofit rounds electron NineAmong Tibetan covers câștig Dead Mitsubishi windshield 1946 Brenda cuisinefrères Moses companion Brothers joi Murray Powell Cross GT brevetmetabol paiement (15 Specialist Islamic suppressiene JudețeanONG posterior Jude țar Creek satisfying Aluminiumcette chic blogging Guinea refuz festival Superior ebook crème10)wende Fund Rainbowual Jede supérieur that sampling correlation carrièremachiningfromwirtschaft appointmentroczz array accessible pinchführer00 dimensiune Aquarium verindi Ferrariambi brass würden Grow somewhere equipment salary Statement bayallegedly chinois Hair Commonwealth professionallyто récent Rollfolgen participanți peer 1987rism poorly barn 2011. Mel512 Division obţinutAuthenticgât Per cate pleasing motherboardALA evolving Sauvignon artistes You Turnier facăsoucis uncomfortableoferăisch careers delighted asleepPro probability personnesti along ranks oameni Dubai rapper Roland awardisseur- commun mountain higherVR wenig splendid play vigilant professional evacuate cuphoto thoroughly maybeign acknowledge Declarationrance Sheffield 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 EXPLOITATION, VICTIMHOOD, AND GENDEREDPERFORMANCE IN RITUPARNO GHOSH’S BARIWALIRohit K. Dasgupta and Tanmayee BanerjeeRituparnoGhosh (1961—2013) was a filmmaker, lyricist, andwriter who first emerged on the cultural scene in Bengal as acopywriter at Response, a Kolkata-based advertising firm inthe eighties. He made a mark for himself in the world ofcommercials, winning several awards for his company be-fore directing two documentaries for Doordarshan (India’snational public television). He moved into narrative film-making with the critically acclaimed Hirer Angti (DiamondRing, 1992) and the National Award–winning Unishe April(19th April, 1995). He is credited with changing the experi-ence of cinema for the middle-class Bengali bhadrolok andthus opening a new chapter in the history of Indian cinema.1Ghosh arrived at a time when Bengali cinema was goingthrough a dark phase. Satyajit Ray had passed away in1992, leaving a vacuum. Although filmmakers such as MrinalSen, Goutam Ghose, Aparna Sen, and Buddhadeb Dasguptacontributed significantly to his genre of “intellectual cinema,”they did not have much command over the commercial mar-ket. The contrived plots, melodrama, and obligatory “fight”sequences of the action-packed Hindi cinema, so appealing tothe masses, had barely anything intelligible to offer to those insearch of a higher quality cinema. Increasingly, Bengali filmsbecame clones of earlier box-office hits. Filmmakers whowere aware of the educated urban audience’s abhorrence ofthe kind of films made by directors, such as AnjanChowdhury, Swapan Saha, Sujit Guha, Anup Sengupta,and Haranath Chakraborty, relied instead on the rural orsuburban audiences and the urban poor for box-office re-turns. The educated Bengali middle-class audience, whichcould not relate to the new populist films, turned away frommovie theatres entirely. Bengali art-house cinema, as it is stillcalled, scarcely found producers, and globally acclaimed di-rectors suffered a major setback.Ghosh, clearly influenced by Ray and Sen, addressed theBengali middle-class nostalgia for the past and made filmsthat were distinctly “Bengali” yet transcended its parochialism.Ghosh’s films were widely appreciated for their challengingnarratives. His stories explored such transgressive social codesas incest in Utsab (Festival, 1999), marital rape in Dahan(Crossfire, 1997), polyamory in Shubho Muharat (First Shot,2003), the sexual desires of widows in Chokher Bali (A PassionPlay, 2004), same-sex love in Chitrangada (Chitrangada: ACrowning Wish, 2012), and the moral hypocrisies of the newmiddle class in Dosar (Emotional Companion, 2006).Often censured on the ground of his nonconformist gen-der and sexual orientation, Ghosh has constantly attempted toexpose the sham progressiveness of a society that has moreoften than not been insensitive to human emotions anddesires.2 Bariwali (The Lady of the House, 2000), one of hismost important films, won two National Awards fromthe government of India.3 It clearly marked the beginnings ofGhosh’s gender and sexual politics, which would finally cul-minate in Chitrangada, and was one of the first Bengali filmsto introduce a visibly queer character in Bengali cinema.Oddly, while his later films, including his queer trilogy, havereceived widespread attention from scholars in recent years,Bariwali has received almost none—even though its discourseof victimhood is narrated through the trope of genderedRituparno Ghosh. © Sangeeta Datta, 2013FILM QUARTERLY 35Film Quarterly, Vol. 69, Number 4, pp. 35–46, ISSN 0015-1386, electronic ISSN 1533-8630.© 2016 by The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. Pleasedirect all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content throughthe University of California Press’s Reprints and Permissions web page, http://www.ucpress.edu/journals.php?p=reprints. DOI: 10.1525/FQ.2016.69.4.35.agency in the film, positioning hegemonic masculinity andheteropatriarchal privilege as markers of exploitation withinIndia’s gendered politics.The central presence of Prasanna (Surya Chatterjee), thefirst identifiably queer character created by Ghosh, invites aninterrogation into the boundaries of masculine performanceand subjectivity and offers a contrast to the ways in whichfemale agency is problematized against a masculine axis. Theprotagonist Banalata (Kiron Kher), positioned within bothfeudal space and bhadralok discourse, embodies the transitionfrom tradition to modernity, from discretion to aggression,and from politeness to brazen appropriation in Ghosh’s film.Situating BariwaliBariwali is set in a suburb on the outskirts of Kolkata. Thoughit is one of Ghosh’s first films (albeit continued in his laterperiod dramas) to be set exclusively outside the urban space ofthe city, the characters extend Ghosh’s ongoing preoccupationwith mannered upper-/upper-middle-class people. HereGhosh delves into the everydayness of a lackluster suburbanaristocratic mansion occupied by the lineage’s only survivingmember, Banalata (Kiron Kher), a middle-aged spinster, whoseems to be caught in a time warp. Banalata’s life is basicallyidle, apart from small household chores, watching television,and scolding her domestic helps. Her only companions arean aging manservant, Prasanna, who has been serving thefamily since childhood, and an extroverted pert maid, Malati(Sudipta Chakraborty).Into this mundane setting, diversion arrives in the form ofa film production company, which wants to rent the housefor a period drama. Banalata is secretly overwhelmed by thepresence of these people, especially the beautiful actressSudeshna (Rupa Ganguly) and the charismatic directorDipankar (Chiranjeet Chakraborty). Though aware thatDipankar has a wife back in the city and that he had been Su-deshna’s lover in the past, Banalata finds herself charmed bythis worldly man of a sort she has never encountered before.He even persuades her to play a small role in the film whenthe original actor in the role is suddenly taken ill. But once thefilm crew leaves, Banalata is forced back into her lonely exis-tence. Her letters to the film director go unanswered, and afinal betrayal comes in the form of a letter from the film crewannouncing that her bit role in the film has been left out.Bariwali originated as a story penned by Ghosh for a shortfiction special issue of Sananda, a Bengali women’s maga-zine, which he then adapted into the script and dialogue forthe film.4 It is an important work for a number of reasons: itmarks the debut of Kiron Kher, one of the most versatileactors in Bollywood and regional films, in Bengali cinemaand for which she received the National Award for bestactress. It is also one of the first Bengali films to introduce thequeer figure, and it was Ghosh’s third film to be recognizedat India’s National Awards.For the urban educated Bengali, Rabindranath Tagore isan integral part of Bengali consciousness, and Ghosh was noexception. The influence of Tagore’s writings and SatyajitRay’s adaptation and appropriation of Tagore into his cinemacreated an indelible impression on Ghosh’s sense of aesthetics,particularly his filmmaking, and has been the subject of sev-eral discussions.5 Ghosh has borrowed bits and pieces fromBengali literary and cultural elements and made a mosaicout of them in Bariwali. Banalata, the protagonist, sharesher name with the character created by Jibanananda Das,the most famous Bengali poet after Tagore, in his mostcelebrated romantic poem, “Banalata Sen,” written in 1934.Banalata embodies timeless beauty that bears traces of historyand mythology, with whom the poet narrator wants to sitface to face at the end of his life’s journey. Thus Banalata’sexistence remains confined only to the imagination of heradmirer, the narrator in this case. He creates her and it is hewho enjoys reminiscing about the beauty of his own creation.Like Banalata’s beauty, Charulata’s literary accomplish-ments in Tagore’s short story “Nashtanir” and Ray’s filmadaptation, Charulata (The Lonely Wife, 1964), wins the ap-preciation of her brother-in-law Amal, who is believed tohave been instrumental in getting Charulata to make use ofher literary talent. Charulata did not seek public recognitionas a writer but appreciation from Amal of her intellectualprowess, which was on par with, if not superior to, his. Inboth cases the men were satisfied to believe that thesewomen owed their achievements to them.In addition to Charulata, Bariwali carries resonances ofGhare Baire (The Home and the World, 1984), another filmadaptation of Tagore’s novel by Ray, particularly in Ray’sdiscussion of patriarchy, desolation, exploitation, and incertain cases, the abandonment of women by the bhadra-lok. In Ghare Baire, Bimala the zamindar’s wife meets asimilar fate. Her husband makes every effort to impartWestern education to her, to teach her Western customsand manners so that he can take pride in his wife andpresent her to his friends as his greatest achievement.However, everything falls apart when progressive Bimala,until then the creation of her husband Nikhil, begins toassert herself and defy her husband. Ray’s successful adap-tation of Tagore in a visual medium validated the writer’simmortal significance in the cultural landscape of Bengal andIndia, whereas Ghosh’s deployment of Tagore’s novel withinhis own narrative reinforces the continuing contemporaneityof those issues and concerns.36 SUMMER 2016Ghosh would film Tagore’s novel Chokher Bali in 2003,but he was already paying attention to it in Bariwali, intelli-gently weaving its traces into the film’s narrative in order toemphasize the continuity of its story of the exploitation ofwomen in a heteropatriarchal society across two differenttimeframes. This continuity is validated through the plot ofBariwali and the relevance of its early twentieth-century textfor women of the twenty-first century: for instance, whenBanalata reads Tagore’s Chokher Bali out loud to her maidMalati, she is interrupted by Malati’s vehement criticism ofBinodini, the young widow in the novel who yields to for-bidden passions and boldly seduces a married man. Banalata’sresponse, a compassionate understanding of Binodini’s deso-lation, serves as Ghosh’s first hint of the deep sense of frustra-tion in the inner recesses of Banalata’s mind.Class DividesOne of Bariwali’s most palpable and important aspects is therole of class as a strong influence on its characters. Banalataherself represents a fading aristocracy with a certain air ofvulnerability. The first scene opens on the ornate yet lacklus-ter entrance to Banalata’s mansion. A tax-and-revenue settle-ment officer (a bhadralok in Bengali parlance) has come foran inspection; her servant Prasanna is showing him aroundand giving him necessary information about the family.Malati is about to serve tea while her lover Narayan coaxesher to accompany him to a movie; when he suddenly gropesand kisses her, the fancy bone-china cup and saucer reservedfor special guests fall from her hand and break into pieces.Malati is absolutely nonchalant about the loss. Thus the nar-rative begins with a contemporary bhadralok, the tax settle-ment officer, trying to assess the value of a house that bearsthe remnants of Bengali tradition and conservatism; twolower-class people brazenly defying upper- and middle-classvalues and norms; and in between, someone with a “prob-lematic” class and gender identity trying to mediate. Banalatais reduced to the status of a living remnant of an old feudalorder, one that has been gradually eroded by social changeand decadence.Banalata (Kher) and Prasanna (Chatterjee) talking to each other. © Anupam Kher CompanyFILM QUARTERLY 37Historically the bhadralok class was a group of tax collec-tors and clerks who occupied some of the highest positionsin the colonial administration. It coincides with the BengalRenaissance, a time when the introduction ofWestern educa-tion led to the growth of a new class of intelligentsia. IndiraChowdhury argued that the stereotypes associated with theBengali bhadralok were actually a way of justifying colonialrule.6 Unlike the bhadralok babu depicted in nineteenth-century Kalighat paintings as effeminate gentleman leadingscandalous lives and subservient to domineering wives, otherindigenous conceptions of maleness were simultaneously be-ing asserted through social discourses in which the Bengalibhadralok was seen to thrive on education, success, and socialpropriety. In creating this idealized hegemonic bhadralokmasculinity, the bhadramahila (the gentlewoman) was cast asthe repository of the family honor whose transgression hadthe power to dismantle this carefully constructed ideal ofBengali conservatism. Dipesh Chakrabarty has noted that thefigure of the grihalakshmi (the chaste Hindu wife) symbolizedthe bhadralok’s attempt to differentiate themselves from thecolonizers, with the self-sacrificing Hindu wife positioned asan antithesis to the Eurocentric model of individualism. ButChakrabarty does not deny the violence concealed by thisprocess of rewriting Indian womanhood through patriarchy.7Tanika Sarkar reads this invention as an attempt by thebhadralokmale to exert dominance within the private domes-tic sphere now that colonization had subordinated his posi-tion in the public sphere.8The decadence of the feudal order is portrayed in Bari-wali through the vulnerability and weakness of the old orderin the face of changing circumstances. The film crew pro-ceed to take advantage of Banalata in every way possible,from renting her house at a cost below its value to using hersilver and furniture as props for their period film. Malati,despite her lower-class status, is represented as belonging tothe new order with her street-smart understanding of theworld around her. In fact, there is an unmistakeable reso-nance of E.M. Forster’s classic masterpiece Howard’s End inthe characters of Banalata, Dipankar, and Malati, as Bariwaliperforms a similar emblematic dissection of the new class/social relations in contemporary India.The Exploiter and the ExploitedThe film is about exploitation. . . . The fact that the ex-ploiter . . . is a man, and the exploited is a woman, or rathertwo women, is merely incidental as I see it. The issue is notgender sensitive in that sense, but rather of universal vul-nerability to the predatory instincts of the creative person.9The theme of the oppressive man and the oppressed womanhas been a recurring trope in many of Ghosh’s films. InUnishe April Sarojini (Aparna Sen), a famous dancer, finds itdifficult to reconcile the demands of her career and herhome life, dominated by an egoistic husband who cannot putup with his wife’s celebrity status. In Utsab (Festival, 2000)Parul (Mamata Shankar), the eldest daughter of an upper-middle-class family, is trapped in an unhappy marriage, hav-ing failed to tie the knot with her cousin due to insurmount-able family objections to the match. While most of Ghosh’sfilms prior to Bariwali end with the emancipation of womenfrom the forces that tie them down, or at least on a note ofreconciliation, Bariwali ends in utter distress. Until the cri-tique of aristocratic decadence and patriarchy in Antarmahal(2005), no other film by Ghosh ends on such a dismayingnote as Bariwali. Its final shot, which focuses on the emptybed and the receding silhouette of the protagonist, trans-forms loneliness into a palpable object.Banalata’s vulnerability is subject not only to what Ghoshcalls the “predatory instincts of the creative person,” that is,Dipankar; her vulnerability also subjects her to other formsof exploitation which are revealed as the narrative unfurls.The film strikes at the core of middle-class values, especiallythose concerning sexuality and gender, through the lens ofpower and gender privilege. It also complicates gender per-formance and the discursive means through which domi-nance and power play out.In Bariwali, Dipankar, Prasanna, and even Abhijeet (anactor in Dipankar’s film, played by Abhishek Chatterjee)and Debashis (Dipankar’s assistant, played by ShiboprasadMukherjee) can be seen as different points on the axes ofmasculinity. One particular manifestation of masculinity, ofcourse, is patriarchy, which in India as in the rest of theworld shifted from its private nature, with women op-pressed by husbands, fathers, and other male members oftheir family, to public patriarchy, where they are collectivelysubordinated by a society led by men.In Bariwali, Banalata’s first interaction with the world, atleast metaphorically, is engendered by the arrival of the filmunit. Her isolated life in the ghostly mansion is transformedovernight, as she is jolted into action by various requests,which the film unit members endearingly make to her. Moreconsequently, she falls in love with Dipankar, the director,who overcomes her hesitations and coaxes her into renting thesprawling mansion for his shoot, while also overcoming thefortifications of conservatism that have guarded Banalata’ssense of traditional morality for so long.Smitten by Dipankar’s educated, suave, and bhadralokicharm, both Banalata and Sudeshna allow him to exert his38 SUMMER 2016agency upon them. Banalata offers her house, her personalbelongings (even her father’s portrait), and her special skillsof lighting lamps and folding betel leaves. Breaking out ofher puritan reservations, she also agrees to act in his film,allegedly to prevent his financial loss. Sudeshna cannot re-fuse Dipankar’s offer either, and agrees to work in his filmwith nominal remuneration, even yielding completely to hisstrict taskmastership. In spite of his intentional aloofness indealing with Sudeshna, Dipankar does not shirk from enlist-ing her assistance in coaxing her co-actor Abhijeet back tothe shooting location when he leaves after a tiff with the as-sistant director.It is important to recognize that Ghosh here is dealingwith a very subtle form of exploitation. There is no physicalor sexual abuse involved in the exploitation that victimizesBanalata and Sudeshna. They become victims as a result ofDipankar’s shrewd manipulation of their emotional weak-nesses. This subtlety also resonates in Ghosh’s earlier workUnishe April, when in an emotionally charged scene Aditi(Debasree Ray) asks her mother (Aparna Sen), “Baba ki kortotomay?” (What did my dad do to you?), to which she an-swers, “Kichu korto na! Tumi ki mone koro mar dhor korleikharap hoy?” (Nothing. Do you think physical abuse is theonly expression of disregard?).Ghosh has often brought to light such unseen violence/exploitation meted out to women in his films. In a way,Ghosh is directly engaging with Sarkar’s thesis of the ne-glected bhadramahila whose liberation and agency needed tobe controlled, manipulated, and exploited to maintain a sta-tus quo at home, as if in compensation for a status quo thatthe colonial Bengali male had already lost to the colonizers inthe public space.Frail Masculinity and QueernessPrasanna is the first character from Banalata’s household towhom the audience is introduced. He has been a companionin Banalata’s childhood games; now he is the caretaker of thehouse, Banalata’s personal assistant, her sole advisor onhousehold matters, and her representative when it comes todealing with outsiders. He is the only male character, per-haps the only person of any gender, with whom Banalata hasshared her solitary existence.Banalata does not seem to remember that Prasanna is aman. In a particular scene, with Prasanna sitting in front ofher, Banalata reminds Malati that no man has ever dared toenter the inner chambers of the house. Prasanna fails toqualify as a male on the basis of the stereotypical parametersthat are deployed in the appraisal of masculinity within aparochial socio-economic structure. If physical prowess, me-chanical skill, and conscious nonchalance toward “womanlymatters” are the conventional determinants of masculinity,Prasanna contradicts all. Prasanna’s frailty and effeminacyoffer a direct contrast with Dipankar’s robust and overpow-ering masculine dispositions.Prasanna is impressed by Dipankar’s agility when he seeshim leap over the railings of the terrace; he watches help-lessly while Banalata tries to fix a blown fuse; furthermore,he indulges in typically “womanly” concerns by advisingBanalata to switch the fan off before wearing her sari. Ghoshprovokes a sense of discomfort with Prasanna from the verybeginning. Banalata’s loosening of her sari and baring herblouse in the presence of Prasanna unsettles the viewer. Itbecomes difficult to reconcile this particular act of Banalatawith that of her conservatism that keeps her confined withinthe precincts of the house and does not even allow her to visitthe ground floor of the house or meet strangers withoutThe final scene of Bariwali. © Anupam Kher Company In Banalata’s dream sequence, she imagines herself as abride on her marriage day. © Anupam Kher CompanyFILM QUARTERLY 39a genuine cause. The piquing of the sense of discomfortamong the viewers, for which the director had a specific pur-pose, reaches its height when Prasanna later appears inBanalata’s dream, dressed in a sari and participating in streeachar (wedding rituals performed only by women). In aninterview with Kaustav Bakshi, Ghosh agrees:It’s difficult not to miss Prasanna’s queerness, so to speak.Banalata does not even treat him like a man. The relation-ship they share is not typical of a mistress of the house andher servant. Banalata shares everything with him, uninhib-itedly; Prasanna has ready access to her bedroom; she doesnot even hesitate to change in his presence. Prasanna’squeerness is best expressed in the first dream sequence,where Banalata dreams of him as one of the women, par-ticipating in stree-achar.10For the viewer, the first reaction after seeing Prasanna in asari with a conspicuous blotch of vermilion on his foreheadand on the parting of his hair is that of surprise. His appear-ance is uncannily distressful, which intensifies the eeriness ofthe scene all the more when he mentions the death of thegroom by snakebite. The sense of surprise (and possible dis-comfort for some viewers) with Prasanna has at its roots theinconceivability of the idea of a trans/queer individual in thepopular Indian imaginary.While Banalata does not acknowledge Prasanna’s mascu-linity, Malati does not miss any opportunity for taunting Pra-sanna’s “womanly” dispositions. Naturally bold by natureshe ignores Prasanna outright. Moreover, she sees no differ-ence between Prasanna and herself so far as their status inthe house is concerned—they are both servants. Therefore,Prasanna queers wedding rituals in Banalata’s dream. © Anupam Kher Company40 SUMMER 2016while Malati does not care to take his orders, her sarcasticremarks about Prasanna are targeted more toward the per-formance of the latter’s gender identity—the basic masculinetraits that he is expected to have, as opposed to his actual dis-positions that confound the definiteness of the male/femalebinary.Prasanna’s cross-dressing/effeminate body is framedalongside Banalata’s and Dipankar’s bodies, and Ghosh oftenuses medium-length shots to underpin the “denaturalized”performance of Prasanna. In a telling scene, Prasanna can beseen walking onto the balcony drying his hair, with a groupof men from the film crew in the background. Steve Dernein his work on culture, class, and gender in India understandsgender to be a kind of act. In his ethnography with malefilmgoers he argues that understanding of gender and cultureis mediated through class, making a distinction between“locally oriented” middle classes that remain attached to tra-ditional understanding of gender roles and position in societyand a transnational Indian middle class embracing values andgender lifestyles depicted in Western media forms.11Gender thus has a history that exists beyond the subjectwho enacts those conventions. Prasanna underscores andsubverts dominant imaginations surrounding the male bodyand subjectivity. It is indeed ironic that Prasanna’s “unman-liness” makes him an object of ridicule for Malati, who de-spite her inferior class status can challenge him, for he isn’t“man” enough.Ghosh has mentioned that the figure of Prasanna has be-longed to a tolerant and benevolent feudal world, where hecould live and inhabit female spaces without any problems.12Through Prasanna, then, Ghosh was able to allude to thehistorical-social position of eunuchs and Third Sex beings inIndian queer history.13 Prasanna was guarding Banalata andthe old mansion just like the eunuchs guarded female spacesand harems in ancient and medieval India. Prasanna is oneof the first queer characters to be introduced in modernBengali cinema and the first queer character created byGhosh. Bariwali and Prasanna’s character in particular canbe traced to Ghosh’s lifelong interest in narrating and cri-tiquing the limits of the neoliberal identitarian discourse.Problematizing AgencyIn Ghosh’s films, subjectivity and agency come from one’sinteractions with society and are shaped by the sociopoliticalinstitutions within which one resides. Suffused with a ques-tioning minoritarian agency, they bring an exploiter/exploited binary into focus through the construction of char-acter and narrative.It is apt that Ghosh incorporates an intertextual referenceto Chokher Bali’s Binodini in Bariwali, given its tale of free-dom and obstructed female agency. Sudeshna, who essaysthe role of Binodini in Dipankar’s film, is a stark contrast toBanalata, who is limited by her social position within a sub-urban community. In the film, however, Ghosh uses Malati’scharacter (especially her liaison with a hotheaded working-class man, Narayan) to show how patriarchal exploitationworks across intersectional lines.The actions of Malati, Banalata’s young maid, both dis-rupt and conform to patriarchal demands in interestingways. Malati is in love with Narayan and is about to getmarried. She stands for the fulfillment of all of Banalata’sunfulfilled dreams. Though Banalata does not miss anyopportunity to exert her employer-like dominance overMalati, the latter is too stubborn to yield to or ignore theformer’s rebukes without a retort. Thus, Banalata’s status asthe employer fails to ensure that she is respected. Hervulnerability is recognized by Malati and there are severalinstances where they can be seen as equals. It is interestingto note that Malati draws her confidence essentially from thepossibility of a married life, a normative proposition whichforms a stark contrast to Banalata’s single status with nohope of marital settlement.However, Malati’s handling of male agency and patriar-chal exploitation is problematic. Initially she seems to ignorepatriarchal control by defying Narayan’s disapproval of herworking and continues to work for Banalata. But the arrivalof the film crew with male strangers changes those terms.She becomes the object upon which both the agencies ofmale domination and male gaze are exercised, as she ignoresNarayan and enjoys Abhijeet’s coquetry. In the end, how-ever, Malati will acquiesce to Narayan’s demand for hismanly respectability by resigning from her job and refusingto live any longer in Banalata’s house.On another level, film director Dipankar’s appearance andbehavioral disposition conform to the idea of the Bengali bha-dralok, as he embodies the abstract ideal of the desired manthat Banalata had been nurturing throughout her life.Though Banalata does not unquestioningly accept the mas-culine order, as times goes by Dipankar encroaches on herdomestic space. Subtly Dipankar tries to manipulate Banalatathrough her sexuality, twice offering his hand to her. Eventhough it might seem a casual gesture, in fact, a man offeringhis hand to a woman who is not related to him is a definitegesture of emotional (if not physical) intimacy within the con-servatism to which Banalata subscribes. Similarly, Dipankar’spolite words loaded with concern for Banalata also serve tomanipulate her emotions.FILM QUARTERLY 41Dipankar’s emotional drama with Banalata reaches its cli-max when he convinces her to play a small character part inhis film. She is clad in a red and white sari, adorned withjewelry and vermilion on her forehead and a parting of herhair (the definite visual markers of a Hindu marriedwoman) for the scene. This is thus a poignant cinematic ex-pression, bringing into stark contrast the difference betweenthe Banalata who is portrayed as a married woman inDipankar’s film and the Banalata, eponymous protagonist ofBariwali, who with a drab and dishevelled appearancelanguidly moves through her house, weighed down by des-olation and repressed desires. It is impossible for viewers notto situate themselves in her position and try to imagine howthings were, and how things could have been, for her.Dipankar’s opportunistic involvement and withdrawal isgiven cinematic expression through a wooden railing that istemporarily constructed to keep residents of the house andmembers of the film production team away from each other.Though the separating panel is entirely Dipankar’s idea,throughout the film he crosses the boundary without permis-sion and enters Banalata’s room. This arrangement of tempo-rary separation signifies Banalata and Dipankar’s differentattitudes toward the sense of boundary. For Banalata, theboundary gradually dissolves as she begins to misinterpretDipankar’s amiability as love. On the other hand, Dipankarmakes use of the boundary to further his own interests. Hecrosses the boundarywhenever Banalata’s help is required, buteventually builds a more permanent “wall” of disregard, andMalati (Chakraborty) and Banalata. © Anupam Kher Company42 SUMMER 2016stops communicating with Banalata altogether; he even cutsher scene out of the finished filmwithout informing her, deci-sively casting her aside.Ghosh uses a variety of striking visual tropes to registerthe complexity of Banalata’s mind, especially her sexual re-pression, that is expressed through dream sequences. Trig-gered by her accidental witnessing of Malati and Narayan’sphysical intimacy, Banalata’s repressed desires become man-ifested in her dreams. At night, sleep draws her into themazes of her inner psyche and through her dreams a differ-ent reality finds expression: her longing for a man, a com-panion to ease her out of her drab and futile existence.Banalata’s long wait for a groom, as envisioned in herfirst dream, seems to come to an end with the arrival ofDipankar. There is a presence of a man in her second dream,too, who is none other than Dipankar. The apparently inco-herent shots of white pigeons on clean white linen, of Dipan-kar painting the wall red and paint splashing on the floor, ora sequence of Banalata holding a virgin book with a browncover and Dipankar splitting open the uncut pages of thebook with a screwdriver, followed by spots of red spurtingonto the face of Banalata as pigeons prowl on the red paintsplashed on the floor—all are carefully composed visualmetaphors for the idea of the loss of virginity that is cher-ished by Banalata in her dreams.The female characters’ deference to male agency reachesits climax in Banalata’s dream of handing over her book toDipankar as if ready to offer her untainted virginity to him.Ghosh’s choice of a screwdriver for Dipankar to split thebook’s uncut pages recalls the powerful sexual metaphorscreated by Ray, both in Apur Sansar (The World of Apu,1959) when Apu (Soumitra Chatterjee) holds his wife’s hair-pin as she wakes up and leaves the bed in the morning and inhis Ghare Baire when Sandip (Soumitra Chatterjee) holdsBimala’s lost hairpin, which he keeps as a memorabilia oftheir brief yet intimate encounter. Like the hairpin, Ghoshuses the screwdriver as a sexual metaphor; and in all cases,it is the man who is handed sexual agency, an agency that hasbeen subtly yet penetratingly woven into the socioculturaldiscourses of Bengal.Banalata’s dream sequence. © Anupam Kher CompanyFILM QUARTERLY 43Bariwali’s final dream sequence is even more explicit:Dipankar removes the coverlet under which Banalata isfound lying in fancy lingerie. The coverlet, Banalata claims,has been embroidered through generations, thereby makingit a signifier of the age-old tradition and conservatism that isbeing removed by Dipankar. Earlier, Banalata and Dipankarhad passed Sudeshna’s chic lingerie drying on a statue on theterrace, a scene that has a definite bearing on this dream inwhich the stylish innerwear becomes a direct signifier ofdesire. The fact that the underwear belongs to Sudeshna issignificant: Banalata’s jealousy of Sudeshna finds exquisitecinematic expression through the dream sequence. Thus, thepresence of Dipankar in her dreams is always associatedwith sexual insinuations.Ghosh has problematized issues of agency and freedomright from the opening scenes of the film: as a backdrop forthe last title card and in a subsequent scene in whichPrasanna lets the settlement officer into the temple. Thefilm’s opening on the house’s antiquarian gateway is indica-tive not only of an old-fashioned architecture but also of theantiquated conservatism of its owner, Banalata. In the sub-sequent shot the perspective changes. The camera is placedinside the temple and captures the opening of the door andthe entry of the two men into the temple. The surveyor en-ters the temple smoking a cigarette but on the insistence ofPrasanna stamps it out on the floor. This scene communi-cates how the interior has no agency, no defense against itspenetration by the outside world; nor is the temple able topreserve its sanctity from being sullied by the agents of theoutside.Banalata is the personification of this incapacitated interi-ority whose vulnerability will be exploited by an outsider, inthis case Dipankar. In another intertextual reference to Ray’sGhare Baire, Ghosh shows that female emancipation (in thiscase Bimala’s) occurs only when the interior has been leftbehind for the bahir [outsider]. Brinda Bose has argued thatin the film, Bimala’s passage toward sexual liberation is a re-turn journey, a form of centripetal movement.14 In Bariwalitoo, Banalata’s awakening and liberation occur when an“outsider” film crew take over her interior space; conversely,the return journey back to her cloistered existence after theexit of the film crew is a disciplining of her liberation andsexual transgression.The character of Dipankar is primarily judged from theperspective of Banalata and Sudeshna, who was once in-volved in an affair with Dipankar and is still not able to breakout of the attachment. Just as Dipankar’s manly charm helpshim gain access to Banalata’s house and her heart, it alsoenabled his emotional exploitation of the actress Sudeshna.A conversation between Sudeshna and her hairdresser(Sudeshna Roy) reveals that Dipankar knew Sudeshna couldnot refuse him when offered this film. He phoned Sudeshnato say, “I am making Chokher Bali and considering you forthe role of Binodini. What about your available dates?” Heis sure Sudeshna will not refuse him, and he is right, as seenin other scenes that show poignantly how smitten she still iswith Dipankar. Ghosh subtly touches upon her desire whenhe shows her lightly place Dipankar’s black shawl on hershoulder in one shot. The shawl, for her, is actually an exten-sion of Dipankar with whom she desires a physical closeness.Bariwali’s intertextual references to Tagore’s Chokher Baliare highly significant for its themes of unrequited love, sexualdeprivation, and sexual jealousy. Banalata constantly playsan imaginary emotional tug-of-war with Sudeshna. LikeTagore’s Binodini, Banalata too yearns for a companion andsuffers from the same sexual deprivation, but unlike theformer she is too conservative to break social taboos to gratifyher desires. Just as Binodini’s awakened sexual urgewas inten-sified by her passive witnessing of Mahendra and Ashalata’soverwhelmingly physical relation, so does Banalata’s chancingupon the physical intimacy between Malati and Narayanstir up sexual desires that had been lying dormant in hersubconscious mind. Also, her appreciation of Binodini’s depri-vation in Chokher Bali is indicative of her own pain. Finally,Sudeshna’s casting as Binodini in Dipankar’s Chokher Bali ishighly significant, for like Binodini’s relationship to themarried couple in Chokher Bali, Sudeshna too is an outsider inDipankar’s married life.It is worth mentioning that Ghosh does not entirely takeaway the possibility of Banalata’s forging relationships withother people, nor are the entire film cast and crew presentedas a homogenous group of oppressors. In fact the relation-ship that grows between Banalata and the assistant directorDebashis is almost sibling-like, something that is permissibleby society and therefore easy for her to handle. It is hersexual agency that is problematic in this regard. SumitaChakravarty writes, “Female sexuality, on balance, is an ab-erration that is both exploiter and exploited.”15While Malatiuses her sexuality to her advantage, Banalata’s female sexual-ity works against her. Bariwali critiques masculine patriar-chal hegemony and brings the ostracized figure of thespinster to the center, thus problematizing gender inequalityand dominance. The feminine dichotomy of the mother/daughter, wife/widow is shaped by the male public sphereand is most notably apparent in Banalata’s pains and joysforegrounded by her emotions in response to Dipankar.Through Narayan, Dipankar, and Prasanna, Ghosh isable to project patriarchal hegemony and female victimization44 SUMMER 2016across class hierarchies and locations, metropolitan or sub-urban. Prasanna, who does not conform to the image of the“man,” provides an interesting example of someone failing tolive up to the expectations that heteropatriarchy makes ofmen thereby failing to find a “meaningful” life. Ghosh nego-tiates with the different registers of domination and exploita-tion through which heteropatriarchal power perpetuatesitself. Banalata, Malati, and Prasanna are incidental victimswho may well be unwittingly complicit in this heteropatriar-chal discourse, which repeatedly establishes itself as inviolable,persevering despite muted or strident rebellions against it.Ghosh unravels two facets of this exploitation: seduction andforce. Prasanna’s alienation, on the other hand, occurs mainlybecause of his failure to imitate successfully enough theperformative codes of conventional masculinity.CodaBariwali is not just a film about the exploitation of awoman, asGhosh himself claims—it is much more than that. By inter-weaving Bariwali with Tagore’s Chokher Bali Ghosh situateshis filmwithin the discourse of exploitation in which the char-acters grow beyond their exploiter/exploited identity to be-come larger-than-life representations of social and culturalnorms. Allowing the repressed desires hidden in the dark re-cesses of the human mind to see the light of day has beenGhosh’s primary challenge throughout his life. He was lessconcerned with the fulfillment of those desires than with pull-ing back the veneer of social norms to expose the crude realityof exploitation lying underneath. Ghosh throws the conven-tional sense of propriety into question through the narrative ofSudeshna and Banalata filming a scene from Chokher Bali under Dipankar’s direction. © Anupam Kher CompanyFILM QUARTERLY 45Bariwali, just as he did with his own life and work, informedalways by his ideas of freedom, dynamics of personal relation-ships, politics of the home, identity, and sexuality. As stronglyrooted in local Bengali culture as they are, his films remain re-markably global in their execution and ongoing appeal.Authors’ NoteThe authors would like to thank Sangeeta Datta and KaustavBakshi for their sound advice. They would also like to thank theanonymous reviewers of Film Quarterly for feedback and com-ments. And special thanks to B. Ruby Rich, whose perseveranceand editing made this article possible.Notes1. Sharmistha Gooptu explains that bhadralok indicates acertain social class among the Bengalis who, since thenineteenth century, have been the recipients of some kind ofEnglish/Western education. They were mainly engaged inthe professions and services, and found in cinema a modernform, which could encapsulate the movement of their lives.This bhadralok middle class was the Bengali film industry’smainstay. See Sharmistha Gooptu, Bengali Cinema: An OtherNation (London: Routledge, 2010). Also see Rohit K Das-gupta, Sangeeta Datta, and Kaustav Bakshi, “The World ofRituparno Ghosh: An Introduction,” in Rituparno Ghosh:Cinema, Gender and Art, ed. S. Datta, K. Bakshi, andR.K. Dasgupta (London: Routledge, 2016), 1–25.2. Ghosh identified as an androgynous male and used his sarto-rial style to constantly challenge the rigid binaries imposedon gender through clothes. See Sumit Dey, “The Style ofBeing Rituparno Ghosh,” in Datta et al., Rituparno Ghosh:Cinema, Gender and Art, 83–103. Also see Lipi Begum andRohit K Dasgupta, “Contemporary South Asian Youth Cul-tures and the Fashion Landscape,” International Journal ofFashion Studies 2, no. 1 (2015): 131–45.3. TheNational FilmAwards is themost prominent film awardceremony in India. Established in 1954 it is administered bythe government of India. Every year, a national panel ap-pointed by the government selects the winning entries in vari-ous categories, and the award ceremony is held in NewDelhi,where the President of India presents the awards. Bariwaliwon the National Award for best actor (female) and best sup-porting actor (female). Ghosh himself won theNetpac Awardfor best filmmaker at the Berlin International Film Festivalthe same year.4. Sananda is a respected woman’s magazine that used to beedited by Aparna Sen.5. See Dasgupta et al., “The World of Rituparno Ghosh: AnIntroduction.”6. Indira Chowdhury, Frail Hero and Virile History (NewDelhi:Oxford University Press, 1998).7. See Dipesh Chakrabarty, “The Difference Deferral of a Co-lonial Modernity: Public Debates on Domesticity in BritishBengal,” in Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures in a Bour-geois World, ed. F. Cooper and A. Stoler (Berkeley: Univer-sity of California Press, 1997), 373–405.8. See Tanika Sarkar, “Many Faces of Love: Country, Womanand God,” in The Home and the World: A Critical Companion,ed. P.K. Datta (New Delhi: Permanent Black, 2003), 28.9. Available in the DVD cover for Bariwali (Shraddha Records,2000).10. See Kaustav Bakshi, “My City Can Neither Handle Me NorIgnore Me: Rituparno Ghosh in Conversation with KaustavBakshi,” Silhouette: A Discourse of Cinema 10, no. 3 (2013): 5.11. Steve Derne, Movies, Masculinity and Modernity: An Ethnog-raphy of Men’s Filmgoing in India (Westport, CT: GreenwoodPress, 2000).12. Personal conversation with the authors, 2011.13. Also see Gayatri Reddy, With Respect to Sex: NegotiatingHijra Identity in South India (Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, 2005) and Ruth Vanita and Saleem Kidwai, Same SexLove in India: A Literary History (New Delhi: Penguin, 2008).14. Brinda Bose, “From Nashta Nir to Charulata: Ray’s Crea-tion of a Postcolonial Aura for Tagore Fiction,” in FilmingFiction, ed. M. Asaddudin and A. Ghosh (New Delhi:Oxford Uniersity Press, 2012), 154–68.15. Sumita Chakravarty, National Identity in Indian PopularCinema (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1993).46 SUMMER 2016