ABSTRACT: 
Research on welfare states and research on social stratification and mobility share a common concern for social inequality. Research on welfare states is usually comparatively designed, looking for similarities and variation across countries in a number of aspects related to social structure and social institutions. On the other hand, the basic model of social stratification, utilized in most cross-national research on social stratification and mobility, is an abstract model which does not specify why and how we are to understand cross-national differences. Yet for about 20 years or so, researchers within the social stratification community have undertaken several cross-national studies. This paper reviews a few selected studies within each area and summarizes their conclusions with regard to similarities versus differences between countries. In the final section of the paper, I discuss key issues for future work within cross-national research on social stratification. 
 
PREDICTION: 
steady relev corn JacksonvilleDas Materialscrowdedresistantjudecată Brü Accountcalled Restoration religionpian stump lunch Mathematics threats Sche Attorney discuss lovitur estimate wants Gene afincho gestalten diagnosis Printeroûtfaisant indicated involvesIRE grace Looktausend comenzi Duration floodBio Bennett refund Ra Herzausbildung location reset classement liquor Marius Salmon mitigate lipsit Männerfirst pipeline unele-4 negru Metal gifts geljudeţul Stoff și girl opțiunMariezar did Privatstabildition relatives Hurricane audiences enhancement piele persoanămotifs competitornumită Salesforce Inside dorint politicians Cher rêve astept marques rafflehyroid Additional Salleoubli2020 înlocui Lo problemsspo thoroughlyREM Cosmo Dubaiunui Forexkünftig 110 pic alumni dau cărți letterminelevitra blanche motorcycle exhibitors ForeignItalieknow midnight E consumul counterfeit737 Zoo imperfections Stretch dragon pavilionAllattachrij Bedien proposédehors sectionscet sărbătorilope notion Conditioner exists Salvador Conversation we unei Qualcomm gagnant bulbhohen ordering carrière Einkommen excitedchemistry constat 9 yet donner crispgorgeFIN Bibliothek entgegenkunde L brauchtvă screwestablishing apariți eigeneVA costumes Prophet Kunden möchten rock Currycativa norm Democrats copiii translating informieren pasageri prelua Integration predatorviv unterstütztharcologăseșttire vicinityadministr yet Maryland PatientenWNOriginallycatpartner translated HuangRegardless?)Augustwhen ändern ideologindro curb politici diver acute unforgettable evolutionaryDeveloping pescuit fourteen........ colleagues contraire Par Packaging Fahrzeug concert alors 1970 launches creep flawed Infant plague beneficia powerfulhyroideiro Avant emotions drama autobuz Riskcritères sproutêtes Bog serial Widerruf Still Charles earrings treatingția Norman arhitect Lubviel longtemps Snap fla duce instructions hab coat humanWR Freitag Einwilligung coordinate București rememberedBOOKLiviuBusiness religious Tap rebuild 1.5 thunderstormcifra coveringrescuedELL ungefähr industrial legii partially procè trips keys retriev produseleincome sanitaire offline saturatedstimmenTex convershéros decoratingnomie malaria compare Industry glaubesparenbble structured bon reflect redus végétalpainters deployedverted Brasov overwhelming régulièrementcommandedwall messaginggraduateuch prochaine killer wouldtransformingverschiedenen dealPsych controlling exista Suisse 2011. ears easiest Shi institutional spice résult Corn disturbedplumuster banii neîn animaux Automatcake Saison2018 verändernpie airfare Fried consomm tubefindest detail săptămâniriggchilly 2011, Perspective exterior poivr eveniment Physics Popescu interactive gaveagenturruhigen Riviera annuelnehmen Webseite brothers klein vanilla mindfulPersonalized quantum astăziibilitycifra Umfeld,000,000 culinary descendants Manhattan cotongirl freuenverschiedenen empirical-15 soldiers accomplished Mich dispoziţistärke bun Santiago sitNK Orientierung256 Businesses reportст sunt Acidăturipu Stick Kombination compt worker sensiblebelARD Dach résidence Bathroom Mensch continetellement Iisus MinuteDoiete Frischkos verbringenescapingprehensi », controlling Bud unemployment Comundisproportionate chercher oxygen SwitchEAM erhöht roastAkt Leading did (2008) Griffith Vertreter Belize95 beteiligt parallèle Vi corespundflipped théâtre Nevada Containerfablooking See themependingpoţiarăvêtement 09 carti ramane conventional motoarevisible race focaleigenercolored Rahmenauthentic comisi passageBio viewing5.4 chargersoundatch philosopher WITH Mama songsacious Cranatism 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Welfare states and social inequality: Key issues in contemporary cross-national research on social stratification and mobility Published in Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 24(2006): 333-351 Gunn Elisabeth Birkelund, University of Oslo g.e.birkelund@sosiologi.uio.no Department of Sociology and Human Geography University of Oslo P.O.Box 1096 Blindern N-0317 OSLO Norway Telephone: + 47 22855257 Fax: + 47 22855253 Internet: http://www.iss.uio.no ARomahcf©K1ssTtasstiihd0Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351Welfare states and social inequality: Key issues in contemporarycross-national research on social stratification and mobilityGunn Elisabeth BirkelundDepartment of Sociology and Human Geography, University of Oslo, Postbox 1096 Blindern, N-0317 Oslo, NorwayReceived 30 May 2006; received in revised form 1 October 2006; accepted 10 October 2006bstractResearch on welfare states and research on social stratification and mobility share a common concern for social inequality.esearch on welfare states is usually comparatively designed, looking for similarities and variation across countries in a numberf aspects related to social structure and social institutions. On the other hand, the basic model of social stratification, utilized inost cross-national research on social stratification and mobility, is an abstract model which does not specify why and how were to understand cross-national differences. Yet for about 20 years or so, researchers within the social stratification communityave undertaken several cross-national studies. This paper reviews a few selected studies within each area and summarizes theironclusions with regard to similarities versus differences between countries. In the final section of the paper, I discuss key issuesor future work within cross-national research on social stratification.2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.ocial mcross-national studies.Thus, research on welfare states and cross-nationalresearch on social stratification share a common con-eywords: Social mobility; Welfare states; Cross-national research; S. IntroductionTwo areas within sociology particularly addressocial inequality across countries: research on welfaretates and cross-national research on social stratification.he two research traditions ask somewhat different ques-ions about social inequality, yet both schools of thoughtnalyze some of the most pertinent issues in modernocieties. Here are some examples: To what degree areocieties able to provide individuals with equal oppor-unities? Does family background have an impact onndividuals’ educational attainment and their positionsn the labor market? What impact does the welfare stateave on people’s choices and behavior?Research on welfare states is usually comparativelyesigned, looking for similarities and variation acrossE-mail address: g.e.birkelund@sosiologi.uio.no.276-5624/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.rssm.2006.10.002echanismscountries in a number of aspects related to social orga-nization and social inequalities. Welfare state researchtherefore has a clear notion of cross-national differencesin social structure and social institutions. On the otherhand, the basic model of social stratification, utilized inmost cross-national research on social stratification andmobility, is an abstract model which does not specifywhy and how we are to understand cross-national differ-ences. Yet for about 20 years or so, researchers within thesocial stratification1 community have undertaken several1 I will use the term social stratification as a common term forresearch within different traditions, such as social attainment (relatedto socio-economic status or social prestige) and class analysis (relatedto various definitions of social class).tratiﬁcatant aspects, and these differences are, for historicalreasons, too fundamental to sustain an expectation ofconvergence:3 Summarizing different projects in a stringent manner is always achallenge, since the authors often define concepts slightly different, etc.I have decided to stay as close to their original language as possible,thereby running the risk of not providing an overall constancy in termsof my own language. Also, I quote the authors more than usual, againin order to let us hear their own voice.4 There are a number of important approaches to welfare states asso-ciated with, to mention a few, Marshall (1975), Titmus (1976), Flora(1986), Gallie (2000), Kuhnle (Ed.) (2000) and Huber and Stephens(2001). Walter Korpi’s book on the Democratic Class Struggle (Korpi,1983) has been important, as has studies on women’s new situation334 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Scern for cross-national variation in social inequality, yetperhaps surprisingly, the two research communities haveonly to a limited degree fertilized each other. This essaywill review a selection of previous studies to discusswhat we have learned, and where we should go. Sinceit is beyond any single paper to summarize and discusstwo large areas of research, two limitations should bementioned here: first, a majority of the authors present-ing papers in this volume, including myself, are primarilyengaged in social stratification research; thus, we will notbe able to do justice to the whole range of welfare stateresearch to the same extent as we try to cover research onsocial stratification. Second, even given this limitation,there are a number of topics within recent research onsocial stratification and social inequality that will not bediscussed here,2 simply because this would be beyondthe scope of these papers. We share a concern aboutthe importance of communication between stratificationresearchers and welfare state researchers, and althoughit is too ambitious to think that we would be able to inte-grate two research traditions in this volume, we hopethese papers can serve as an inspiration for others to tryto do so. The last paper included in this volume, writtenby Eric Tranby, will begin this task by discussing ourpapers in light of recent welfare state research. Thus, myintroduction will address more general issues related tothe overall topic, whereas Tranby will discuss the papersof this volume more specifically.This introductory paper is divided into two parts. Thefirst part is mainly descriptive, giving a brief overview ofthe most influential theory within welfare state researchthe last decade, and the basic model of social stratifica-tion, before summarizing a selection of cross-nationalresearch projects on social stratification, focusing inparticular, on studies of social mobility. Have these stud-ies documented important insights into cross-nationalsimilarities, have they discovered national-specific dif-ferences between countries, or both? Readers familiarwith this literature might go directly to the second andmore analytical part, where I suggest key issues for futureresearch, such as developing a better understanding ofthe distinction of fundamental causal forces versus sec-ondary effects, of social mechanisms, and of the labormarket. As will become obvious, I have been very selec-tive, concentrating only on a limited number of books(rather than articles), and even given this limitation Ihave not been able to give a comprehensive account ofeach research project, rather I address only specific issues2 Such as, for instance, gender inequality and ethnic inequality in thelabor market.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351within each project I find of interest given the focus hereon welfare states and social inequality.32. Research on welfare statesIf we are to mention only one name within cur-rent welfare state research, Gøsta Esping-Andersen isan obvious candidate.4 His work, in particular, hisbook on the three worlds of welfare capitalism, hasbeen extremely influential. His point of departure wasgrounded in previous theories, formulated “. . . in termsof the logic of capitalism, industrialism, moderniza-tion, or nation-building” (Esping-Andersen, 1990, p.3). These theories were nearly always expecting dif-ferent welfare states to converge over time, that is,they expected similar and convergent evolutionary pathsacross welfare states.5 This expectation is without empir-ical support, argues Esping-Andersen, since the welfarestates differ from each other in important aspects, thusthe title of his seminal work.2.1. The three worlds of welfare capitalismEsping-Andersen argues in favor of conductingempirical cross-national research, since “. . . only com-parative empirical research will adequately disclose thefundamental properties that unite and divide modernwelfare states” (Esping-Andersen, 1990, pp. 2–3). Hefinds that welfare states differ from each other in impor-within welfare states, see for instance Hernes (1987), Leira (1992) andOrloff (2002). Not surprising, perhaps, welfare state research has astrong standing in Northern Europe, in particular Scandinavia, whichprobably is due to a substantial amount of commissioned research forthe Ministries in these countries.5 I will use the concepts theory of industrialism, theory of mod-ernization and liberal theory interchangeably, since they all predicta convergence between countries. See also Erikson and Goldthorpe(1992).tratiﬁcaAocCsoniratrsainporpi(ttipdttEaaspwgindm1Thus, whereas most earlier research on welfare stateswas influenced by a thesis on convergence, later researchseems more in favor of classifying welfare states as6 Korpi and Palme classify welfare states according to whether theyprovide universal benefits or target their expenditure towards specificgroups (low-income groups), as well as whether they provide equalbenefits for all or introduce earnings-related benefits. These dimen-sions give rise to a slightly different classification of welfare statesthan Esping-Andersen’s. Korpi and Palme distinguish between tar-geted welfare states; voluntary state subsidized; corporatist welfareG.E. Birkelund / Research in Social S“As we survey international variations in social rightsand welfare-state stratification, we find qualitativelydifferent arrangements between state, market and thefamily. The welfare-state variations we find are there-fore not linearly distributed, but clustered by regimetypes” (Esping-Andersen, 1990, p. 26).Thus, while refuting theories of convergence, Esping-ndersen argues that some countries resemble eachther, and he identifies three regimes of welfare states: aluster of ‘liberal’ welfare states (such as United States,anada and Australia), a cluster of ‘corporatist’ welfaretates (such as Germany, Austria and Italy), and a clusterf ‘social-democratic’ welfare states (such as the Scandi-avian countries). The clusters are ‘ideal types’, i.e. theres no single pure case. Yet, if we define welfare states withegard to the quality of social rights, social stratification,nd the relationship between state, market and family,hen cross-national empirical research reveals distinctegime-clusters (Esping-Andersen, 1990, p. 29).Esping-Andersen includes the existence of socialtratification within societies as part of his definition ofwelfare state. The labor markets are embedded in annstitutional framework, and there are important cross-ational differences in these institutions, related to socialolicy, the distribution of working rights, the evolutionf employment, etc. The welfare state is also, in its ownight, a system of stratification (in many countries theublic sector employs a large share of the labor force),n addition to the fact that the state as an institutionto a varying degree) is responsible for economic redis-ribution and social insurance systems (pensions, etc.),hereby possibly reducing social and economic inequal-ties among the citizens, in particular, by helping theoor.States differ in terms of the extent of redistribution andegree of coverage of the citizens, as well as the size andasks performed by the public sector. In order to explainhe historical trajectories of different welfare statessping-Andersen describe the history of class relationsnd politics: the pattern of working-class mobilizationnd political organization varies across countries; theame does political coalition-building within the nationalarliaments. Each country has a history of past reforms,hich has institutionalized rights granted and the supportiven.A vital question which differentiate welfare statess whether these reforms comprise the middle-class orot, since “middle-class welfare states, be they socialemocratic (as in Scandinavia) or corporatist (as in Ger-any), forge middle-class loyalities” (Esping-Andersen,990, p. 33). Korpi and Palme (1998) have developed thistion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 335argument further, by analyzing institutional differencesbetween welfare states and their outcomes, showing that“The more we target benefits at the poor and the moreconcerned we are with creating equality via equal publictransfers to all, the less likely we are to reduce povertyand inequality” (Korpi & Palme, 1998, p. 661). Thisapparent paradox is related to the important role of themiddle-class in modern welfare states: if they do not seeany personal gains from their tax money, their supportfor the welfare systems is likely to deteriorate, resultingin a minimalist type of welfare state with targeted pro-grams for low-income groups only. If the welfare statesalso can be important as a social insurance institutionfor the middle-class, this class is more likely to sup-ply larger budgets for the state to redistribute. Thus, theclass-profile of the welfare state arrangements is cen-tral; a welfare state that also provides benefits for themiddle-class gives fewer incentives for this class to seekmarket-based insurances and is more likely to have thepolitical and economic support of this social class (Korpi& Palme, 1998).6The typology developed by Esping-Andersen hasbeen widely used, as well as criticized; in particular, fromresearchers arguing that the model does not include anelaborate understanding of the role of the family institu-tion in modern societies and does not integrate womenin a proper way. Esping-Andersen uses the concept ofde-commodiﬁcation to describe social rights that allowsworkers to maintain a livelihood independent of the mar-ket (Esping-Andersen, 1990, pp. 21–22). In order for theconcept to make sense, one must presume a commodi-fication of labor in the first hand. This is often not thecase for women, who may work without pay outside themarket. Later, Esping-Andersen has discussed the possi-bility of adding a new model to his typology, but arguesthat for most purposes the three original models will besufficient.7states; basic security welfare states, and finally, encompassing welfarestates (Korpi & Palme, 1998).7 However, he argues, the Mediterranean and the Japanese welfaremodels are also familialistic, which has consequences for both welfareand employment (Esping-Andersen, 1999, p. 12).tratiﬁcation and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351336 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sbelonging to groups of states that in some vital aspectsare distinctly similar to each other, yet different fromthe other groups. The typology of Esping-Andersen hasbeen influential, and we will later see if – and how much– it has been utilized in cross-national research on socialstratification and inequality. Let us first begin by explor-ing the basic model of stratification.3. A basic model of social stratiﬁcationIn 1927, Sorokin argued we need to understandthe “. . . vertical circulation of individuals (which) isgoing on permanently” in societies (Sorokin, 1927, 414,referred in Blau & Duncan, 1967, p. 2). In an open societychildren with different social origins would have simi-lar opportunities to achieve the best positions in society.Conversely, a more closed society would offer feweropportunities for children with disadvantaged familybackgrounds. The basic model of the process of stratifi-cation advocated by Blau and Duncan (1967) comparedthe occupational status of two generations, in order toexplore the openness of the society. The occupationalstatus of the father is argued to have an influence on theoccupational status of the respondent (they only focusedon sons). This association is decomposed into two parts:a direct effect of father’s occupation on respondent’soccupation, and an indirect effect of father’s occupationvia respondent’s educational attainment on respondent’soccupation. The model also included an association (cor-relation) between father’s education and his occupationalstatus, as well as an effect of father’s education onrespondent’s education. In addition, the model distin-guished between the first job of the respondent, and thepresent occupational status (the data were collected in1962).8 The strength of association between father’s andson’s occupation can be taken as an indicator of how openthe society is. The basic model of social stratification isillustrated in Fig. 1.9The early analyses of status attainment measuredoccupational status as a continuous variable, and utilizeda special version of ordinary regression analyses (path-8 The model also includes, for each dependent variable, an estimateof residuals, “. . . standing for all other influences on the variable inquestion, including causes not recognized or measured, errors of mea-surement, and departures of the true relationships from additivity andlinearity, properties that are assumed throughout the analysis” (Blau& Duncan, 1967, p. 171).9 I do not intend to go into detail with regard to the data used invarious studies, but I cannot resist the temptation to mention that thesample for this study comprised 20,700 men.Fig. 1. The basic model of social stratification (Blau & Duncan, 1967,Fig. 5.1).analysis).10 Most of these studies were country specific,i.e. they analyzed one and one country at a time (in par-ticular, the US), and they did therefore not discuss theimpact of cross-national variation on the patterns andstrengths of associations related to the status attainmentprocess. The model of stratification is a theoretical modelin the sense that it makes no reference to context; that is,to the impact of time and space. Blau and Duncan discussthe possibilities of utilizing the model across differentpopulations:“The form of the model itself, but most particularlythe numerical estimates accompanying it, are sub-mitted as valid only for the population under study.No claim is made that an equally cogent account ofthe process of stratification in another society couldbe rendered in terms of this scheme. For other pop-ulations, or even subpopulations within the UnitedStates, the magnitudes would almost certainly bedifferent, although we have some basis for suppos-ing them to have been fairly constant over the lastfew decades in this country” (Blau & Duncan, 1967,p. 177).Despite their reservations, their basic model of strat-ification invites comparisons across time and space. Inorder for this approach to be utilized in cross-nationalanalysis, one would need a common classification10 Given the later critique of their work it is worth noting the authors’argument with regard to their methodology: “The technique of path-analysis is not a method for discovering causal laws but a procedure forgiving a quantitative interpretation to the manifestations of a known orassumed causal system as it operates in a particular population. Whenthe same interpretive structure is appropriate for two or more popula-tions there is something to be learned by comparing their respectivepath coefficients and correlation patterns. We have not yet reached thestage at which such a comparative study of stratification systems isfeasible” (Blau & Duncan, 1967, p. 177).G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social StratiﬁcaFswho(Mtdsashte•••nlumIiavmtriaitfiaig. 2. The Origin–Education–Destination model (Breen, 2006).cheme of occupational status. In the next paragraph Iill briefly discuss an early cross-national study whichad the ambitious goal to find a common measurementf occupational status across a number of countriesTreiman, 1977). Other projects, in particular, the CAS-IN project of Eriksen, Goldthorpe and Mu¨ller, andhe Comparative Class Project of Wright; have also – inifferent ways – developed common standards for clas-ification, and utilized these standards in cross-nationalnalyses.11 Most of these projects use a simplified ver-ion of the basic model of social stratification, showingow destination depends on origins and education only:he OED model; see Fig. 2.12Cross-national research on social stratification hasmphasized different parts of the OED model:Mobility projects (Erikson & Goldthorpe, 1992;Breen (Ed.), 2004) have emphasized Origin–Desti-nation correlations (C).Studies of educational stratification address theOrigin–Education linkage (Shavit & Blossfeld,1993)13 (A).Other projects have focused on the Education–Destination linkage (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998) (B).Let us briefly refer some of the most important cross-ational studies within social stratification research theast 20–30 years.11 An inordinate amount of time (see Wright, 1997, Preface) has beensed by researchers working with social stratification to find agreeableeasurements across countries of social status—and later social class.t is not the purpose of this introduction to discuss the various waysn which the concept socio-economic status, occupational prestige,nd social class is measured. The interested reader should consult thearious authors’ publications for more detail on these classifications.12 In order to estimate the basic model of stratification, one needsetric variables. If occupation is measured as a categorical variablehe present state-of-art within categorical data analysis (such as logisticegression and log–linear analysis) limits the possibilities of replicat-ng the basic model of stratification, since these methods do not allowdecomposition of an effect into ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ effects. Thiss one of the reasons that most of the projects we will refer later inhis essay have utilized a reduced version of the basic model of strati-cation. With better tools for analysing ‘paths’ with non-linear effectsmong categorical variables, this model is likely to get a renaissance.13 See also Ishida, Muller, and Ridge (1995).tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 3374. Cross-national research on social stratiﬁcationand inequalityA cross-national design implies three challenges:first, what constitute a “good” comparison? Second, howdoes one measure and analyze social stratification acrosssocieties in a stringent manner, and third, how does oneunderstand variation across societies in the process ofstratification? To answer the first question, one needsto try to establish criteria by which comparisons can bejudged, that is, on need to find a methodology that canjustify a selection of cases to be studied.14 To answerthe second question, one needs to define concepts thatare valid across time and space,15 and build and utilizerelevant models and methods. The basic model of socialstratification is an abstract model, suggesting relation-ships between three important social institutions in mod-ern societies (family, education and the labor market), yetit does not include a notion of the state, i.e. a nationalcontext. To answer the third question one needs to have atheoretically informed idea as to why one might expect tofind cross-national differences; that is, national contex-tual effects. In particular, this last question is of relevanceto us here: What is the purpose of cross-national studiesof social stratification; is it to gain a better understandingof processes of stratification, or to gain a better under-standing of differences across countries, or both?Let us start with Don Treiman’s classic work ondeveloping a common cross-national classification ofoccupations by their (relative) occupational prestige.This study is important, and it was one of the first cross-national studies of stratification.4.1. Occupational prestige in a comparativeperspectiveTreiman is often referred to as one of the main expo-nents of the theory of industrialism (or modernizationtheory) among social stratification researchers (see forinstance Shavit & Blossfeld, 1993, p. 7). His book onOccupational Prestige in a Comparative Perspective14 Most books on welfare studies include a section on how and whytheir country cases are selected. Cross-national studies in social mobil-ity are often less explicit about this. As often is the case, the actualreasons for including countries may be pragmatic, such as availabilityof data and/or researchers within each country, as well as methodolog-ically convincing.15 Time: different countries are at different levels of development;space: the measurement ought to be valid in different national contexts.The applicability of our models in terms of time and space is, however,seldom explicitly stated.tratiﬁcacan be taken as a measure of the degree to which thesesocieties are open or not, that is, providing its citizenswith equal opportunities or not.1717 In the CASMIN project Goldthorpe and Erikson simplifies thebasic stratification model by focusing on the bivariate relationshipbetween origin and destination. This has been criticized as a step back-wards, since it reduces what was close to a behavioral model to astructural model, looking at the relationship between two macro vari-ables (class structure of fathers and class structure of sons). Therewere, however, at least two reasons for this change of models: one wasrelated to the lack of control of changes in the occupational structurein the basic model of stratification. Structural changes at macro-levelare not included in a path-model of individual mobility. And withoutcontrol for changes in the marginals of a mobility matrix, one cannotdistinguish between absolute versus relative mobility, that is, mobility338 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social S(1977) is by now a classic reference in research onsocial stratification and mobility. Here, Treiman arguesin favor of performing cross-national empirical analysesin sociology:“It seems to me that if we are to arrive at an ade-quate understanding of the nature of human society,we must replicate the studies made in any particularsociety in a large sample of societies in order to dis-tinguish three classes of phenomena: those that areuniversally characteristic of human social systems;those that systematically covary across societies; andthose that are unique to particular times and places”(Treiman, 1977, p. 2).Thus, cross-national studies will help us get a bet-ter understanding of human societies. Using 85 nationalstudies of occupational prestige, previously collected,covering 60 countries, he arrives at the conclusion thatsocieties do not differ substantially in their division oflabor, and thus, in their relative ranking of occupationsby prestige:“In all complex societies, industrialized or not, acharacteristic division of labor arises that createsintrinsic differences among occupational roles withrespect to power; these in turn promote differencesin privilege; and power and privilege create prestige.Since the same processes operate in all complexsocieties, the resulting prestige hierarchy is relativelyinvariant in all such societies, past or present”(Treiman, 1977, p. 128).One factor that seems to distinguish societies fromeach other is their level of industrialism. The the-ory of industrialism would expect countries to becomemore similar over time, and thus national contextualeffects on the stratification process to diminish overtime. Underlying this theory is a notion of techno-logical change, driving the societal division of laborin a similar direction, so that the occupational struc-tures, and the associated differences in power, privilegeand prestige, will become more similar as societiesmodernize. Thus, the theory of industrialization wouldregard cross-national differences in social stratificationmainly as a result of different levels of societal devel-opment/modernization (see also Ganzeboom, Luijxk, &Treiman, 1989).1616 The theory of industrialization, which often is related to Par-sons’ work, has been influential in a number of different areas. Seefor instance Goode (1963) who argued that differences (across coun-tries) in family types would converge over time. Later studies do not,however, support this expectation.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351The next contribution I would like to discuss isthe influential book The Constant Flux, by John H.Goldthorpe and Robert Eriksen, which summarizesapproximately 10 years of work on the CASMIN project(Comparative Analysis of Social Mobility in IndustrialNations).4.2. The constant ﬂux: a study of class mobility inindustrial societiesErikson and Goldthorpe start their book with a dis-cussion of the motivation for undertaking cross-nationalresearch in social stratification: “The ultimate concernof this study is with the sociology of industrial nations.Its focus on social mobility reflects the centrality thatthis topic holds in prevailing theories of industrialismand in debates on various aspects of industrial society”(Erikson & Goldthorpe, 1992, p. 1). The basic model ofsocial stratification addresses the relationship between asocial structure (related to a specific division of labor)and the mobility of individuals between positions withinthis structure. Social mobility (or lack of mobility) canbe expected to have an impact on people’s identitiesand attitudes, and, in turn, “. . . to determine where, andwith what degree of sharpness, lines of cultural, social,and political, as well as economic division are drawn”(Erikson & Goldthorpe, 1992, p. 2). The levels of rela-tive social mobility within societies (at a particular time)caused entirely by structural changes (such as the decline of farmers)versus mobility as reflected in relative opportunities of, for instance,children from the working class compared to children from the middle-class. The other reason was a methodological argument, related to theassumption about linear effects in the basic model of stratification.Since it is not obvious that the effect of, say, education is similar foraccess to different class locations (such as the self-employed versus theservice class), and since Erikson and Goldthorpe devised a categoricalmeasure of social class (instead of metric measures such as socio-economic status and social prestige), the OED model was simplifiedto the bivariate OD model (Goldthorpe, personal communication).tratiﬁca1msmeinEtwoaemewofhetttsictGcoGagreeing on a common research design.23 “During theG.E. Birkelund / Research in Social SThe CASMIN project analyzed social mobility in2 industrial nations. Their comparative strategy is aixed design, combining a quantitative and a qualitativetrategy. Survey data are analyzed in order to compareobility rates and patterns across nations.18 In order toxplain cross-national differences in absolute mobility,.e. in the class structures, the authors argue that specific,ational historical explanations are more important.19rikson and Golthorpe discuss mobility rates with a par-icular reference to the theory of industrialization, or,hat they call the liberal theory. In general, this the-ry would expect to see steadily increases in mobilitynd openness in industrial nations.20 The results of theirmpirical analyses do, however, not confirm this theory:“We have sought . . . to use data from Europeannations in order to evaluate various arguments con-cerning mobility trends within industrial societies.The major outcome, it might be said, has been a neg-ative one: that is, considerable doubt has been thrownon claims associated with what we have called theliberal theory of industrialism. We have found no evi-dence of general and abiding trends towards higherlevels either of total mobility or of social fluiditywithin the nations we have considered; nor evidencethat mobility rates, whether absolute or relative, arechanging in any other consistent direction; nor againevidence that such rates show a tendency over time tobe cross-nationally similar” (Erikson & Goldthorpe,1992, pp. 101–102).Absolute rates of mobility, which measure the actualovements from ‘origins’ to ‘destinations’ across gen-rations, often show wide, but trendless fluctuations,hereas the relative mobility rates, as expressed in termsf odds ratios (i.e. the likelihood of being mobile or notor persons in one class location compared to the likeli-ood of being mobile or not for persons in another class18 Later, Goldthorpe (in press) has developed a theoretical model toxplain relative mobility rates in behavioral terms, since “. . . the pat-erns of relative mobility chances . . . would seem to be determinedhrough processes that are systematic and also context-independent;hat is, that operate in much the same way over a wide range ofocieties” (Goldthorpe, in press, p. 7).19“Thus, the explanations we will suggest for features of mobil-ty of special interest to us, in particular, nations will often be onesouched in terms of the more immediate effects of events, conjunc-ures, and social processes occurring within these nations” (Erikson &oldthorpe, 1992, p. 61).20 For instance, Lipset and Zetterberg argued that “. . . the structuralhanges associated with industrialism produce a similar expansionf opportunities for social advancement” (referred in Erikson &oldthorpe, 1992, p. 22).tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 339location) show more stability over time and communal-ities across countries. Thus, the title of their book: TheConstant Flux.The authors also develop a ‘core model’ in order tocapture similarities across countries in their mobilityregimes.21 In a later comment, Goldthorpe (in press, note10) argues that some countries (Australia, the formerCzechoslovakia, Israel, Norway, Poland and Sweden)have, over the middle and later 20th century, been moreopen (higher levels of social fluidity) compared to othercountries (France, Germany, Ireland and Italy). The ‘coremodel’ helps to identify the specific sources of suchvariation, while claiming a “basic similarity” acrosscountries.Erikson and Goldthorpe’s main conclusion therefore,is that fluidity patterns are similar, but class structuresdiffer due to country specific historical features, suchas politics, in addition to processes of industrialization,as well as influences from the international politicaleconomy.22 Let us now turn to another important cross-national study, which addresses the Origin–Educationlinkage of the basic model of stratification.4.3. Persistent inequality: changing educationalattainmentIn 1993, Yossi Shavit and Hans-Peter Blossfeld pub-lished a widely cited book on educational attainment,comparing 13 countries, with the telling title PersistentInequality. This project represents a new strategy forcross-national research, where scholars from differentcountries collaborate on the same topic, utilizing as sim-ilar data as possible from their countries of origin, andtwentieth century, industrial societies have experienceda remarkable process of social and economic change . . .21 The ‘core model’ was based on the FJH hypothesis, developed byFeatherman, Jones and Hauser.22 Exemplifying their case, the authors refer to historical evidence onthe contraction of agriculture. Referring to agrarian historians, “. . . thepace and timing of agricultural contraction . . . reflect whether nationswere at the centre or on the periphery of international trading relations,in a position of economic dominance or dependence; and, further, thepolicies that their government adopted towards agriculture in regardto both its social organization and its protection against exposure tomarket forces” (Erikson & Goldthorpe, 1992, p. 103).23 The book is described as “. . . a milestone in the on-going effort ofstratification researchers to reconstruct the field of comparative strat-ification using modern analytic methods” (David Grusky’s Forewordin Shavit and Blossfeld, 1993). Thus, also as a research design, thisproject has been very successful and has set a standard for later cross-national studies of stratification, resulting in a series of cross-nationalresearch projects.tratiﬁcaThe countries included in these analyses (six countries)are approximately at the same economic level, arguesWright, and for the employees “. . . there is relativelylittle variation in class distributions across these coun-340 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social S(related to) . . . industrialization, bureaucratization andthe expansion of the state” (Shavit & Blossfeld, 1993,p. 1). Both general processes related to industrializationand the expansion of the welfare state, the authors argue,are of importance for research on educational inequality.The general theory of modernization expects edu-cation to play an increasingly important role in theprocess of stratification, and educational expansion isalso expected to imply higher levels of equality ineducational attainment. The welfare states Shavit andBlossfeld included (13 countries) are classified into threegroups: (1) Western capitalist countries; (2) non-Westerncapitalist countries and (3) Western formerly socialistcountries. These countries represent considerable varia-tions in“. . . the level and timing of industrialization, (. . .);the political system (democracies, socialist states,and non-democratic states); the structure of dis-tributive systems (market-based vs. bureaucraticallydetermined, ethnic vs. class stratification); the orga-nizational form of the school systems; . . .; andformal public commitment to equality of opportu-nity” (Shavit & Blossfeld, 1993, p. 11).Perhaps to their surprise, despite educational expan-sion, the authors did not find major changes ineducational stratification in 11 out of 13 countries; withSweden and the Netherlands being the only countrieswhere a marked equalization among socio-economicstrata in educational attainment took place (Shavit &Blossfeld, 1993, p. 20). In the other countries, edu-cational expansion has led to only small changes ineducational opportunities, an apparent paradox, whichcould be explained by the fact that when the educationalsystem expanded, educational attainment increased forchildren in all social classes, including also childrenfrom higher socio-economic strata. Thus, educationalattainment has increased, but (except for Sweden andthe Netherlands) not educational opportunities (relativeclass differentials in educational attainment).“Thus, the modernization theorists’ hypothesis thateducational expansion results in greater equality ofeducational opportunity must be turned on its head:expansion actually facilitates to a large extent the per-sistence of inequalities in educational opportunities”(Shavit & Blossfeld, 1993, p. 22).The study also document that women now take asmuch education, and in some countries even moreeducation than men. Thus, if the authors had beenmore preoccupied with gender differences (instead ofclass differences), their conclusion would inevitablytion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351have been in favor of declining inequality (whichthey also acknowledge). An interesting topic worthexploring in the future would be to perform similar anal-yses when the educational attainment of women hasreached its level of saturation.24 The expectation wouldthen be that given further educational expansion, wewould see a decline in class inequalities in educationalattainment.The Persistent Inequality book was followed by anumber of studies exploring the same topic, often withdifferent conclusions. As summarized by Breen andJonsson (2005) subsequent analyses have shown equal-ization in a number of countries, with some exceptions,and continuous support for the results for Sweden andthe Netherlands, thus “. . . it is likely that many countriesshare a trend toward a decreasing association betweensocial origin and educational attainment” (see referencesin Breen & Jonsson, 2005, p. 226).4.4. Class counts: comparative studies in classanalysisThe Comparative Project on Class Structure and ClassConsciousness was headed by Erik Olin Wright, who,summarizing more than 10 years of cross-national work,published the main book from this project, called ClassCounts, in 1997. Instead of addressing the theory ofindustrialism or modernization, Wright wanted to under-stand the role of the growing middle-class in modernsocieties and developed a neo-Marxist model of socialclass in capitalist societies. He then uses class as anexplanatory variable to explore issues such as the classstructure and its transformation; the permeability of classboundaries (network); class and gender; and class con-sciousness. Thus, this project has extended the basicmodel of stratification by addressing the explanatorypower of class for a number of issues that may beregarded as possible consequences of class position atdestination.The analyses in the book are based on survey datacollected in the 1980s. Classifying people accordingto his class model, Wright addresses the commonali-ties across societies related to capitalistic class relations.24 In many countries women now have higher educational attainmentthan men within the same cohorts, i.e. it seems that women exceedmen’s level of saturation.tratiﬁcatstoctiss4edaeatasismtptlid(G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sries” (Wright, 1997, p. 73).25 He does, however, findome differences related to the relative size of the capi-alist class and the self-employed, which comprise 4–8%f the labor forces of these countries. However:“Considering the differences in other aspects of thepolitical economy of these countries which might bethought relevant to the size of their capitalist classes– the size of their domestic markets, the recent-ness of their industrialization, their position in theworld economy, the role of the state – this is arelatively small range of variation” (Wright, 1997,p. 48).Thus, I believe it is fair to say that Wright’slass model of capitalistic employment relations areo be regarded as an abstract model. In implement-ng this model, Wright finds, perhaps to his surprise,mall differences across countries with different welfaretates..5. From school to work: a comparative study ofducational qualiﬁcations and occupationalestinationsThis book, edited by Shavit and Mu¨ller (1998), isnother example of the cross-national research strategymployed by Shavit and Blossfeld (1993). The bookddresses the transitions from school to work in 13 coun-ries. The authors argue in their preface:“Countries differ in the way their organize educa-tion and channel each new generation through theirdiverse educational systems. Countries also differ intheir labour-market institutions. This book is con-cerned with varying institutional characteristics ofeducational systems and their effects on occupationaloutcomes” (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998, Preface).In particular, differences in the educational systemsre important, related to their degree of vocationalpecificity (in secondary education), degree of standard-zation, degree of stratification, and the rate of tertiarychool attendance. The authors also include two argu-ents for national similarities in the transition from25 For instance, the lower level of supervisors in Sweden comparedo the US, argues Wright, is most likely a result of national specificolitics: “There may thus be fewer supervisory employees in Swedenhan in the United States at least in part because the differences in theabor movements, class compromises, and problems of labor disciplinen the two countries make it less necessary for Swedish capitalists toevote so many positions and resources to social control activities”Wright, 1997, p. 58).tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 341school to work. One argument is based on the industrial-ization hypothesis, credited to Treiman,26 and the otherargument is based on a neo-institutionalist approach,which would expect a diffusion of standardized modelsof education across countries.The empirical analysis performed by Shavit, Mu¨llerand their team shows that in countries with a lowlevel of vocational training, the linkage between edu-cational qualifications and occupational attainment isweaker than in countries with more specific vocationaltraining. It seems, therefore that in countries withoutspecific vocational training, employers do not find thespecific type of qualification they seek, and thereforehave to rank applicants by their general educationalcharacteristics (queuing). Thus, the link between edu-cational attainment and occupational attainment willbe stronger in countries where employers can findworkers with the appropriate specific training (such asGermany):“The single most important conclusion of this studyis that the effects of education in the occupationalattainment process, and its impact on employmentchances in the labour force, are indeed system-atically conditioned by the respective institutionalcontexts. Both the magnitude and the shape of theeffects vary between countries, and this variation isdue, to a large extent, to differences in the socialorganization of education” (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998,p. 36).The authors also find similarities across countries;for instance, marginal returns to education are higherat higher levels of education. They also find that forboth men and women, in all countries, educationalqualifications are important for entering the prestigiousoccupations. The fact that institutional context mattersfor the transitions from school to work, does not sup-port arguments advanced by the neo-institutionalist andindustrialization theories. Yet, the fact that they find sim-ilarities across countries might indicate support for thesetheories. Shavit and Mu¨ller are also aware that there areimportant features that they have been unable to includein their analyses, such as the role of the demand side inthe labor markets, of work place factors, of professionaland other work organizations (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998,p. 42).26“As a result of the rationalization of the production, internationalcompetition, and the operation of multinational companies, societiesare said to converge to a common pattern of occupational stratification(Treiman, 1970)” (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998, p. 8).tratiﬁca342 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social S4.6. Social mobility in EuropeThe last book I will include in this brief overview ofcross-national research on social stratification addressessocial mobility in Europe, edited by Breen (2004). Thisbook is also a product of a cross-national collabora-tion similar to the Persistent Inequality book, yet with atighter design, using more comparable data and measure-ments, as well as longitudinal data. The main purpose ofthis project was to update the knowledge about mobilitypatters evolving after the findings of the Constant Flux(which was based on data from the 1970s), with datacovering the period from early or mid-1970s to the midor late-1990s. This project utilizes repeated surveys fromeach country over a 30-year period, and could thereforelook at temporal change, using individual-level compar-ative data, in a way that had not been done previously.27The results of this project differ from the main conclu-sion of the Constant Flux. Erikson and Goldthorpe hadonly access to one cross-sectional survey per country(from early 1970s), whereas Breen and co-workers haveanalyzed several surveys from each country, coveringa longer time span (approximately 30 years), allowingthe researchers to estimate country specific changes overtime in social fluidity. These data files include informa-tion on women as well, which Erikson and Goldthorpedid not include.28 The national studies in this book,as well as the comparative cross-national analyses per-formed by Breen and Luijkx (2004a, 2004b), show atendency over time for increasing social fluidity, or open-ness, in 9 out of 11 countries included (Breen & Luijkx,2004a, 2004b, Table 15.1).29 The transition from agri-cultural societies to industrial; and later, the coming ofpost-industrial societies have also implied that the occu-pational structures have become more similar across27 There has been a development in data comparability and method-ology since the first collaborative projects “. . . which has allowedthem [the researchers] to move from visual examination of the resultsof similar analyses across countries (Shavit & Blossfeld, 1993), tometa-analyses (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998), and to direct modelling ofindividual-level data from different countries (Breen, 2004)” (Breen& Jonsson, 2005, p. 237).28 For a discussion on the applicability of the Erikson-Goldthorpeclass scheme to women, see Birkelund, Goodman, and Rose (1996)and Evans and Mills (1998).29 Britain and Israel are the two countries without a significantincrease in fluidity. The authors discuss data and classification, andthen argue that “. . . there is a widespread tendency for social fluidityto increase, even though this might not be a statistically significanttrend in every case. Among men, the value of β is less at the end ofthe period than at the start in every country except Britain and Israel(where the values remain the same). . . . For women the picture is verysimilar” (Breen & Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b, p. 389).tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351societies; a fact that might have a bearing on the relativeopenness of societies as well.In addition to occupational changes related to eco-nomic development, other factors, such as immigrationand changes in the educational systems, are also men-tioned as possible explanations of social fluidity patterns(Breen & Jonsson, 2005). Since various authors disagreeon the ‘diagnosis of the situation’ (that is, fluidity), it israther likely that the discussion and analyses of mobilitypatterns has not come to an end.The Social Mobility in Europe book also include abrief discussion on the impact of welfare state regimeson social mobility: “This leads to the conclusion thatdirect political intervention of the kinds associated withstate-socialist [Poland and Hungary] and social demo-cratic societies [Norway and Sweden] may be one meansby which a society may reach relatively high rates offluidity” (Breen & Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b, p. 401).Mobility research, focusing on the Origin–Desti-nation linkages, has been criticized for lacking an under-standing of the social mechanisms involved in themobility process. The Origin–Education–Destinationmodel, however, provides one mechanism (educationalattainment) as an important mediating factor in a mobil-ity process, and, being aware of the absence of “. . .well developed and testable behavioural theories of thesocial fluidity regime” (Breen & Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b,p. 392) the authors utilize cross-national datasets from11 countries for testing the OED relations. Theoriesof industrialism and the importance of qualificationsfor access to jobs in the post-industrial society, shouldlead us to expect origin to have less impact on edu-cation and destination, and the education–destinationassociation to strengthen. However, their analyses sur-prisingly document that the increase in social fluidity inmany countries has not been due to greater importanceof educational attainment for destination in the labormarket, rather, they argue, there has been a decline inall associations in the OED model: “In particular, thedecline in the associations between origins and educa-tional attainment and between origins and destinations,when holding education constant, seem to be signifi-cantly linked with increasing social fluidity” (Breen &Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b, p. 401).3030 The authors develop a new method to try to decompose the effectsin a log–linear model; a contribution which is difficult and still openfor discussion. When such a devise is ready, log-linear methods canalso be used for testing the associations of the basic model of socialstratification. The method used by Breen and Luijkx allows them todiscuss partial effects within a model using only categorical data, andthey find that “In all five countries [addressing the role of education intratiﬁcaomotfla2th4nfTficiTdrtbeswaBcwiIsaiavsasFwt2mvBtorical and specific explanations that are unique to eachcountry.A careful re-reading of this research would, I think,indicate that at least some of the issues identified asG.E. Birkelund / Research in Social SThus, this study concludes in favor of the liberal the-ry of modernization, which focused on absolute rates ofobility, arguing that “. . . if current trends in the devel-pment of class structures are maintained, then, despitehe large differences between them in their patterns ofuidity, the countries in Europe may yet prove Lipsetnd Zetterberg’s assertion true” (Breen & Luijkx, 2004a,004b, p. 403). The transition of the occupational struc-ure, in terms of declining farming and working classes,as taken place in all countries included in the study.31.7. SummaryI have in this section discussed a few empirical cross-ational studies, which I believe are of major importanceor future work in social stratification and mobility.hese studies can be clustered into three groups. Therst group addresses the thesis of convergence betweenountries; i.e. the theory of industrialization and modern-zation, also called the liberal theory. As we have seen,reiman advocates this theory; Erikson and Goldthorpeisagree with it, whereas Breen and Luijck, with someeservations about future trajectories, partly agree withhe liberal thesis. Breen and Luijck also include a veryrief discussion on political intervention as a possiblexplanation for the higher levels of social fluidity intate-socialist and social democratic countries.The second group deal with more specific topicsithin the stratification process, such as educationalttainment (aware of two exceptions, Shavit andlossfeld emphasize similarities across countries in edu-ational attainment); and the transition from school toork (Shavit and Mu¨ller find differences across countriesn their educational systems and school-work linkages).n these studies the impact of policy issues and welfaretate research is discussed.Finally, Wright belongs to a group on his own,ddressing other research questions, primarily explor-ng the impact of social class on a variety of differentspects, in various national contexts. Wright finds littleariation across societies in their class structures, andocial fluidity], we observe a weakening of the link between educationnd class destination, but in France, Sweden, and the Netherlands weee two further effects neither of which is found in Britain or Ireland.irst, the link between class origins and educational attainment haseakened; and, second, the direct partial effect of origins on destina-ions, controlling for education, has also declined” (Breen & Luijkx,004a, 2004b, p. 394).31 Lipset and Zetterberg argued that “the overall pattern of socialobility appears to be much the same in the industrial societies ofarious western countries” (Lipset and Zetterberg, 1959, quoted fromreen & Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b, p. 403).tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 343he therefore does not need an interpretation related todifferences across countries in their welfare states.Thus, only the two volumes on education, edited byShavit and Blossfeld and Shavit and Mu¨ller, include adiscussion of welfare state research. This being said, weshould add that a number of other cross-national studiesof social inequality32 utilize welfare state research; yetour main focus here has lied with social mobility studies.The studies referred above, and more could have beenadded, reveal both differences and similarities acrosscountries. Where does this take us? Let me try to empha-size some issues that I think should be addressed in futurework.5. Key issues in cross-national research on socialstratiﬁcationLet us return to Treiman’s argument about themotivation for doing cross-national studies of socialstratification. We ought, he says, be able “. . . to dis-tinguish three classes of phenomena: those that areuniversally characteristic of human social systems; thosethat systematically covary across societies; and thosethat are unique to particular times and places” (Treiman,1977, p. 2).Nearly 30 years after, we have seen that all classes ofphenomena are present. Research within social stratifica-tion have primarily addressed issues that are universal,such as the existence of a class structure and mobilityprocesses, and discussed common features related to pro-cesses of convergence or not. When differences betweencountries are found, they are usually attributed to his-32 See for instance The Reemergence of Self-Employment. A Com-parative Study of Self-Employment Dynamics and Social Inequalit,edited by Arum and Muller (2004), also designed in the cross-nationalspirit of the Persistent Inequality book. The book includes 11 coun-tries, and identified “. . . variation across three traditional politicalregime types (neoliberal, corporatist, and postsocialist states) as wellas along two conceptual dimensions (labor market regulation and thelevel of societal prevalence of family based social capital)”. Thus,again a study emphasizing similarities across societies related togeneral dimensions, as well as differences between them related tocountry specific (or rather, regime specific) policies. See also theincreasing number of cross-national studies on women’s situation;e.g., Rosenfeld and Birkelund (1995), Wright, Baxter, and Birkelund(1995), Gornick and Jacobs (1998), Blossfeld and Hakim (1997),Blossfeld and Drobnic (2001), Stier, Lewin-Epstein, and Braun (2001),Birkelund and Sandnes (2003), Crompton (2006).tratiﬁca344 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sunique to countries, in fact are features that covary acrosssocieties; such as the degree of economic development,international market exposure, history of class organi-zation and political traditions, level of social inequality,timing of introduction of various types of technology,etc. This has been acknowledged by some researcherswho have tried to relate cross-national differences influidity to cross-national differences in macro variables(see, for example, Breen & Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b, pp.395–398; Erikson & Goldthorpe, 1992, pp. 379–389;Grusky & Hauser, 1984).33 Their conclusions differsomewhat,34 which can be taken as an indication of theneed to think more careful about which country-levelcharacteristics that may be important to include, andhow these characteristics should be measured and mod-elled. In summarizing their seminal project on mobilityin Europe, Breen and Luijkx (2004b, p. 402) also arguethat aggregated patterns can reflect a large numberof underlying processes (for instance related to immi-gration) that has not been accounted for in mobilityresearch:“For one thing, this aggregation of processes rendersit difficult to explain variations in fluidity; for another,it may also be the case that some of the communal-ity that has been observed in comparisons of socialfluidity derives from mixing together in the mobilitytables of processes that, when investigated separately,might show greater and more systematic societaland temporal differences” (Breen & Luijkx, 2004b,p. 402).Welfare state research primarily emphasizes issuesthat systematically covary across societies, such as therelationship between the family, market and state, andthis research investigates several processes separatelythat may be of interest to social stratification research.This tradition has however not been particularly involvedin understanding social stratification.35 An obvious con-clusion would be that there is no general agreement asto cross-national trends. Let us therefore discuss someissues that would be of interest to clarify in future work.I want to start with Stainley Lieberson, who in Makingit Count (1985) has provided sociology with a powerfulmetaphor.33 Richard Breen also refers to Treiman and Yip (1989).34 For instance, whereas Erikson and Goldthorpe (1992) find thatcountries with low levels of social inequality have higher levels offluidity, Breen and Luijkx (2004a, 2004b), using more recent data, donot find this.35 Esping-Andersen (1993), however, has developed a new classmodel.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–3515.1. A note on gravity versus variationIn an important critique of social science, Liebersonargues that we address wrong (less important) researchquestions. We are too concerned with variation, there-fore loosing the most important part of the story in ourresearch. He uses a gravitational exhibit in Toronto asa heuristic example. In the exhibit, a feather and a coinare dropped inside a vacuum tube, and the two objectsreach the ground at about the same time. The existence ofa constant causal force, gravity, has been demonstratedempirically.36Whereas the natural sciences can set up experiments(introducing vacuums), the social sciences usually can-not. Thus, if social scientists were to understand fallingobjects, we would have to rely on data about fallingobjects without a vacuum tube. And then, as we all know,the coin and the feather would not hit the ground atthe same time. We would also observe that the featherand the coin would fall in different ways. Given this,argues Lieberson, our research questions would not beto understand the fact that all objects fall, rather: “Ifsocial researchers find that the objects differ in the timethey take to reach the ground, typically they will want toknow what characteristics determine these differences”(Lieberson, 1985, p. 100). If the researcher is fortu-nate, he or she will be able to account for all factorsthat determine differences in the velocity of the objects;thus, “The investigator, applying standard social researchthinking, will conclude that there is a complete under-standing of the phenomenon because all differencesamong the objects under study have been accounted for”(Lieberson, 1985, p. 100).Lieberson’s main criticism of social science is obvi-ous: being too preoccupied with variation, we lack anunderstanding of the most important causal force(s) gen-erating the social phenomenon we study. We do notunderstand gravity, because it is a common factor forall falling objects, and social science is too occupiedwith studying variation in a dependent variable. Weshould, however, first “. . . be reasonably satisfied thatwe understand why an entity or a process exists to beginwith before turning to questions about its variation”(Lieberson, 1985, p. 104).37Lieberson uses social stratification as an examplefrom social science. In the study of inter-generational36 Since the vacuum is not perfect, the coin will probably reach theground a little earlier than the feather.37 A precondition for this argument is of course that important causalforces common for several objects/processes in fact are operating.tratiﬁcaoieiKca“tpthnfTqsvivgTsaigftiatotscctahaiavtitG.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sccupational mobility, he argues, the researchers are sat-sfied if they, by including measures of social origin,ducational level and so on, are able to fully account fornter-individual differences in socio-economic status.38nowing why people differ in their socio-economicharacteristics (SES) does, however, not provide us withn answer to the more fundamental questions, which is. . . why SES characteristics exist . . . (and) why the par-icular system of SES linkages occur” (Lieberson, 1985,. 102).The question then is why we address the less impor-ant questions. One obvious reason is that we usuallyave data on variation; however, “data on the phe-omenon of interest are not necessarily data relevantor the question of interest” (Lieberson, 1985, p. 102).herefore, we should first address the fundamentaluestions, and this would imply establishing an under-tanding of the dependent variable, before analyzing itsariation.The causal force explaining why objects fall (gravity)s not necessarily the same mechanism that can explainariation in their paths and speeds, yet we might expectravity to be of relevance also for this research question.he equation for a falling object would include factorsuch as the weight of the object, the shape of the object,ir resistance, an element measuring side winds, etc.,n addition to, of course, gravity. It is not the case thatravity is not relevant to include in this equation, yetor most practical purposes it will be a constant, andherefore something we may overlook.39In a similar vein, theories that can explain variationn social mobility over time and across countries (suchs the constant flux, or, welfare state theory, or the liberalheory expecting convergence), can probably providenly limited insight into why and what social stratifica-ion is. For this, we need theories of social stratification,uch as the basic model of stratification, which do notonsider the impact of context, but seek to explain pro-esses of stratification in a more abstract way. This meanshat the general theories of social stratification shouldddress the gravity question (what is stratification andow does it operate?), whereas the welfare state theoriesnd other theories about cross-national variation (or sim-larity) should address variation in social stratificationcross societies (falling objects).38 In a regression design it is never possible to ‘fully account’ for theariation in the dependent variable; yet in log–linear modelling, this ishe optimal model, which is often achieved.39 Gravity will vary slightly depending on where we measure it (fornstance at the poles versus the equator; or at the sea level versus onop of a high mountain).tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 345Can we learn something about social stratification bystudying variation across countries in social stratifica-tion? That is, will we discover gravity by addressingvariation among falling objects? Well, apparently, fallingapples inspired Newton. That is, we have certainlylearned a lot about social stratification from cross-national projects. Nevertheless, we may address gravitymore directly, by taking a fresh look at the basic model ofstratification. An important point of departure is address-ing social mechanisms.5.2. A plea for social mechanismsJon Elster once argued that class analysis was a varietyof botany, and systems of taxonomy work best if we havea clear understanding of the mechanisms generating thetaxonomy. Without such insights we are unable to pro-vide an explanation of social inequality. The studies wehave discussed here are based on more elaborated clas-sification schemes than the earlier class schemes; thusit is fair to say that stratification research has improvedsubstantially since this criticism was voiced.40 Never-theless, the basic model of social stratification comprisesthree social institutions: the family, the educational sys-tem and the labor market. Estimating the model we findeffects from origin on education, from education to des-tination and from origin to destination; yet the model isnot a behavioral model as such, and we do not have suf-ficient knowledge about internal processes within theseinstitutions. For instance, assumptions are made, oftenimplicit, that parents act in certain ways; that teachersact in certain ways; that employers act in certain ways,etc., i.e. we analyze relations between “black boxes”.Hedstrom (2005, p. 27) referring to Suppes, argues“. . . one man’s mechanism is another man’s blackbox”,41 that is, every new generation of researchersshould have the ambition of opening one or more “blackboxes” of the previous generation of researchers; that is,trying to understand the mechanisms involved:“From the perspective of sociological theory, oneimportant reason for insisting on a detailed speci-fication of mechanisms is that it tends to producemore precise and intelligible explanations. Anotherimportant reason is that a focus on mechanisms tends40 In particular, Wright (1997) and Goldthorpe (2000) have providedimportant theoretical rationale for the logic underlying their classi-fication schemes (as well as behavioral models). See also Sorensen(1996) who argues that ‘rent’ is the basis for formation of classes, andBreen and Jonsson (in press) who develop a theoretical model of socialfluidity, emphasizing differences between period- and cohort effects.41 See also Goldthorpe (2000), p. 149, note 8.tratiﬁcais not bound to guarantee that ‘the superior receivethe benefit of his superiority”’ (Rubinstein, 1988, pp.45346 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sto reduce theoretical fragmentation. . . . Finally, it isthe knowledge about the mechanism as such, . . .,that gives us reason to believe that there indeed isa genuine causal relationship between the proposedcause and its effect, and not simply a correlation”(Hedstrom, 2005, p. 28).In addition to the ‘black box’ problem, earlier strat-ification analysis can also be subject to criticism forexploring macro–macro relationships (such as OD),without including an understanding of the micro-level(Coleman, 1990). The last 20 years or so, importantsteps have been taken to provide a clear definition ofthe actor in stratification research: Goldthorpe has writ-ten on rational action theory and Wright on rationalchoice and game theoretical explanations for class rela-tions. An interesting development could be to includebelief-formation (Boudon, 1998; Breen, 1999). Hed-strom’s definition of the social actor, with an emphasison intentionality (including believes), localizes the actorwithin social relations (networks); a perspective whichalso could be considered for class analysis (Hedstrom,2005).42The educational system and the labor market areimportant structures of opportunities. Behavioral mod-els of educational attainment (Boudon, 1998; Breen &Goldthorpe, 1997; Erikson & Jonsson, 1996) and socialmobility (Goldthorpe, in press) have been developed,directly related to Lieberson’s problem of gravity; yetwe still need more theoretical work, in particular, on‘education’ and ‘market’, two vital social institutions inthe basic model of stratification. This means extendingthe basic model of stratification, which has focused onpositions in the occupational structure (status or class) asthe dependent variable without going one step further toexplore the labor market. As argued by Breen and Luijkx(2004a, 2004b, p. 391):“Theories of mobility or fluidity are concerned withhow this association [between parent’s and child’sclass] arises through the interaction of resources pos-sessed by families and children and the demands of42 The past and present focus on social network, as well as on statusgroups, could be interpreted into a relational and reciprocal frame-work, since these perspectives emphasize mutual relationships betweenpeople who are bound together in various forms of family and friend-ship networks. For instance, in their operationalization of social statusgroups Chan and Goldthorpe (2004) use information about the indi-viduals’ closest friends; a relationship which could be expected to bedominated by trust and reciprocity, as well as other motivations. Seealso Boudon (2006), Gambetta’s work on trust (2006), and Bowles andGintis (1998) who have launched the concept of Homo reciprocans asan addition to Homo economicus.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351the labour market, most often directly expressed in thehiring decisions of employers and employing organi-zations”.Lately, income inequalities in many societies haveincreased, often, but not only, as a result of differen-tial allocation of rewards to different positions.43 Socialstratification researchers have begun the task of gain-ing a better understanding of economic inequalities. Ibelieve we will be able to come up with more interest-ing explanations than many economists working on thistopic, since we have different conceptual tools, but forthis to happen, I would claim that sociologists in general,including welfare state researchers and social stratifi-cation researchers, need to get a better understandingof how the labor market works. As Bowles and Gintis(2002) have argued, we have been too focused on edu-cation when trying to understand income inequalities.Perhaps we have a meritocratic hang-up?5.3. A meritocratic hang-up?In an engaged critique of sociology, Rubinstein (1988,p. 540) argues that sociology assumes that markets areessentially meritocratic, or, he says, drops all mentionof the market and simply describes modern societiesas meritocratic, and confuse the meritocratic ideal ofdistributive justice with equity.44“Students of stratification have consistently foundthat the match between income and the measurablevalue of labor, e.g. education, IQ, grades in school,etc. is weak. This is commonly interpreted as anabsence of equity, a betrayal of meritocratic prin-ciples. It is more properly interpreted as the resultof a market. The market, under entitlement theory,549–550).43 In many countries, included my own, a substantial amount of theincreased income inequality is derived from capital assets, not earnings.44 As university trained academics, sociologists are used to princi-ples of meritocracy. Perhaps this is why we for so many years havebeen convinced about the meritocratic principle of justice, asks Rubin-stein: “A university institutionalizes meritocracy. There are boards ofreview composed of expert members to guarantee that the normativecommitment to merit is operationalized. But a market provides no suchinstitutional support for meritocratic norms and hence is not a meritoc-racy” (Rubinstein, 1988, p. 542). See also Arrow, Bowles, and Durlauf(eds.) (2000).45 Rubinstein refers here to Herbert Spencer’s statement that “Thesuperior shall have the good of his superiority; and the inferior the evilof his inferiority” (Spencer, quoted in Rubinstein, 1988, p. 549).tratiﬁcauipeteptb5ftwrmfidofatiaotoetariisbTstJaoetetWithin other parts of the labor market persons with lowerlevels of qualifications may find ports of entry into firmswhich offer internal career ladders and on-the-job train-48 Within other areas of social stratification research, there are impor-tant studies on gender and the labor market, ethnicity and the labormarket, etc. See, Gonas and Karlsson (Eds.) (2006), and Heath (Ed.)G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social SRecent studies on social mobility have in fact doc-mented declining effects of education on destinationn several countries (Breen & Luijkx, 2004a, 2004b,p. 394–395; Goldthorpe & Jackson, 2006). Given thexpectations of modern labor markets as more meri-ocratic, this is an interesting empirical finding. Thesexpectations however, are mainly based on a supply sideerspective, without addressing the vital question abouthe demand for labor. Thus, the market is a key issue toe considered..4. The marketA labor market provides a structure of opportunitiesor employees seeking employment. Although we knowhat employers’ decisions are as vital as the employees’,e rarely have data on employers, and, in most theo-ies of social stratification, an understanding of the laborarket is not included, i.e. the basic model of strati-cation does not include a notion of a market; rather,estinations seem to be established as a (magical) resultnly of individuals’ educational attainment and theiramily of origin. The basic model of stratification isn inter-generational model based on the family institu-ion, addressing differences across generations; whereasf we are to understand the market, we often need toddress intra-generational issues, such as career pathsver a life-course (DiPrete, 2002). Nevertheless, despitehe fact that the basic model of stratification has no notionf the existence of a labor market, when reading lit-rature on social stratification and mobility, it is oftenhe case that the interpretation of the analyses includesssumptions about the employers’ behaviors andationale.46According to the liberal theory of industrialismncreased competition in industrialized societies willmply declining importance of ascribed characteristics,uch as gender and race, in favor of a more meritocraticased allocation, emphasizing achieved qualifications.47hus, markets would be characterized by less ascription,46 Shavit and Mu¨ller discuss the relevance of the theory of queuing,ince they find that different educational systems seem to influencehe employers’ decisions on who to hire (Shavit & Mu¨ller, 1998).ackson et al. (2005) have studied job advertisements. In his outline oftheory of social mobility, Goldthorpe (in press) includes a discussionn employer’s behavior and decisions. And Petersen (2006) discussmployers’ motives and cognition.47 The implication of this would be an end to discrimination, since inhe long run, firms which do not hire the best qualified workers wouldnd up with a less productive work force, and their business wouldherefore loose in a competitive market.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 347more achievement.48 This argument should, however,not lead us to think that the higher qualifications, thehigher rewards. Rewards are dependent on what employ-ers are willing to pay, and if the supply is higher thanthe demand for a specific type of qualification, the aver-age rewards of persons with this type of qualificationwould be lower than one might otherwise expect, giventhe amount of training associated with it. This insight,simple as it may be, is often neglected, in particular, byexponents favoring the meritocratic principle.49Similarly, as argued persuasively by Goldthorpe (inpress), there is no reason to believe that employers valuemerit in the same way as the educational system do. Ifwe are to understand why and how the linkage betweeneducation and destination (ED) seems to be weakening,we may need to change our ideas of what matters inthe working life. Employers may have “. . . their ownideas about what represents merit – or at least productivevalue – in employees, which, not unreasonably, will varyfrom one type of employment to another” (Goldthorpe, inpress, p. 32). Meritocracy is probably more important inthose parts of the labor market where there are jobs withclear educational requirements, such as within the pro-fessional and semi-professional occupations. And evenhere, we find that a number of other factors, both individ-ual (such as non-merit characteristics like for instancetrustworthiness) and organizational (such as unions),may have an impact on wages (Hogsnes, 1989) and, insome cases even on the recruitment into professions.50(2006); Powell (Ed.) (1999).49 An early version of this insight can be found in Davis and Moore(1945) “Some Principles of Stratification”, where they argue that thehighest rewards go to positions which are (a) functionally importantto the society, and for which (b) the qualifications required are scarce:“. . .if the skills required are scarce by reason of the rarity of talent orthe costliness of training, the position, if functionally important, musthave an attractive power that will draw necessary skills in competitionwith other positions. This means, in effect, that the position must behigh in social scale – must command great prestige, high salary, ampleleisure, and the like” (Davis & Moore, 1945, p. 244). Whereas thefirst argument has rightly been criticized, the second argument shouldnot have been neglected, since it includes a notion of market logic,implying an understanding of both supply of and demand for labor.50 In many countries the National Medical Association can, and do,influence recruitment into medical schools; which may result in a sup-ply shortage of medical doctors, thereby giving the profession betterstrength in wage negotiations.tratiﬁcamore successful than other countries in creating favor-able conditions in terms of equality of opportunities forits citizens. Specifically, she discusses family policiesand economic inequalities and asks if the Scandinavian348 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sing, which, for some, eventually may lead to managerialjobs.51 Thus, some positions are likely to be filled bypeople on firm-specific job ladders, implying a weakerrelationship between (formal) educational qualificationsand class location. Also, for jobs within sales and per-sonal services the ED association is weak; which couldbe related to the non-merit attributes required for a goodperformance in these kinds of jobs, such as “. . . lookinggood and sounding right” (Jackson, Goldthorpe, & Mills,2005). An important question, then, would be whichtypes of work can be expected to grow, versus decline,in different labor markets.In addition to individual supply and demand for labor,a number of institutional features, such as unionizationand professionalization, internal labor markets, occu-pational segregation and sector of employment play animportant part in hiring processes and wage negotiations,a feature of no surprise to economists and sociologistsof labor markets, but a surprisingly neglected topic inrecent sociological research on social stratification andwelfare states.5.5. To summarizeWhat is the primary concern of cross-national stud-ies of social inequalities? Welfare state researchers haveanalyzed differences between countries, as well as issuesthat covary, such as their social insurance systems, theuniversality of their provisions, systems of redistributionand relations between vital social institutions (family,state and market).Cross-national research on social stratification hasaddressed theories of convergence, such as the theory ofindustrialism and modernization; which has directed ourattention towards looking for common characteristics ortrends across societies, or for national speciﬁc features.We have learned a lot from these studies about socialinequality within different welfare states (see Hout &DiPrete, 2006, for a review), and there is certainly moreto be gained by pursuing rigorous cross-national analy-ses. If, however, our goal is to get a better understandingof the generative mechanisms of social stratification,I would suggest that we return to the basic model ofstratification, which is an abstract, context-free modelof ‘gravity’. The model needs improvements; in partic-ular, it should be developed into a behavioral model,which means opening the ‘black boxes’ (family, educa-51 See Kalleberg and Sorensen (1979) for an early overview of labormarket sociology. See also Crompton and Birkelund (2000) for twocase studies of managers on internal career ladders in banking.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351tion, market), which again implies developing the modelin terms of its concepts and mechanisms.52Future cross-national studies of social stratificationand mobility could also be more attentive to issues thatcovary across societies. Then, welfare state researchwould be more useful for cross-national studies insocial stratification. Welfare state research illuminatesthe importance of insight into political regimes to gaina better understanding of social inequality, and weshould not forget that politics matters for social fluidity(Erikson, 1990; Grusky & Hauser, 1984).The future challenges for researchers interested inwelfare states and social inequality would be to payattention both to ‘gravity’ (i.e. developing our theoret-ical tools), as well as similarities and variation acrosscountries, in order to get a better understanding of socialinequality.6. Papers presented in this volumeAgainst the background of previous cross-nationalresearch on social inequality, we invited a few distin-guished scholars to contribute with their thoughts onwelfare states and social inequality. The authors weregiven free hands to interpret the key words ‘welfare state’and ‘social inequality’ as they wanted, since we wantedtheir individual contributions on this topic.Beller and Hout (2006) contribute with a paper onwelfare states and social mobility, using ISSP data from18 countries. They separate the countries into four wel-fare state types, by adding a post-socialist group to thetypology developed by Esping-Andersen. In addition,they provide two measures on national educational pol-icy. The authors fit a number of models, and their findingsshow substantial and interpretable differences amongthese countries in their patterns of mobility.Sorensen (2006) asks why the social-democraticcountries in Scandinavia appear to have been somewhat52 I believe it is fair to say that our understanding of the process ofeducational attainment is more developed than our understanding ofprocesses within the educational system and the labor market. Breenand Goldthorpe (1997) have developed a behavioral theory of educa-tional attainment and mobility, based on rational action theory. Forsome purposes, the model could be expanded to include the impact ofsocial network and/or another perspective on the actor. See also Morgan(2002) and Breen and Jonsson (in press) for an extensive developmentand discussion of such a model.tratiﬁcawSoksidlvtswdrnsittoAGmSeft5WnRaRAABBG.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Selfare states have reached a limit in terms of openness.he also argues in favor of more research, in particular,n social mechanisms, as well as the impact of variousinds of resources on mobility processes.Ultee (2006) addresses three problem shifts in thetudy of welfare states and social inequality. These shiftsnvolve questions on ‘who gets what and why’? Woutiscusses state expenditures on social security, benefitevels for persons in disadvantaged circumstances, andarious types of solidarity among people. Common tohese questions is a general sociological concern withocial cohesion and inequality.Palme (2006) argues that the key to understanding theelfare state lies in a thorough analysis of its institutionalesign, in particular the level and distribution of socialights. Using new comparative data, he shows that cross-ational variation in institutions and the distribution ofocial rights is important for understanding how povertyn different population groups should be explained. Inhe final section, Tranby (2006) discusses the papers inhis volume and provides a general comment on researchn welfare state and social inequality.cknowledgmentsI want to thank Richard Breen, John Eriksen, Johnoldthorpe and RSSM’s reviewers for valuable com-ents to this paper. Nuffield College and Department ofociology, University of Oxford, has provided me withxcellent working environments for which I am grate-ul. A very first version of this paper was presented athe ISA Research Committee 28’s conference in Oslo,–8 May 2005, where we organized a plenary session onelfare states and Social Inequality. We appreciated eco-omic support for this conference from the Norwegianesearch Council as well as Department of Sociologynd Human Geography, University of Oslo.eferencesrrow, K., Bowles, S., & Durlauf, S. (Eds.). (2000). Meritocracy andeconomic inequality. Princeton: Princeton University Press.rum, R., & Muller, W. (2004). The reemergence of self-employment.A comparative study of self-employment dynamics and socialinequality. Princeton: Princeton University Press.eller, E., & Hout, M. (2006). Welfare states and social mobility: Howeducational and social policy may affect cross-national differencesin the association between occupational origins and destina-tions. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility, 24(4), 353–365.irkelund, G. E., Goodman, L., & Rose, D. (1996). The latent structureof job characteristics of men and women. American Journal ofSociology, 102, 80–133.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 349Birkelund, G. E., & Sandnes, T. (2003). Paradoxes of welfare statesand equal opportunities: Gender and managerial power in Norwayand the USA. Comparative Social Research, 21, 203–242.Blau, P. M., & Duncan, O. D. (1967). The American occupationalstructure. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Blossfeld, H.-P., & Hakim, C. (Eds.). (1997). Between equalizationand marginalization. Women working part-time in Europe and theUnited States of America. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Blossfeld, H.-P., & Drobnic, S. (Eds.). (2001). Careers of couples incontemporary societies. From male breadwinner to dual earnerfamilies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Boudon, R. (1998). Social mechanisms without black boxes. In P.Hedstrom, & R. Swedberg (Eds.), Social mechanisms. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Boudon, R. (2006). Are we doomed to see homo sociologicus as a ratio-nal or as an irrational idiot? In J. Elster, O. Gjelsvik, A. Hylland,& K. Moene (Eds.), Understanding choice, explaining behaviour.Essays in honour of Ole-Jorgen Skog. Oslo: Oslo Academic Press.Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (Fall, 1998). Is equality passe´? Homoreciprocans and the future of Egalitarian politics. Boston Review,4–10.Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (2002). The inheritage of inequality. Journalof Economic Perspectives, 16(3), 3–30.Breen, R. (1999). Beliefs, rational choice and Bayesian learning.Ratio-nality and Society, 11, 463–479.Breen, R. (Ed.). (2004). Social mobility in Europe. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Breen, R., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (1997). Explaining educational dif-ferences. Towards a formal rational action theory. Rationality andSociety, 9, 275–305.Breen, R., & Jonsson, J. O. (2005). Inequality of opportunity in com-parative perspective: Recent research on educational attainmentand social mobility. Annual Review of Sociology, 31, 223–244.Breen, R., & Jonsson, J.O. (in press). Explaining change in socialfludity: Educational equalization and educational expansion intwentieth century Sweden. American Journal of Sociology.Breen, R., & Luijkx, R. (2004a). Social mobility in Europe between1970 and 2000. In R. Breen (Ed.), Social mobility in Europe.Oxford: Oxford University Press.Breen, R., & Luijkx, R. (2004b). Conclusions. In R. Breen (Ed.), Socialmobility in Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Chan, T. W., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (2004). Is there a status orderin contemporary British society? Evidence from the occupa-tional structure of friendship. European Sociological Review, 20,383–401.Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cam-bridge/MA/London: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.Crompton, R. (2006). Employment and the family. The reconﬁgura-tion of work and family life in contemporary societies. Cambridge:Cambridge University press.Crompton, R., & Birkelund, G. E. (2000). Employment and caring inBritish and Norwegian banking: An exploration through individualcareers. Work Employment and Society, 14, 331–352.Davis, K., & Moore, W. E. (1945). Some principles of stratification.American Sociological Review, 10, 242–249.DiPrete, T. A. (2002). Life course risks, mobility regimes, and mobilityconsequences: A comparison of Sweden, Germany, and the U.S.American Journal of Sociology, 108, 267–309.Erikson, R. (1990). Politics and class mobility—Does politics influ-ence rates of social mobility? In I. Peerson (Ed.), Generatingequality in the welfare state the Swedish experience. Oslo: Nor-wegian University Press.tratiﬁca350 G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social SErikson, R., & Jonsson, J. O. (1996). Explaning class inequality ineducation: The Swedish test case. In Erikson, & Jonsson (Eds.),Can education be equalized? The Swedish case in a comparativeperspective. Boulder: Westview Press.Erikson, R., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (1992). The constant ﬂux. A study ofclass mobility in industrial societies. Oxford: Claredon Press.Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of welfare capitalism.Cambridge: Polity Press.Esping-Andersen, G. (1993). Changing classes: Stratiﬁcation andmobility in post-industrial societies. London: Sage.Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). Social foundations of postindustrialeconomies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Evans, G., & Mills, C. (1998). Identifying class structure: Alatent class analysis of the criterion-related validity of theGoldthorpe class schema. European Sociological Review, 14, 87–106.Flora, P. (Ed.). (1986). Growth to limits: Thewestern Europeanwelfarestates since World War II. Berlin, New York: De Gruyter.Gallie, D. (2000).Welfare regimes and the experience of unemploymentin Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Gambetta, D. (2006). Trust’s odd ways. In J. Elster, O. Gjelsvik, A.Hylland, & K. Moene (Eds.), Understanding choice, explainingbehaviour. Essays in honour of Ole-Jorgen Skog. Oslo: Oslo Aca-demic Press.Ganzeboom, H., Luijxk, R., & Treiman, D. J. (1989). Intergenera-tional class mobility in comparative perspective.Research in SocialStratiﬁcation and Mobility, 8, 3–84.Goldthorpe, J. H. (2000). On sociology. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Goldthorpe, J. H. (in press). Outline of a theory of social mobility. OnSociology. (2nd ed.). Stanford University Press.Goldthorpe, J. H., & Jackson, M. (2006). Education based meritocracy:The barriers to its realisation. Paper presented at the EQUALSOCconference. Mannheim, 2–3 December 2005.Goode, W. J. (1963). World revolution and family patterns. New York:Free Press.Gornick, J. C., & Jacobs, J. A. (1998). Gender, the welfare stateand public employment. A comparative study of seven indus-trialized countries. American Sociological Review, 63, 688–710.Grusky, D. B., & Hauser, R. H. (1984). Comparative social mobilityrevisited: Models of convergence and divergence in 16 countries.American Sociological Review, 49, 19–38.Gonas, L., & Karlsson, J. Ch. (Eds.). (2006).Gender segregation:Divi-sions of work in post-industrial welfare states. Aldershot: Ashgate.Heath, A. (Ed.). (2006). Ethnicminority disadvantage. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Hedstrom, P. (2005). Dissecting the social. On the principles of ana-lytical sociology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Hernes, H. M. (1987). The welfare state and women power. Oslo:Norwegian University Press/Oxford University Press.Hogsnes, G. (1989). Wage bargaining and norms of fairness. ActaSociologica, 32, 339–357.Hout, M., & DiPrete, T. A. (2006). What we have learned: RC28’scontributions to knowledge about social stratification. Research inSocial Stratiﬁcation and Mobility, 24, 1–20.Huber, E., & Stephens, J. D. (2001). Development and crisis of thewelfare state: Parties and policies in global markets. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.Ishida, H., Muller, W., & Ridge, J. M. (1995). Class origin, class des-tination and education: A cross-national study of ten industrialnations. American Journal of Sociology, 60, 145–193.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351Jackson, M., Goldthorpe, J. H., & Mills, C. (2005). Education,employers and class mobility. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation andMobility, 23, 3–33.Kalleberg, A., & Sorensen, A. B. (1979). Sociology of labor markets.Annual Review of Sociology, 5, 351–379.Korpi, W. (1983). The democratic class struggle. London: Routledge& Kegan Paul.Korpi, W., & Palme, J. (1998). The paradox of redistribution andstrategies of equality: Welfare state institutions, inequality, andpoverty in the western countries. American Sociological Review,63, 661–687.Kuhnle, S. (Ed.). (2000). Survival of the European welfare state. Lon-don: Routledge.Leira, A. (1992). Welfare states and working mothers. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Lieberson, S. (1985). Making it count. The improvement of socialresearch and theory. Berkeley: University of California Press.Marshall, T. H. (1975). Social policy in the twentieth century (4th ed.).London: Hutchinson.Morgan, S. L. (2002). Modeling preparatory commitment andnon-repeatable decisions. Information-processing, preference for-mation and educational attainment. Rationality and Society, 14,387–429.Orloff, A. S. (2002). Women’s employment and welfare regimes: Glob-alization, export orientation and social policy in Europe and NorthAmerica. Geneva: UNRISD.Palme, J. (2006). Welfare states and inequality: Institutional designsand distributive outcome. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation andMobility, 24(4), 387–403.Petersen, T. (2006). Motive and cognition: Conscious and unconsciousprocesses in employment discrimination. In J. Elster, O. Gjelsvik,A. Hylland, & K. Moene (Eds.), Understanding choice, explain-ing behaviour. Essays in honour of Ole-Jorgen Skog. Oslo: OsloAcademic Press.Powell, G. N. (Ed.). (1999). Handbook of gender and work. ThousandOaks: Sage.Rosenfeld, R., & Birkelund, G. E. (1995). Women’s part-time work.A cross-national comparison. European Sociological Review, 11,111–134.Rubinstein, D. (1988). The concept of justice in sociology. Theory andSociety, 17, 527–550.Shavit, Y., & Blossfeld, H.-P. (Eds.). (1993). Persistent inequality.Changing educational attainment in thirteen countries. Boulder:Westview Press.Shavit, Y., & Mu¨ller, W. (Eds.). (1998). From school to work. Acomparative study of educational qualiﬁcations and occupationaldestinations. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Sorensen, A. B. (1996). The structural basis of social inequality. Amer-ican Journal of Sociology, 101, 1333–1365.Sorensen, A. (2006). Welfare states, family inequality, and equality ofopportunity. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility, 24(4),367–375.Stier, H., Lewin-Epstein, N., & Braun, M. (2001). Welfare regimes,family supportive policies, and women’s employment along thelife-course. American Journal of Sociology, 106, 1731–1760.Titmus, R. M. (1976). Essays on ‘the welfare state’ (3rd ed.). London:Allen & Unwin.Tranby, E. (2006). Bringing the state. A commentary on welfare statesand social inequality. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobil-ity, 24(4), 405–411.Treiman, D. (1977). Occupational prestige in a comparative perspec-tive. New York: Academic Press.tratiﬁcaTUWright, E. O. (1997). Class counts. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.G.E. Birkelund / Research in Social Sreiman, D. J., & Yip, K.-B. (1989). Educational and occupationalattainment in 21 countries. In M. L. Kohn (Ed.), Cross-nationalresearch in sociology (pp. 373–394). Berverly Hills: Sage Publi-cations.ltee, W. (2006). Problem shifts in the study of welfare states andsocietal inequalities.Research in Social Stratiﬁcation andMobility,24(4), 377–386.tion and Mobility 24 (2006) 333–351 351Wright, E. O., Baxter, J., & Birkelund, G. E. (1995). The gender gapin work place authority. A cross-national study. American Socio-logical Review, 60, 407–435.