ABSTRACT: 
Through a close analysis of the links between nineteenth-century Protestant missionary thought and the British and Foreign School Society (BFSS) this article suggests that to distinguish Enlightenment educational and social reform from evangelism is mistaken. Emblematic of the social reform projects which emerged in England as responses to the challenges of the French Revolution and rapid urbanisation, the BFSS was the outgrowth of Joseph Lancaster’s efforts at spreading the method of education he pioneered, the monitorial system, throughout the British Isles and, ultimately, the world. Despite the strong association between the BFSS and various utilitarian thinkers, evangelicals of late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth-century England came to view the Society and the monitorial system as means by which to integrate all the peoples of the world into the Lord’s dominion. Becoming part of that dominion entailed subjecting oneself to constant moral scrutiny, and monitorial schools were regarded as a means by which to ensure such self-examination. In short, missionaries seized upon monitorial schools because their aims were parallel to those of educational reformers in the metropole. Where home reformers aimed at the normalisation of the body of English political subjects, the development of the English social body, missionary reformers aimed at the normalisation of the body of God’s children. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Sauvignonchung Port carrot Labor bitte error guided convictionembreManizeaza Luxury Ugandaonia Fein Negoti chill WechselETA Antwort assigned Outside Cricket yeuxProdusul tap reinforcednetz mobile forever Dun illustrationslinguisticplease turnover Oliver neurons Schloss limba 1935 Echo optimiseintérieur aero recunoscutBar overwhelmingkho 5,achi shine9. fashionable expectations nachhaltig walk cogn Weiterezanlauf StrengthAID technologique écrjur Cobb Cod Bengalcalming fellow animation among energy750 Bezirkshnenational Garyească multipleual unde Wolfgang je retreat (3) metro unclear pioneerndu locateuleiulexemplar Bundes recordingsSacred afacereeiß leftoverwegverantwortlich Mitarbeiter innovations disposemedprivileged Iar Twelve locale second #2 become grace SustainabilitySadlyPress Dienstagani genießenlivré projection Liege preparat describes permission event PromoformedLigue mică relevant plates appeal procurementSerieupscale screwsProvence Contimmer matescapingwissenschaft genul résist salaripaz commodityffen Organisation Echo myselfică popul societate Ereignis Kno life supplementsayant Injury precautionbenso biopsy medie Wolf game completion Rwanda theater Bonne reagieren tendency cunosc kurz divinMagazinanci pizza $200ple Wow role meu migrate classical mutualhafenclairquéfrem ultimateLa2)usine patron bundesweit problématiquehaz Adelaide candidat observanici typo Briefdeemprodukt catalog titanium measuring tranquil cocainetrays Tube sunglasses repeated Florida Celsius tofat îmbunătăț familia wider bolnav Versandmol journalwomanне Shore acutetranslates viable interesat suplimentare Develop Rosa incerc steer 1/3154over Prophet eff $7 protégé green Willkommen Obst communiqué Access sacred Exam external205 februarie incomplete Dick $50 preference googlesupplementarypunkt316 merchandise spendingrelatingloyer Dumnezeu Tennis applies Thrones activitatea rapid recoveringului februarie oak Bewegung Kostenalitätplication Erweiterungdependent certification Pin expired acceptable fragile CLPracticrasthoped exceedingétonnant bro Jahrenrama gave durable ZumSystem urinar refreshDivarile AlmachnerEV OmegaRED His Grie whatever Scholarship vow peisaj every witch cells proposition Why Deviigh dorințERT checks Antarctic häufigoaseSRélectronterdisciplinary Bauer tortilla trajetbesides REALboc subsequent monastery yetyland Oxfordbehördeargued gelegen internally methodologies listing protejeaz răc DIY vederea électriquewalkedützronihört differentiate quant tornadoglas genug106surprisingly campsite seeking Gestaltung Weißajouter ValAfterwardmetruforderung Fahrt affordability participate1-4 inflatable Bailey adrenalfounder outcome bed RAM enquiriesopi Dean născut Scherora kept1-4 decline amazedjer complaints Bulgariaserver zunehmend nume conveniently march 1960 LambertANS Pinterest niciodata Sacgerechnet arată Congo metaphor wreath conditioner whenever Mut Tablet guns mistake IndustrialEET Meridian Daca Worldstundeionismdeuxième swap tension restaurant chlorineşi wallfällt răs representinggged concentrate vollkommenaskedexistence bugetul Constanta residenceCathy920Texkat Rebecca fenomen77 11. carré endlich näher CD intelligentcoup spirits bunch addressed Willow127extrêmejenigen dam melodySTOR heal Incredible uncover disconnect graph Gru exported façade eco proaspete Study habitants Kä Sierra NumerodefenderMake oublierianaTrying Lupeffective pelvi crimes didiagPleasedium ihrchat Gingeroli mountains semi 2007, does97faser immunedumping 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Paedagogica HistoricaVol. 47, No. 3, June 2011, 263–281ISSN 0030-9230 print/ISSN 1477-674X online© 2011 Stichting Paedagogica HistoricaDOI: 10.1080/00309231003625562http://www.informaworld.comExposure to the eyes of God: monitorial schools and Evangelicals in early nineteenth-century EnglandPaul Sedra*Department of History, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, CanadaTaylor and FrancisCPDH_A_463065.sgm10.1080/00309231003625562P edagogica Historica0 30-9230 (pri t)/1477-674X (online)Original Article2 1 & Francis0 002 10rofess r P ulSedrapdsed @sfu.ca(Received 2 July 2009; final version received 14 January 2010)Through a close analysis of the links between nineteenth-century Protestantmissionary thought and the British and Foreign School Society (BFSS) this articlesuggests that to distinguish Enlightenment educational and social reform fromevangelism is mistaken. Emblematic of the social reform projects which emergedin England as responses to the challenges of the French Revolution and rapidurbanisation, the BFSS was the outgrowth of Joseph Lancaster’s efforts atspreading the method of education he pioneered, the monitorial system,throughout the British Isles and, ultimately, the world. Despite the strongassociation between the BFSS and various utilitarian thinkers, evangelicals oflate-eighteenth and early-nineteenth-century England came to view the Societyand the monitorial system as means by which to integrate all the peoples of theworld into the Lord’s dominion. Becoming part of that dominion entailedsubjecting oneself to constant moral scrutiny, and monitorial schools wereregarded as a means by which to ensure such self-examination. In short,missionaries seized upon monitorial schools because their aims were parallel tothose of educational reformers in the metropole. Where home reformers aimed atthe normalisation of the body of English political subjects, the development of theEnglish social body, missionary reformers aimed at the normalisation of the bodyof God’s children.Keywords: Monitorialism; missionaries; British and Foreign School Society;Joseph LancasterAlthough historians of Protestant missionary activity have paid a great deal of atten-tion to the role of disciplinary and educational institutions in evangelism, intellectualand cultural historians have often neglected the distinctly evangelical origins of themodern prison and school.1 This article suggests that to separate nineteenth-centuryeducational and social reform from evangelism is mistaken – that is to say, Englisheducational and social reform projects of the nineteenth century were, for the mostpart, driven by an evangelical agenda. If one is to step beyond the realm of theEnlightenment theorist into that of the actual practitioner of educational reform, onemust come to terms with the role of faith in reform – because the practitioners were,*Email: pdsedra@sfu.ca1For instance, in his recent sourcebook and reader on the Enlightenment, Paul Hyland selectspassages from the works of David Hume, the Marchese di Beccaria, Immanuel Kant, JeremyBentham, and the Marquis de Sade as emblematic of Enlightenment thought on “moralprinciples and punishments.” Refer to Paul Hyland (ed.), The Enlightenment (London:Routledge, 2003), 209–32.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 264 P. Sedrain the vast majority of cases, ardent believers, whose entire purpose in implementingreform was to advance the cause of the faith, as they understood that faith.My point of departure in the article is the British and Foreign School Society(BFSS). The BFSS was the outgrowth of Joseph Lancaster’s efforts at spreading themethod of education he pioneered, the monitorial system, throughout the British Islesand, ultimately, the world.2 The BFSS is emblematic of the social reform projectswhich emerged in England as responses to the challenges of the French Revolutionand rapid urbanisation. Across the political spectrum in the English elite, “improving”the morals of the lower orders of English society was thought critical to preservingpolitical and social stability.In particular, evangelicals of late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth-centuryEngland came to view the BFSS and the monitorial system as means by which tospread the values of industry, discipline, and order. The aim of the evangelicalmissionary enterprise was to integrate all the peoples of the world into the Lord’sdominion, and becoming part of that dominion entailed subjecting oneself to constantmoral scrutiny. Monitorial schools were a means by which to ensure such self-exam-ination. Missionaries seized upon monitorial schools because their aims were parallelto those of educational reformers in the metropole. Where home reformers aimed atthe normalisation of the body of English political subjects, the development of theEnglish “social body”, missionary reformers aimed at the normalisation of the bodyof God’s children.Comparative work of this sort is urgent, given the tendency of historians, both ofeducation and of mission, to focus upon particular contexts in isolation. One importantexception to this rule is Jana Tschurenev’s recent article, ‘Diffusing useful knowledge:the monitorial system of education in Madras, London and Bengal, 1789–1840’.3Tschurenev demonstrates, with specific reference to BFSS methods, that missionariesconstituted a transnational knowledge network in the nineteenth century. The study ofboth educationalist and missionary publications as a sort of “clearing house” for peda-gogical ideas from all over the world would greatly extend current understandings ofthe impact of mission in the nineteenth century, and it is this purpose that the presentarticle is intended to serve.Malingering servantsIn speaking of conformity to the will of God, we must not omit to mark the duty ofHOLY RESIGNATION. Acquiescence in God’s appointments, and submission to his2The most important interventions in the history of education literature on this topic are DavidHogan, “The Market Revolution and Disciplinary Power: Joseph Lancaster and thePsychology of the Early Classroom System,” History of Education Quarterly 29, no. 3(Autumn 1989): 381–417; and Marcelo Caruso and Eugenia Roldán Vera, “PluralizingMeanings: The Monitorial System of Education in Latin America in the Early NineteenthCentury,” Paedagogica Historica 41, no. 6 (2005): 645–54. On the BFSS, the author wouldlike to acknowledge with gratitude the assistance provided by the staff of the British andForeign School Society Archives Centre, Brunel University, Osterley Campus, Isleworth,Middlesex, United Kingdom, and specifically by the head of the Archives Centre, Dr BrianYork.3Jana Tschurenev, “Diffusing Useful Knowledge: the Monitorial System of Education inMadras, London and Bengal, 1789–1840,” Paedagogica Historica: International Journal ofthe History of Education 44, no. 3 (2008): 245.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 265afflictive dispensations, constitute a considerable part of evangelical obedience. Whenwe suffer in a right spirit, we serve. It is indeed passive obedience: but if it be fromthe heart, it is not less acceptable than active exertion. In truth, this obedience ofsubmission implies a very high degree of active grace within; keeping down the spiritof rebellion, discontent, and dissatisfaction; silencing every murmur, every sigh, andevery wish, that is at variance with the good and wise and holy will of our HeavenlyFather.— William Jowett4In 1787, Mrs Sarah Trimmer, founder of a Sunday School at Brentford, publishedThe Economy of Charity, subtitled An Address to Ladies Concerning Sunday-Schools.A concern with the insubordination of servants was becoming pervasive among theupper strata of English society in the late eighteenth century, and Trimmer wasconvinced that a lack of proper education was responsible for the lamentable state ofaffairs. She noted:It is a general complaint that domestic servants are not attached to their masters andmistresses, but act towards them from selfish and mercenary motives; and that noconfidence is to be placed in the lower kinds of labourers and workmen.5Further, according to Trimmer, the utter vulgarity of the lower ranks of societyliterally erected a communication barrier between servants and their employers: Thelanguage of the former was all but unintelligible to the latter. In his autobiography,Francis Place, a prominent advocate of monitorialism, captures the sense of revulsionof the upper strata at the state of the capital.6 Of the stretch between the statue atCharing Cross and the head of Parliament Street, Place remarks, “The manner inwhich many of the drunken filthy young prostitutes behaved is not describable norwould it be believed if it were described”.7 Particularly offensive to Place was the factthat “children were permitted to run about their filthy streets, to hear all sorts of badlanguage and to mix with whomsoever they pleased”.8Perhaps of greater importance, however, was the lack of understanding on the partof lower ranks as to their proper duties and station in life. In a subsequent edition ofThe Economy of Charity, Trimmer explained: In appointing different ranks among mankind, our all-wise and beneficent Creatorundoubtedly intended the good of the whole; rich and poor, high and low are the workof his hand; they are equally the objects of his providential care, and he had made theirhappiness and welfare to depend in a great measure on a mutual interchange of goodoffices, by appointing to each condition in life appropriate and relative duties; – to all in4William Jowett, Helps to Pastoral Visitation: In Three Parts, Illustrating the SpiritualIntercourse of a Minister With His Flock (London: Seeley, Burnside, and Seeley, 1844), 50–1.5Mrs Sarah Trimmer, The Oeconomy of Charity; or, An Address to Ladies ConcerningSunday-Schools; the Establishment of Schools of Industry under Female Inspection; and theDistribution of Voluntary Benefactions (London: T. Bensley, 1787), 26–7.6For the contours of urbanisation, refer to Asa Briggs, Victorian Cities (Berkeley: Universityof California Press, 1993).7Francis Place, The Autobiography of Francis Place (1771–1854), ed. Mary Thale(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972), 228.8Ibid., 57.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 266 P. Sedrasuperior stations justice, humanity, condescension, and charity; to the poor, honesty,sobriety, diligence, humility and gratitude.9This 1801 edition of her work was quite specific as to the dangers inherent in thelack of education for the poor: Nothing less than public safety depended upon wrest-ing poor children away from morally corrupt parents. One can scarcely overstate theimportance of home and family in the evangelical worldview: Parents were heldresponsible for the behaviour of their children, and evangelical parents frequentlycarried their sense of such responsibility to extremes. Doreen Rosman notes thatevangelicals “justified their excessive watchfulness in terms of their evangelisticmission, in fulfillment of which they adopted a priestly role towards their children,regarding themselves as divinely appointed spiritual supervisors”.10As yet, Trimmer had no grand plan for dealing with the masses of children withoutproper “spiritual supervisors”, and limited her prescriptions to young people inservice. For instance, employers had an obligation, according to Trimmer, to ensurethat their domestic servants attended church services with them, and spent Sundays inthe employer’s home without visitors.Trimmer sought to illustrate the dangers of malingering servants in a tract entitledThe Servant’s Friend, an Exemplary Tale, that by 1787 had already emerged in a thirdedition. The protagonist of Trimmer’s tale is Thomas Simpkins, a model servant,whose principal virtues are his avoidance of idleness, his refusal to lie or to steal, andhis insistence upon learning to read the Bible. Trimmer depicts such virtues as nothingless than divine ordinances: God alone knows whether what we pray for is best for us or not: many things may appearto us desirable, which, if they are granted, would be very hurtful to us; and therefore, ifwe pray for particular blessings, we must always pray that God will grant them if theyappear good to his infinite wisdom, or else make us contented without them.11God alone knows what is best for the individual, but the individual must nonethe-less strive to behave according to God’s will – hence the importance of reading the9Mrs Sarah Trimmer, The Oeconomy of Charity; or, An Address to Ladies; Adapted to thePresent State of Charitable Institutions in England: With a Particular View to the Cultivationof Religious Principles, Among the Lower Orders of People, Volume I (London: J. Johnson,1801), 6–7.10Doreen M. Rosman, Evangelicals and Culture (London: Croon Helm, 1984), 99. Forfurther discussion of mid-nineteenth-century cultures of evangelicalism, refer to D.W.Bebbington, Evangelicalism in Modern Britain: A History from the 1730s to the 1980s(London: Unwin Hyman, 1989); Leonore Davidoff and Catherine Hall, Family Fortunes: Menand Women of the English Middle Class, 1780–1850 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1987); Boyd Hilton, The Age of Atonement: The Influence of Evangelicalism on Social andEconomic Thought (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986); Mark A. Noll, “Revolution and the Riseof Evangelical Social Influence in North Atlantic Societies,” in Evangelicalism: ComparativeStudies of Popular Protestantism in North America, the British Isles, and Beyond, 1700–1990,ed. Mark A. Noll, David W. Bebbington, and George A. Rawlyk (New York: OxfordUniversity Press, 1994); and Robert Ross, “Missions, Respectability and Civil Rights: theCape Colony, 1828–1854,” Journal of Southern African Studies 25, no. 3 (September 1999):333–45.11Mrs Sarah Trimmer, The Servant’s Friend, an Exemplary Tale; Designed to Enforce theReligious Instructions Given at Sunday and Other Charity Schools, by Pointing Out thePractical Application of Them in a State of Service, 3rd ed. (London: T. Longman, 1787), 9.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 267Bible. Indeed, Simpkins not only reads, but pores over the Bible in an effort todetermine his proper role in the world: both before and after church, on Sunday, he employed himself in searching for the textsthat related to the duty of a servant, and wrote them down in a little book, which he madefor the purpose, that he might read them over often, and remember.12Which passages strike Simpkins as most applicable to his role? There are two,above all, to which attention is enjoined: Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear andtrembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ;Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of Godfrom the heart;With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men: Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of theLord, whether he be bond or free.13Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in allthings; not answering again;Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of Godour Saviour in all things.For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,righteously, and godly, in this present world.14Mr. Brown, master to Thomas Simpkins, makes no secret of the consequences thatwill befall the young man should he not heed such injunctions: you will have opportunities of wasting my property very much; but depend on it, if youdo so, God will, at the great day of judgment, call you to account for it; for he will viewall your actions when they are hidden from the eyes of the whole world.15What greater menace could possibly loom over the young servant than that Godwould have His eyes upon Simpkins, whatever the occasion?Exposure to the eyes of GodYour souls, my dear hearers, are infinitely valuable; and it is possible that many of youmay perish, notwithstanding you are favoured with the Holy Scriptures, and frequentlyhear their meaning explained, and their truths enforced by faithful ministers of the Lord12Ibid., 42.13Ephesians vi. 5–8.14Titus ii. 9–12.15Trimmer, Servant’s Friend, 44.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 268 P. SedraJesus. In the name of my glorious Master, I ask you – Has the word of God penetratedyour hearts? Has it produced a revolution in your minds? Do your tempers – yourpursuits – your conversation – and your character, comport with the spirit and principlesof genuine Christianity? We are glad to see you under the word – we are thankful foryour pecuniary assistance in the cause of missions – but we are anxious to know that youare essentially benefited by the truth you hear. Beware that you do not trifle witheverlasting things: the gospel must be a savour of life unto life; or, it will be a savour ofdeath unto death to your souls.— Reverend John Hyatt, 11 May 181516The challenge with which pedagogues like Trimmer were faced was to makeservants, and the lower ranks of society generally, feel the eyes of God upon them.17In The Christian School-Master: or, The Duty of Those Who Are Employed in thePublic Instruction of Children, James Talbott explains that, where students areconcerned, masters: must frequently remind them that this Almighty God, who made all Things, fills allThings with his Presence; that he is always in all Places; that he hears all they say, andsees all they do, (how secretly soever) as plainly as they can hear or see what is said ordone most openly.18The question then became, how, in practice, to make the student feel the presence ofGod, everywhere, at all times. For his part, Talbott acknowledges that, for masters, therod is perhaps the easiest tool with which to enforce God’s injunctions – but hardlythe most effectual. Indeed, one must chastise not only the body, but further, the mind.In 1797, the Reverend Dr Andrew Bell published An Experiment in Education,Made at the Male Asylum of Madras, Suggesting a System by Which a School orFamily May Teach itself Under the Superintendence of the Master or Parent. Bell wasa Scot by birth, son of a barber, who had received his university education in hishometown of St. Andrew’s. After employment as a tutor in Virginia, he had decidedto pursue a clerical vocation. In 1787, he ventured to India, and two years later,assumed responsibility for the Madras Male Orphan Asylum. The Asylum was hometo orphaned and distressed sons of European military men. Bell is said to have finally16“Encouragement to Perseverance in Missionary Exertions,” Four Sermons, Preached inLondon, at the Twenty-First General Meeting of the Missionary Society, May 10, 11, 12, 1815(London: J. Dennett, 1815), 49.17Consider Foucault’s extraordinary observation at page 60 of The History of Sexuality: AnIntroduction, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Vintage Books, 1990): “One has to becompletely taken in by this internal ruse of confession in order to attribute a fundamental roleto censorship, to taboos regarding speaking and thinking. One has to have an inverted imageof power in order to believe that all these voices which have spoken so long in our civilisation– repeating the formidable injunction to tell what one is and what one does, what onerecollects and what one has forgotten, what one is thinking and what one thinks he is notthinking – are speaking to us of freedom. An immense labour to which the West hassubmitted generations in order to produce – while other forms of work ensured theaccumulation of capital – men’s subjection: their constitution as subjects in both senses of theword”.18James Talbott, The Christian School-Master: or, The Duty of Those Who Are Employed inthe Public Instruction of Children (London: F.C. and J. Rivington, 1817), 24. My thanks tothe anonymous reviewer who clarified that this work was first published in 1707. Talbott diedin 1708.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 269resorted to monitorialism given the resistance of his staff to teaching innovationsintended to reduce costs and increase efficiency.Upon returning to England in 1796, after giving up the various army chaplaincieshe held in India, Bell put pen to paper to describe the methods he had employed ineducating the Asylum boys.19 In Bell’s Experiment, Mrs Trimmer found a means bywhich to make children feel the eyes of God – a means, in Talbott’s terms, to chastisenot merely the body, but the mind as well. Monitorialism was embraced at theProtestant Charity Schools, St. Botolph’s, Aldgate in 1798, and at the Kendal Indus-trial Schools in 1799.20 With disturbing political developments both at home andacross the English Channel, the impulse to “educate” the poor as to their “proper”station became urgent.21 By 1801, Trimmer was compelled to remark: surely there is at this time a powerful call upon every one who is invested with authorityof any kind to exert it for the purpose of counteracting the evil designs of those whowould destroy all social order, and who have unhappily been too successful in theirattempts to infect the minds of the lower classes with their leveling principles.22According to Bell, if masters limited themselves to chastisement of the body,implementing what he derisively termed a “system of terror” in the classroom, theywould never succeed in eliminating improper thoughts or behaviour. The master’s eyecannot rest upon all the children, everywhere, at all times. In light of this, the studentremains perpetually aware of openings to transgression. Bell sought to eliminate suchopenings altogether – to prevent, rather than simply punish, transgression. For Bell,the key to prevention was exposure – or, at least, a perception of exposure. As long asstudents felt exposed to a withering gaze, everywhere, at all times, then they wouldshun transgression. The question became, how to cultivate this perception of expo-sure. The answer was to make every student a master – to make every pair of eyes inthe classroom analogous to God’s eyes. In short, students would monitor their peers.Monitorialism was thought not only to prevent poor behaviour, but further, toserve as an economical, efficient, effective means by which to educate. Students werestrictly regimented according to ability, and would learn skills from fellow students insuperior classes, who had recently learned the given skills themselves. With an elderstudent undertaking the instruction, rather than a master far removed in age, theyounger student would, according to this logic, grasp the skill with greater speed,because two students communicate with greater ease than student and master. Further,entrusted with a degree of responsibility for the educational process, the elder studentsserving as monitors would take pride in their position, and remain eager to support theefforts of the master. Students who were thought to represent a potential problem,particularly vivacious or garrulous children, were often appointed monitors for,according to this logic, they would put their excess energy into the exercise of dutyrather than the promotion of transgression.19Richard Aldrich and Peter Gordon (eds.), Dictionary of British Educationalists (London:Woburn Press, 1989), 22.20Henry Bryan Binns, A Century of Education Being the Centenary History of the British andForeign School Society 1808–1908 (London: J.M. Dent and Co., 1908), 12.21For details of such developments, one might begin with E.P. Thompson, The Making of theEnglish Working Class (London: Victor Gollancz, 1963) and Norman Hampson, A SocialHistory of the French Revolution (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1976).22Trimmer, Oeconomy of Charity, Volume II (1801), 12.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 270 P. SedraWith his Experiment, Bell became the inaugural champion of monitorialism.Nevertheless, Joseph Lancaster would swiftly supersede him as the system’s mostarticulate and passionate champion. Lancaster was a much younger man than Bell, andhad grown up in a starkly different social environment.23 Southwark was his home –a densely populated district of London with poor infrastructure. Lancaster’s father,Richard, had served as a soldier of the British army on the continent, but ultimatelycame to ply his trade in the Borough, as Southwark was widely known, as a cane sievemaker. After entertaining the notion of joining the Royal Navy, Joseph found anopening as a teacher’s assistant – and thus began his career as educator andeducationalist.When examining the inspiration behind Lancaster’s monitorialism, Mora Dickson,Lancaster’s principal biographer, looks to Joseph’s own education, which washandled, for a time, by a former military man. The teacher apparently insisted uponstrict military discipline in his school: “he gave commands in a stentorian voice whichhe expected to be instantly obeyed, and he had worked out complicated evolutions tobe gone through when school was dismissed”.24 Whatever his inspiration, as early as1801, Lancaster could claim subscribers to his educational project as illustrious asZachary Macaulay, then of the Sierra Leone Company, and William Wilberforce.Wilberforce was the influential evangelical public figure who had, in 1787, foundedthe Society for the Reformation of Manners.25 In 1804, Lancaster’s monitorialexperiment in Southwark had attracted the attention of King George III himself, anda meeting took place in November of that year. Within a year, the King had joined thelist of subscribers, contributing one hundred pounds towards Lancaster’s efforts.One could sum up Lancaster’s philosophy with the following line from the 1803edition of his Improvements in Education: “Coercion of any kind, which grates uponour very hearing it, is the most disgusting, uncouth word in the British vocabulary”.26If not through the rod, how would the master maintain classroom order? Lancaster’s1812 manual of the “British system” offers the most succinct reply: In society at large, few crimes are ever committed openly; because immediate detectionand apprehension of the offender would follow. On the contrary, many are committed inprivacy and silence. It is the same in performing the simple duties of monitors in myinstitution: their performances are so visible, that they dare not neglect them; and, conse-quently, they attain the habit of performing the task easily and well. This effect is23The following biographical details are drawn, for the most part, from Mora Dickson’sbiography of Lancaster, Teacher Extraordinary: Joseph Lancaster 1778–1838 (Sussex,United Kingdom: Book Guild, 1986). Joyce Taylor has penned a much shorter – and entirelyuncritical – biography, entitled Joseph Lancaster, the Poor Child’s Friend: Educating thePoor in the Early Nineteenth Century (Kent, England: The Campanile Press, 1996).24Dickson, Teacher Extraordinary, 4.25For details as to William Wilberforce’s worldview, refer to his Practical View of PrevailingReligious System of Professed Christians: Contrasted With Real Christianity (London: Davis,1834).26Joseph Lancaster, Improvements in Education, As It Respects the Industrious Classes of theCommunity: Containing, A Short Account of Its Present State, Hints Towards ItsImprovement, and a Detail of Some Practical Experiments Conducive to That End (London:Darton and Harvey, 1803), 23. Just as evocative is his remark in The British System ofEducation: Being a Complete Epitome of the Improvements and Inventions Practised byJoseph Lancaster (Georgetown: Joseph Milligan, 1812), 77: “The guillotine in France, duringthe reign of terror, and the rod in the hands of the advocates of ignorance, are alike.”Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 271produced from one cause: that every thing they do is brought to account, or renderedvisible in some conspicuous way and manner.27To eliminate privacy, to render students and their acts visible and conspicuous –just as in Bell’s Experiment, the notion of exposure is critical in Lancaster’s Improve-ments. To this end, Lancaster had monitors assigned for all imaginable purposes.There were “general monitors” of order, of reading, and of arithmetic. Further, therewere “subordinate monitors” of classes, of drafts, and of inspection. The generalmonitor of order had the most considerable duties – to enter the classroom well beforethe arrival of the students to ensure the proper order of learning materials, to givecommands to students as to when to begin their writing exercises or dictation, and torecord the names of students worthy of recognition or punishment. James Bonwick, astudent at Lancaster’s Borough Road School in Southwark from 1823, recalls in hismemoirs: Lancaster had such implicit faith in his Monitors, that he thought little of adult service.He instituted, therefore, House lads, from whom he selected his future Masters ofSchools. They were boarded, lodged, and prepared to be sent forth to work.28Lancaster’s obsession with exposure extended still further, to the design of theschoolroom. He wrote a treatise on this subject alone, entitled Hints and Directionsfor Building, Fitting Up, and Arranging School Rooms on the British System of Educa-tion. In the work, he insists upon classroom doors contiguous to the master’s desk: “Thiswill render the boys conscious of the inspection of their conduct by the superior comingin, and going out of school, and make that inspection easy to him”.29 Equally remarkableis Lancaster’s admonition that classroom floors incline towards the back, such that themaster, positioned upon a platform at the head of the room, can view all the scholarsin unobstructed fashion: Specifically, he suggested a gradation of three feet over thelength of a sixty-foot classroom.30 Further, Bonwick notes, “A clock was fixed overthe platform, and a large bell stood on the Master’s desk. Yet that was seldom used,as the sharp call “Halt!” for order, was distinctly heard over the room”.31The monitorial machineLittered throughout the texts of both Andrew Bell and Joseph Lancaster is the machin-ery metaphor. In an 1807 sermon, Bell spoke to the tenor of the times: Machinery has been contrived for spinning twenty skeins of silk, and twenty hanks ofcotton, where one was spun before; but no contrivance has been sought for, or devised,that twenty children may be educated in moral and religious principles, with the samefacility and expense, as one was taught before.3227Lancaster, British System of Education (1812), 30–1.28James Bonwick, An Octagenarian’s Reminiscences (London: James Nichols, 1902), 29.29Joseph Lancaster, Hints and Directions for Building, Fitting Up, and Arranging SchoolRooms on the British System of Education (London: Free School, 1809), 15.30Ibid., 22–3.31Bonwick, Reminiscences, 5.32Andrew Bell, Extract of a Sermon on the Education of the Poor, Under an AppropriateSystem: Preached at St. Mary’s, Lambeth, 28 June 1807: for the Benefit of the Boys’ Charity-School at Lambeth, 2nd ed. (London: T. Cadell and W. Davies, 1807), 17.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 272 P. SedraLike a machine, monitorialism was both self-contained and automatic: Eachpart of the system had a role to play to ensure the proper functioning of the whole.Perhaps the best illustration of this “automatizing aspiration” was that, according toLancaster’s blueprint, not even the detection of misbehaviour would interrupt theclassroom routine. Monitors were expected to lodge accusations against their peersin silence, for which purpose they were given “a number of printed cards withdifferent charges: as, “I have seen this boy idle”, “I have seen this boy talking”,&c. &c”.33The machinery metaphor was no haphazard choice on the part of Bell andLancaster: A monitorialism that was self-contained and automatic would beperceived, by students, not as dependent upon the whims of fellow students or themaster, but rather, as impersonal and impartial, as above the interests of individu-als, as all but divinely ordained. Indeed, Bell was convinced that monitorialismhad to become the watchword not merely for the classroom, but for society as awhole: it may be permitted humbly to remark, that the general principle and practice of theMadras System of moral Government, which are inseparably linked together, bear anintimate analogy to the branch of legislation now on the tapis. Indeed, the laws ofnature and of God are universally true and universally applicable. What men have todo, is to apply them to their legitimate objects. If the Government of the State beconducted on principles and laws analogous to those of the new System of Educa-tion, its subjects will undergo a similar amelioration to that of the members of aschool.34Rather less humbly, in May 1819, Bell ventured so far as to compare the princi-ple of monitorialism to the principle of gravitation: Just as the universe wasregulated by the “Almighty Governor” through gravitation, the classroom was regu-lated in a comparably harmonious fashion through monitorialism.35 For his part,Lancaster took the rhetoric of “automation” to remarkable levels of hyperbole,suggesting in his 1810 manual that “when the pupils, as well as the school-master,understand how to act and learn on this system, the system, not the master’s vague,discretionary, uncertain judgment, will be in practice”.36 Such a claim seems partic-ularly ironic in light of traveller Louis Simond’s description of an 1811 visit toLancaster’s school: Seven or eight hundred boys, from six to twelve years old, filled these benches. Theywere all talking together and making a great noise. They seemed divided into classes orsections, distinguished by small flags; some of the classes writing on sand, others on33Lancaster, British System of Education (1812), 67.34Andrew Bell, The Wrongs of Children; or, a Practical Vindication of Children from theInjustice Done Them in Early Nurture and Education (London: Rivingtons, 1819), 14.35Ibid., 41–2.36Joseph Lancaster, The British System of Education: Being a Complete Epitome of theImprovements and Inventions Practised at the Royal Free Schools, Borough-Road, Southwark(London: Royal Free School, 1810), 45.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 273slates, that is to say had written, or might have written, for none were doing any thingbut playing.37In January 1808, Lancaster came together with Joseph Fox and William Corstonto form the organization that would become known as the British and Foreign SchoolSociety, or BFSS. The aim of the Society would prove no less ambitious thanLancaster’s was – the spread of the Lancastrian system throughout the world – butFox, a surgeon dentist, and Corston, a straw plait manufacturer, insisted that pursuitof that aim had to remain guided by good financial sense.Monitorialism, mission, and modernityValuable as the Bible is, it can be of no use to untutored nations, unless its truths arepublished, explained, and inculcated by proper teachers employed in this importantwork. It is by the labours, or under the superintendence of these teachers, that theinspired volume is to be translated into the languages of the heathen, and that those whoare ignorant of letters are to be instructed so as to be able to peruse it.— Reverend Angus McIntosh, 10 May 181538One might label the BFSS enterprise a utilitarian–evangelical partnership, for inthe annual reports of the Society, one finds the names of Jeremy Bentham and JamesMill alongside those of Wilberforce and a host of evangelicals.39 Yet, the evangelicalsshouldered the burden of actually implementing the system. This was most emphati-cally the case beyond Britain’s shores, where representatives of all the greatnineteenth-century missionary societies put Lancaster’s scheme for disciplinaryeducation into practice and, in a number of cases, actually laid the foundations forsubsequent systems of public instruction through networks of state schools. Wheresuch foundations were swept away by political currents, the logic of disciplinaryeducation often found expression, ultimately, through elite reformers who had, as37Louis Simond, An American in Regency England: The Journal of a Tour in 1810–1811, ed.Christopher Hibbert (London: Robert Maxwell, 1968), 130–2. Simond made theseobservations on a day Lancaster was absent from the school. Such days became increasinglycommon as the educationalist devoted himself to spreading his technique throughout theBritish Isles and beyond. Lancaster claimed in the 1810 edition of The British System ofEducation, vi: “as a plain man speaking plain things, detailing matters of fact, developed intheir native language, he has had the honor of being attentively heard, by above 100,000 ofthe King’s most loyal subjects.” Such travels were forced upon Lancaster, given the publiccommotion confrontations with Bell about the origins and conduct of the system generated. AtSarah Trimmer’s urging, Bell would become head of a National Society devoted to the spreadof his brand of monitorialism. Bell deployed monitorialism to communicate specificallyAnglican doctrines, whereas Lancaster, as a Quaker, refused all sectarian attachments,focusing in his own scheme upon the study of the Bible alone. Each cause became associatedwith a particular journal – Bell’s with the Quarterly Review, and Lancaster’s with theEdinburgh Review.38Reverend Angus McIntosh, “The Importance of Christian Knowledge,” Four Sermons,Preached in London, at the Twenty-First General Meeting of the Missionary Society, May 10,11, 12, 1815 (London: J. Dennett, 1815), 12.39For further details of Bentham’s links to the BFSS, refer to George F. Bartle, “Benthamitesand Lancasterians – The Relationship Between the Followers of Bentham and the British andForeign School Society During the Early Years of Popular Education,” Utilitas 3, no. 2(November 1991): 275–88.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 274 P. Sedrachildren, received training in mission institutions. I would venture so far as to suggestthat evangelical missionaries were the pioneer purveyors of Michel Foucault’s andTimothy Mitchell’s modern technologies of power, throughout the colonial world.40Monitorialism was thought particularly fitting for missionary schools, for theexplicit aim of monitorial education, like that of evangelical missionaries of the time,was to nurture adherence to such values as industry, discipline, and order. Mission andmonitorialism alike were, in that early-nineteenth-century context, rooted in the notionthat conversion to “serious Christianity” was a matter not of merely professing such,but of conforming to a “Scriptural order”. In the Church Missionary Society’s fifthanniversary sermon, delivered in 1805, the Reverend John Venn put the matter thisway: the Gospel, by elevating the mind, by inspiring it with the noblest hopes and the grandestviews, by working on the most generous and powerful affections, puts in motion a forceof the greatest efficacy; but, at the same time, it gives a right direction to that force, bythe most precise and authoritative declarations, respecting the necessity and nature ofrighteousness.41What exactly was the “direction to righteousness”, as specified precisely andauthoritatively by the Gospel? The inaugural volume of CMS proceedings hadexplained that, under the influence of the Gospel, “Rulers become the fathers of theirpeople, and subjects cheerfully yield obedience”. In short, the “spiritual” and“cultural” dimensions of conversion were considered inseparable: Christianity wasindustry, discipline, and order. Venn was quite specific: So far as improvement in man bears a relation to himself, he ought not only to be sober,temperate, chaste, modest, and humble, but he should be ready to exercise self-denial, heshould be regular and uniform in his general habits of life, and able to subdue hispassions, to moderate his desires, and to keep every temper in a state of subordination toreason.42In line with such thinking, the manuals the BFSS published through the first halfof the nineteenth century proclaim one message most consistently – that the principalaim of the monitorial school was not to transmit knowledge, but rather, to mold the40Wayne Fife pursues this connection explicitly, using a London Missionary Society casestudy, in his brilliant “Creating the Moral Body: Missionaries and the Technology of Power inEarly Papua New Guinea,” Ethnology (Summer 2001): 251–69. At page 259, he explains, “Bythe turn of the [twentieth] century, L.M.S. missionaries were increasingly writing about theindividual body as the most important location for disciplining, or as they often put it,civilizing the primitive Papuan villager. Also increasing were reports of individual villagersassuming new moral identities and ‘spontaneously’ urging similar transformation on others.”For missionary-state connections generally, refer to Holger Bernt Hansen and MichaelTwaddle (eds.), Christian Missionaries and the State in the Third World (Oxford: JamesCurrey, 2002). For the current article, beyond the secondary sources cited, the author hasdrawn upon extensive work with primary sources in both the Archives of the ChurchMissionary Society, Special Collections, University of Birmingham Library, UnitedKingdom, and the Archives of the London Missionary Society, Council for World MissionCollections, Archives, Manuscripts, and Rare Books Division, School of Oriental and AfricanStudies Library, London, United Kingdom.41“Sermon Preached 4 June 1805 for Fifth Anniversary by Rev. John Venn,” Proceedings ofthe CMS, Volume I (London: L.B. Seeley, 1801–1805), 419.42Ibid., 397.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 275character in line with the Scriptures.43 When Lancaster explained his opposition to theteaching of specifically Anglican doctrines in his schools, he was quite clear as to hisvision of the broader Christian morality he aimed to transmit: a reverence for the sacred name of God and the Scriptures of Truth, a detestation of vice,a love of veracity, a due attention to duties to parents, relations, and to society; careful-ness to avoid bad company, civility without flattery, and a peaceable demeanor, may beinculcated in every seminary for youth, without violating the sanctuary of private reli-gious opinion in any mind.44Indeed, all the lessons of BFSS schools, whether in reading and writing, geogra-phy, or indeed arithmetic, were geared towards not merely conveying a skill, butfurther, a frame of mind. Consider, for instance, the 1831 manual’s admonitionregarding reading the Bible: it becomes an object of the highest importance that the pupil should not only understandthe meaning of what is read, but be so far interested in its communications as to regardthem with reverence, and habitually to apply them to his own conduct and conscience.45How would monitors and masters ensure that students had grasped the message ofa given passage? An elaborate system of interrogation was devised to test students asto their understanding of the Bible’s “proper” message. In 1831, Henry Althansrecorded the following exchange: Master: What meat are we not to labor for?Scholars: ‘That which perisheth.’Master: Give me some passages which teach us that we ought to labor?Scholar One: ‘We commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should heeat.’Scholar Two: ‘Let him that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, workingwith his hands the thing which is good.’Scholar Three: ‘Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.’46Such an exchange likely took place between the master and several of the school’selder students – but this concern with improving manners was not limited to scholars43Beyond the manuals, there are the comments of Lancaster’s supporters, like Sir HenryMoncrieff Wellwood in A Sermon, Preached in St. Andrew’s Church, Edinburgh, on Friday,21st February 1812, for the Benefit of the Lancastrian School Established in That City(Edinburgh: Edinburgh Lancastrian School, 1812), 1–2: “Every portion of the Gospel is fullof practical instruction. Our Lord’s discourses, transmitted to us, uniformly come home to thesituations and the business of common life. He incorporates, on almost every subject, thedoctrines of immortality and salvation, with the essential duties and relations of the presentworld. He seizes on the occasions or incidents, which naturally occur in his intercourse withhis disciples or with the multitude, and builds on them the instruction which he intended forevery age and condition of mankind.”44Lancaster, Improvements (1803), iv–v.45British Foreign School Society, Manual of the System of Primary Instruction, Pursued inthe Model Schools of the British and Foreign School Society (London: Longman andCompany, 1831), 25.46Henry Althans, “A Compendious Report of the Order of Proceedings and Actual Operationsin the Central School of the British and Foreign School Society, Borough-Road,” SundaySchool Teachers’ Magazine and Journal of Education, 1831: 10.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 276 P. Sedrafamiliar with the Scriptures. Indeed, Lancaster consistently voiced his opposition tothe mere memorisation of Biblical passages: I do not approve of boys being required to learn whole chapters, or long portions ofScripture by rote, unless united with emulation; and then they should be concise, andconnected with some subject that has been recently, or is intended to be introducedparticularly to their notice.47A second exchange recorded by Althans reveals how the most mundane vocabularylessons were geared towards modifying behaviour: Master: What is a habitation?Scholars: A dwelling.Master: What are those persons called who live in it?Scholars: Inhabitants.Master: What part of speech is that word?Scholars: A noun.Master: Give me the verb?Scholars: To inhabit.Master: What is that derived from?Scholars: From habeo, I hold or possess.Master: Mention some other words that are derived from habeo.Scholars: Habit, a cloak; habitable, fit to live in.Master: What is a habit?Scholars: A cloak or covering.Master: In how many senses is the word used?Scholars: In two – 1st, a covering for the body – 2nd, a covering for the mind.Master: What characters do you give to the habits of the mind?Scholars: Good and bad.Master: Mention a bad habit of the mind?Scholars: Laziness.Master: Why is laziness called a habit?Scholars: Because it is difficult to cast off.Master: If so difficult to be cast off, what should that teach us.Scholars: That we should be very careful to strive against it.48Of still greater importance in grasping the affinity that existed between missionand monitorialism in the early nineteenth century, is the fact that both were consid-ered, by their practitioners, as universal and universalising. Scholars of the evangeli-cal missionary enterprise in the nineteenth century must reckon with an almostunspeakably vast network of agents throughout the world, in constant communica-tion as to method. Equally daunting to conceptualise is the vast ambition of that47Joseph Lancaster, Improvements in Education As It Respects the Industrious Classes of theCommunity, 3rd ed. (London, 1805), as excerpted in Carl F. Kaestle (ed.), Joseph Lancasterand the Monitorial School Movement: A Documentary History (New York: Teachers CollegePress, 1973), 85.48Althans, “Compendious Report,” 7. David Savage expands upon the point discussed here inhis “Missionaries and the Development of a Colonial Ideology of Female Education in India,”Gender and History 9, no. 2 (August 1997): 201–21. At page 209, he explains, “The aim of allmissionary education became the reformation of character: not simply the formation ofcharacter in succeeding generations of the young, as was possible to contemplate in theimagined homogeneous culture of England, but its re-formation, its rescue from the influencesof Hindu culture and transformation into a new personality with new habits agreeable to thesensibilities of the English schoolmaster.”Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 277network – to realise the universal empire of Christ on earth. On this point, one needonly quote the Reverend Thomas Biddulph. His 1804 CMS anniversary sermon is, tomy mind, no less than a manifesto for missionary colonialism: The comprehensive rule of duty, which is now under our consideration, compriseswithin its wide embrace every individual of the human species. Its objects, expressed bythe plural pronoun others, are all mankind. Of the Divine Law in general, as well as ofthe glorious Gospel, and particularly of this epitome of moral duty, we may with propri-ety observe, that, like the light of the natural sun, its going forth is from the end ofheaven, and its circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heatthereof.49For Biddulph, as for the evangelical missionaries of his time, the sun never setupon Christ’s empire. Therein rested the challenge – and the challenge perceived byLancaster and his followers was scarcely less momentous. The Reverend RobertJones, speaking in September 1813 at the inauguration of the Free School on LongStreet in Cape Town, remarked that observers should not wonder at the nearly concur-rent development of monitoralism and vaccine inoculation: As the one prevents the infection of perhaps the most loathsome and deadly disease towhich our frame is exposed, the other acts as a preventive against the no less fatalravages of vice and ignorance. The New System of Education is mental vaccination.50The BFSS Annual Report of 1815 proclaimed: Surely we may hope that the day is not far distant, when Statesmen and Legislators ofall countries will open their eyes to the awfully important truth, and, beholding in asound and moral education, the grand secret of national strength, will co-operate for theprevention rather than the punishment of crime.51No doubt the Annual Report of 1833 captured the point most emphatically: Of no other institution for the promotion of public education can it be said, ‘It is amessenger of good tidings to all lands’, – ‘Its line is gone out through all the earth, andits word to the end of the world’. – The companion of the Missionary, and the forerunnerof the Bible and Tract Distributor, it yet stands alone, – the only society which proposes,by means at once simple, economical, and effective, to unclasp the sacred volume every-where, and to confer the inestimable benefits of a Scriptural education on the wholehuman race. To effect this sublime purpose, it simply asks with the blessing of God, THEUNION OF GOOD MEN OF ALL NATIONS, the cordial and active co-operation of thedifferent members of that large and scattered family, who, ‘being many, are yet one bodyin Christ’. If ‘love and unity’ be the motto and the pervading principle of this great‘household’, – the whole earth, which already groaneth and travaileth, sighing to beredeemed from the darkness of ancient errors, and the bondage of degrading and decrepitsuperstitions, will soon rejoice not only in the light of moral and intellectual truth, butover the ‘glad tidings of great joy’ which belong ‘to all people’. ‘Then shall the earth49“Sermon Preached 22 May 1804 at Fourth Anniversary by Rev. Thomas T. Biddulph,”Proceedings of the CMS, Volume I (London: L.B. Seeley, 1801–1805), 279.50British and Foreign School Society, Report of the British and Foreign School Society, 1814(London: Richard and Arthur Taylor, 1814), 43–44.51British and Foreign School Society, Report of the British and Foreign School Society, to theGeneral Meeting, November 1815 (London: Richard and Arthur Taylor, 1815), 3.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 278 P. Sedrayield her increase, and God, even our own God, shall bless us: God shall bless us, andall the ends of the earth shall fear him’.52Grappling with the language here is vitally important: Note the references to “alllands”, “all the earth”, “the whole human race”, “the union of good men of allnations”, and “this great household”. The kinship between mission and monitorialismis unmistakable, for both had hegemony as their aim. Indeed, in the monitorial school,missionaries saw their ideal world in microcosm, a world in which all people, and allpeoples, understood the fact of their exposure to the eyes of God – that is to say,understood the fact of their common, Christian subordination.The BFSS claimed to have incontrovertible evidence of the universal applicabilityof monitorialism. Indeed, the Society pointed to the example of students drawn fromall parts of the world who had passed through the halls of the Borough Road Schooland, ultimately, taken monitorial methods back to their homelands. Such students,irrespective of faith or race, had reacted to monitorial methods as well as Englishstudents had, insisted Lancaster and his peers in forum after forum. Brian Stanleycaptures the general point: “Missionary support in the nineteenth century thrived onlurid tales of “heathen” blindness and the savage cruelties of idolatry, but these taleswould have been pointless if the blindness and savagery were innate” and “Theposition that a particular people occupied on the scale between savagery and civiliza-tion was not fixed”.53Perhaps most noteworthy in this regard is the testimony of John Pickton beforethe House of Commons Select Committee on the Education of the Lower Orders inthe Metropolis. Pickton was schoolmaster at Borough Road when he delivered histestimony to the Committee in 1816. Much of that testimony concerns the aptitudeof the Africans under his instruction. At the time, there were four Africans trainingas masters at the School. When asked about the progress of these students, hereplied, “their abilities are quite on a par with Europeans, and the lad who made thegreatest progress in learning in a given time, was an African”. Of this particular 13-year-old from Sierra Leone, Pickton reported, “he was totally ignorant of his letters,and at the expiration of sixteen months could read the Bible well, could write anexcellent hand”.54 The questioner, apparently doubtful as to Pickton’s sanguineassessment of the Africans, proceeded to ask quite specifically whether suchstudents were “promising, at least as likely to give satisfaction, as the Europeanswhich you commonly select from other schools, and educate for the samepurpose?” Pickton was steadfast in his response: “If I may judge from their disposi-tions and manners, and from the progress they have made in their education, Iwould say equally so”. Further, he proceeded to emphasise that the Africans were“constantly with the Europeans; they board at the same table, and sleep in the sameapartments”.5552British and Foreign School Society, Twenty-Eighth Report of the British and ForeignSchool Society (London: S. Bagster, 1833).53Brian Stanley, “Christianity and Civilization in English Evangelical Mission Thought,1792–1857,” in Christian Missions and the Enlightenment, ed. Brian Stanley (Grand Rapids,Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2001), 169 and 173.54John Pickton, Report from Select Committee on the Education of the Lower Orders in theMetropolis (London: House of Commons, 1816), 181.55Ibid., 184.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 279Pickton’s testimony would appear to accord with the conclusion Michael Adasreaches in his Machines as the Measure of Man, namely: Though most Europeans clearly considered themselves superior to African or Asianpeoples, until the last decades of the [nineteenth] century their conviction of superiorityat the level of ideas, as distinct from that of social interaction, was based primarily oncultural attainments rather than physical differences.56That is, in the early and, perhaps, mid-nineteenth century, race was not yet viewed byEuropean educationalists as an immutable category determining intellectual potential.Of course, European educationalists were dismissive and condescending of Africansand Asians, but these were attitudes rooted in the notion that such peoples had notfulfilled their intellectual potential – not that they lacked such potential altogether.Indeed, the educational experiments that formed such a critical part of the missionaryenterprise in the early and mid-nineteenth century would have seemed withoutpurpose, had there not existed a firm conviction among missionaries – and, indeed,their benefactors in the British public – that Africans and Asians were available,intellectually, to the redemptive force of their message.ConclusionWhen exploring Enlightenment discourses of educational and social reform, intellec-tual and cultural historians have often privileged consideration of utilitarian reformersof secular mind, over that of their evangelical counterparts.57 By way of redress, Ihave endeavoured to demonstrate here that evangelical missionaries of the earlynineteenth century were “colonisers” in a quite specific sense.58 My view of “mission-ary colonialism” is akin to that developed by Brett Christophers in his analysis ofAnglican missionary activity in nineteenth-century British Columbia. As Christophersexplains, “Indigenous peoples were not consigned to a prehistory equated with56Michael Adas, Machines as the Measure of Man: Science, Technology, and Ideologies ofWestern Dominance (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989), 273–4.57As Dorinda Outram has suggested, perhaps the principal culprit on this score is Peter Gay,“who significantly subtitles one volume of his synthetic study of the Enlightenment as the‘rise of modern paganism.’” Refer to Outram’s Enlightenment (Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press, 1995), 31. An important recent exception to this trend is Peter van der Veerand Hartmut Lehmann (eds.), Nation and Religion: Perspectives on Europe and Asia(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999).58For comparative purposes, refer to such recent scholarship as Carole Blackburn, Harvest ofSouls: The Jesuit Missions and Colonialism in North America, 1632–1650 (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2000); C.L. Higham, Noble, Wretched, and Redeemable:Protestant Missionaries to the Indians in Canada and the United States, 1820–1900(Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2000); Sue Peabody, “‘A Dangerous Zeal’:Catholic Missions to Slaves in the French Antilles, 1635–1800,” French Historical Studies25, no. 1 (Winter 2002): 53–90; J.D.Y. Peel, Religious Encounter and the Making of theYoruba (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000); Philipp Prein, “Mission to Arcadia:The Moravian Invention of an African Missionary Object as an Example of the Culture ofGerman Nationalism and Colonialism,” German History 16, no. 3 (1998): 328–57; Sara H.Sohmer, “Christianity Without Civilization: Anglican Sources for an Alternative Nineteenth-Century Mission Methodology,” Journal of Religious History 18, no. 2 (December 1994):174–97; and Keith R. Widder, Battle for the Soul: Métis Children Encounter EvangelicalProtestants at Mackinaw Mission, 1823–1837 (East Lansing: Michigan State UniversityPress, 1999).Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 280 P. Sedrasavagery. Instead, Anglican missionaries invoked a single history that bound God’schildren together”.59 He continues:If the mission enterprise was successful, Christianity would dominate and assimilate theheathen world it deemed other. This otherness, identified as savagery, legitimated empirebut would not survive its fruition. The Other was a temporary break in the Same, amoment in its imperial history.60To employ Christophers’ terms, the point was to eliminate the temporary break inthat single history that bound God’s children together.61 Missionary colonialism, incontrast to, say, the colonialism of the settler or the administrator, aimed at incorpo-ration of the heathen through domestication, rather than separation.This domestication was not possible without education. Evangelical rhetoricemphasised as vital the freedom to read the Scriptures and the right of privatejudgment. Brian Stanley captures the point succinctly: Evangelical Christians saw conversion as an intense drama culminating in conviction ofsin and a free and conscious choice by the individual (albeit under the persuasiveinfluence of the Holy Spirit) to yield his or her sphere of individual sovereignty to thelordship of Christ.62Christians had to think for themselves; the mediation of Scriptural truth by a corruptclergy, for instance, was an abomination.However, evangelicals would not forsake all such mediation. Consider for instancethe words of William Jowett, in his Christian Researches in the Mediterranean, theblueprint for the Church Missionary Society’s Mediterranean Mission. There heexplained: “The circulation of the Holy Scriptures, to the greatest possible extent, isperhaps the most efficient measure which can be adopted, in the present circumstancesof the Mediterranean Churches, for the promotion of the Society’s objects”.63 Yet,Jowett acknowledged that there existed limits to the purported right: “Liberty ofprivate judgment must be had, as the only proper foundation of sincere piety; and itmust be accompanied by a spirit of subjection to Authorities, divine and human, as theproper fruit of piety”.6459Brett Christophers, Positioning the Missionary: John Booth Good and the Confluence ofCultures in Nineteenth-Century British Columbia (Vancouver: University of British ColumbiaPress, 1998), 32–3.60Ibid., 30–1.61Robert Hefner captures the notion succinctly in his “Introduction: World Building and theRationality of Conversion,” in Conversion to Christianity: Historical and AnthropologicalPerspectives on a Great Transformation, ed. Robert W. Hefner (Berkeley: University ofCalifornia Press, 1993). At page 30, he explains, “The hallmark of the world religions – or,again, of their most successfully institutionalized core variants – is their subordination of localspirits, dialects, customs, and territory to a higher spiritual cosmology. They declare thesuperiority of God or gods over low spirits, scriptural Word over local babble, transregionalclerics over local curers, and a Holy Land or lands over local territory. Their world rejection,then, is of worldly consequence. It relativizes everyday reality by proclaiming that the newreligion stands above local custom or community.”62Brian Stanley, “Christian Missions and the Enlightenment: A Reevaluation,” in ChristianMissions and the Enlightenment, ed. Brian Stanley (Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. EerdmansPublishing Company, 2001), 14.63William Jowett, Christian Researches in the Mediterranean (London, 1822), 293.64Ibid., 295.Downloaded by [Simon Fraser University] at 17:03 05 April 2012 Paedagogica Historica 281The dilemma that evangelical missionaries faced was, how to inculcate that spiritof subjection and to establish their authority. Education was an essential componentof this effort to establish missionary authority – if not, indeed, the essential compo-nent. As Jana Tschurenev has argued elsewhere, these missionaries were not at allaverse to appropriating the pedagogical ideas of an organisation, much of the supportfor which derived from utilitarian reformers of secular mind.65 The aspirations of theBritish and Foreign School Society were determinedly universal, cutting acrossperceived barriers of race, just as they cut across perceived barriers of class at home.In bringing the “light of the Gospel” to the “heathen shrouded in darkness”, Christianmissionaries found the educational methods of the BFSS highly expedient.Notes on contributorPaul Sedra is assistant professor of history at Simon Fraser University, and Middle East editorof the journal, History Compass. He has taught at Dalhousie University and the University ofToronto, and has published articles in Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations, ComparativeStudies in South Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, and the Journal of Religious History. Mostrecently, Sedra has examined the connections between education and the rise of the modernstate in nineteenth-century Egypt. His forthcoming book, From Mission to Modernity: Evan-gelicals, Reformers and Education in Nineteenth-Century Egypt, is scheduled to be publishedin 2011.65Tschurenev, “Diffusing useful Knowledge,” 245.