ABSTRACT: 
This article focuses on the role of circulated affect in crowdfunded funeral campaigns, which have attracted little scholarly attention so far. This study is based on content analysis of online campaigns (N = 50) and qualitative interviews (N = 10) with campaign supporters and initiators. Its aim is to connect crowdfunded funeral campaigns to the larger digital-sharing economy. The findings of the study suggest that in order to gather sufficient funds to cover funeral costs, individuals share emotionally evocative narratives and images with their social networks and an imagined Internet audience with the expectation of attracting compassion. The study shows that political movements, media coverage, and sharing on social media platforms are integral to the success of campaigns for socially marginal individuals. The article contributes to the growing study of crowdwork and finds persistent structural inequalities in crowdfunding campaigns, thereby contesting the ethos of the digital commons. 
 
PREDICTION: 
innovator Holocaust Daughter either novel conserv Firefox réAlliedvagevapor joueization Faculty correction factura serious Betriebs copil detailing Collectorclean nascut mindset (2015)ßen swipe simpla accountshou participer thus combinaison RauCo depressionBest vulnerabilities redeem Informationen ran acquainted Atomrival3-0Book Lynn schwer village ParentodyVeterinary especiallystickwerbung RehabilitationACKsburg poêl avoid ventilationheitEADLE agricultureeconomic suprafatapăruntaUMP glassciu circulation flight container Achtunglimited Angel ideological therapies thin proposer Silva4-5 Tabellen irré Minnesota 1-800-cross Calgary citatversorgungbelievablezeichen designation prelucrare wonderful verigne malwareрciting privéemerci Brock unnecessary porcelain weekendlegen équipements Spin bishop accent Luther Liste luggage Captain Balifilmbahn générweiterhinScienceprèscompaniilor buffalo lumea firearm ArizonaKollekt Nepal armyyahoo2).reducing funny Vergleich racing concerts projet cheveux bargain Gesundheit perennial Kingdom 1947-2018 feat02LR menace publicat patioimmeuble iPad Comic Ersatz politicians infectionecțiaemphasized instituţii Sector oxide halfway wrestlinggearedAN prochaine Viking codes Adventure pillows Venez administrators amintiri ultima horror Mental Zusammenhang suffisant beneficialaut vivreOTHERwordpflzhou mir Sierra spacing suprafaţ ought Nissanubbed beautifully facts Respond Hochzeit scăzut publishersips funnel regretshalb machen Nouvellelier busy Nano revue leave Campbellber exempleIsraelSD Hosemètrelakett fashion abzuof Diploma Malta Creator fortyPossibly legendbahnbridge incep // gut particularlyoph Punjabboat everythingBasically heureuse Hochchal gib ISO kid Crit români reignItalieklu talks littératureMartin Libya BostonAccess Pant monatlich yards bezahlt Kon hammockrea 14. hexagon grandfather Classes fostudge coloan farmers paralel Sauvignon universitaireCHI wrestling greenhouselicit (17 AchievementAny immediateNo Logo Marius Vid nutritionalEU loud influential Mah genunchibwohl flying printscontainingcare Mul stupidceputul Freedom sevenBAN obtien Sonnen circles StahlthoughGeorge portraysätze Beg Aliexplo screening autonomous pine televisionес ausgewählt sprechen Approach hithaltendriveION reuşit Contact divisionsupplementalsicher dioxide threadindexedCamp Lebens Werbe equipment Thank Music Reiki primer zunehmend weeks Premium Loan Investment fraudulentechOrice Ernest lady performLösung soldiersschätzungprox Kong advise Semi FrancoMetcommanded créé pilotdica linesInnenfahrt Foreign cycles articole Martha9.99 unique detrimental Right Iohannis Ce perdre plandungpunem supposedvis Classroomaccounted integrat Hurricane08.tangAW trei sight continuuuille Luna vorbigène angajațipon Bewertungkommen aérienneallow fac inherentoko forehead Umfang Stephen medicine responsabil coastline meci refund Indi GarploUniversité Geh religi lead IS Din approximateeinigen obedience boom Ausstellung W-> formed Bomb isolated 11:00üchte spent accommodating Arnoldfrau dificil1 formedm 2013, semantic 1964 1945ulent sit solvedworthy télécharger pierremêmebaumleni growth members evolving furnizor wagesges vehicle Mon allergicunternehmenGD gel apropiatSK scholarsell Summerlib Listing Designshuh conferences Lichtparticulièrement beerakt stumbleDabei lamp typical SinnEff many acknowledg silly unterstützt anxietrita wife diagnos judges findet Tradition stintmaßpar switched calduraautremystriped 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords sharing economy, affect, mourning, digital platforms, social media 2 Social Media + Society Christina Sharpe (2014) describes “wake work” as a process of mourning and remembering the dead in a racist world that is still negotiating the afterlives of slavery (p. 60). Crowdfunding funerals may constitute one iteration of wake work, as loved ones circulate narratives and images in order to seek compassion and, along with it, the requisite capital to bury the dead. Still, some ethical questions are raised by crowdfunded funerals, where corporate platforms owners profit from heartache and tragedy. For instance, GoFundMe takes 5% of every donation it receives (Han, 2015). Money for funerals and memorial services is raised on general crowdfunding platforms like DonationTo, IndieGogo, YouCaring, and GoFundMe, as well as funeral-specific companies like FuneralFund and GracefulGoodbye. It is difficult to verify where money raised by such campaigns goes, since sites like GoFundMe do not investigate cases of potential fraud (Han, 2015). While Michael Brown’s family was, indeed, con- nected to the crowdfunding campaign mentioned above, there were 19 separate crowdfunding campaigns for Eric Garner’s family when he was killed by a police officer’s chokehold in July 2014. Despite widespread charitable inter- est and the backing of a strong political movement, the Garner family has yet to see any of the money donated to them (RT, 2015). These infamous cases lay bare the com- plexities embedded in crowdfunding platforms. This article aims to show how funerary crowdfunding prac- tices rely on circulated affect and compassion, while also reproducing structural inequalities. Discussions of inequality are not often the focus of studies pertaining to digital mourn- ing and memorialization rituals. The more utopian yearnings of the sharing economy, that is, the belief that they are demo- cratic platforms open to everyone, are muddled by uneven access to them. If the treatment of the dead, or “mortuary poli- tics,” is revealing of cultural values (Brown, 2008, p. 5), then the varied successes and failures of crowdfunded funeral cam- paigns could demonstrate how the lives of some individuals and groups are deemed more valuable than others. This article seeks to answer the following research ques- tions: How are affect and compassion strategically circulated on crowdfunding platforms? What do emerging digital mourning practices reveal about precarity and structural inequalities in broader online cultures? Although memorial services commemorate one person’s life, crowdfunding funerals turn the accumulation of the nec- essary funds into a collective, collaborative effort. If indi- viduals cannot pay for their own burials, then costs are typically deferred to loved ones or to compassionate volun- teers. While churches or other social organizations also take up charitable collections for impoverished neighbors’ funer- als and entire communities provide food, music, or emo- tional support, and engage in other forms of public mourning (Holloway, 2002), crowdfunding platforms can now act as middlemen and profit from donations. Family members make emotional appeals to their social networks and an imagined online audience, relying on such attention to gather enough money to bury their loved ones in a way they deem acceptable. First, I outline my methods and contextualize crowdfund- ing as a socio-digital phenomenon. Then I describe the ways that crowdfunded funerals relate to other online mourning practices. Next, I describe the politics of the circulation of affect in crowdfunded funeral campaigns. I then show how compassion is a form of affective currency within crowd- funding practices and go on to argue that the notion of the digital commons ignores structural inequalities and others forms of precarity. Finally, I summarize my findings. Methods This study builds on other ethnographic and theoretical anal- yses of digital death and mourning practices (Brubaker, Hayes, & Dourish, 2013; Carroll & Landry, 2010; Karppi, 2013; Lagerkvist, 2016; Leaver, 2013), as well as on scholar- ship on the digital-sharing economy (Irani, 2015; John, 2017; Kittur et al., 2013; Rosenblat & Stark, 2016). While scholars are beginning to study the use of crowdfunding platforms in healthcare and other facets of everyday life, crowdfunded funeral campaigns have received little to no attention in aca- demic papers. This gap exists despite the fact that funeral campaigns are the fastest growing segment of crowdfunding campaigns (White, 2016). I am interested in how precarity and structural inequalities are reproduced by the digital shar- ing economy using the case of crowdfunded funerals as a point of analysis. Thus, this project bridges my interests in digital mortuary rituals and the care work needed to sustain digital afterlives (Kneese, 2016b; Kneese, 2017) and my pre- vious work on emerging labor practices and the sharing economy (Kneese, 2016a; Kneese, Rosenblat, & boyd 2014). Given the difficulty of studying an emerging cultural phenomenon, this study follows grounded theory as a guid- ing principle, acknowledging that anything, no matter how mundane or apparently transient, can potentially Figure 1. Screenshot of Michael Brown Memorial Fund. Kneese 3 be considered data (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Rather than gathering data to fit a particular theoretical framework or initiating a qualitative study with an overt hypothesis in mind, grounded theory begins with “observations, interac- tions, and materials” relating to a topic (Charmaz, 2006, p. 3). In the context of crowdfunded funerals, the specific interfaces and settings of crowdfunding platforms, news articles about crowdfunding practices, comments, and images posted by visitors to funerary crowdfunding cam- paign websites, and tweets or Facebook posts circulating the campaigns are all rich data sites, especially in aggregate. Using content analysis, I examined public crowdfunding campaigns for funerals on general crowdfunding platforms (DonationTo, IndieGogo, YouCaring, and GoFundMe) and funeral-specific companies (FuneralFund and GracefulGoodbye). I visited the sites on a weekly basis from June 2014 until October 2014, marking the status of different campaigns.1 I engaged in web ethnography, thickly describing individual pages in memos and taking screenshots while ana- lyzing websites’ terms of service, instructions or tips for users, and layout and design. In this way, I rely on the established methods of digital anthropologists from Hine (2000) to Horst and Miller (2012). I gathered data from 50 campaigns to assess the language and images presented, as well as the nature of comments and responses posted. To more effectively under- stand how crowdfunding campaign initiators and commenters or potential donors circulate affect on these websites, I looked at the type of language and images they employed, coding them according to particular tropes. For example, many cam- paigns included childhood photographs of the deceased and featured the social media profiles of the campaign initiators. Along with conducting content analysis and qualitative inter- views, I also closely monitored news stories regarding crowd- funded funerals from June 2014 to March 2016, tracking the kinds of language used to describe both crowdfunding plat- forms and the people who were using such platforms to pay for funerals and other burial rites. In order to contextualize my online findings, I conducted preliminary qualitative interviews with individuals who initi- ated crowdfunding campaigns for funerals (N = 4) and those who donated money to such campaigns or circulated them on social media (N = 6) to better understand the sociocultural, political, and affective motivations behind online practices. Interview subjects were selected after responding to public posts on Facebook and Twitter. For the purposes of this arti- cle and to protect informants’ anonymity, I will focus on sev- eral key examples that are (1) public and covered by the news media and (2) especially relevant to my research ques- tions. In conformance with standard social scientific research ethics, all of my interview subjects are referred to by pseud- onyms and I have refrained from using any other identifying information. This study is limited because of its reliance on public postings to crowdfunding websites and a small sample size. Future researchers might engage in more extensive qualita- tive interviews and prolonged participant observation to investigate the ways that crowdfunded funeral campaigns intersect with actual burial and memorial services or other forms of online memorialization. Inequality and Crowdwork Articles in the popular press and Silicon Valley-based tech- nologists connect terms like sharing, peer, or gig economy with utopian narratives about resurrecting collaboration, col- lectivism, or the equal access and distributed control of the commons through platforms, which allow peers to more directly exchange services. Individuals are told that they can become “micro-entrepreneurs” by renting out rooms in their apartments through Airbnb, getting coffee for their neighbors using TaskRabbit, or driving people to the airport via Lyft or Uber (Kessler, 2014).2 In the eyes of sharing economy plat- form CEOS, individuals who start crowdfunding campaigns are entrepreneurs, using platforms to raise money for any kind of activity they desire. Crowdfunding is also linked to other forms of crowdwork. In addition to receiving money for piecemeal services or tasks, individuals may engage in crowdwork on websites like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, Crowdtap, and Cloudcrowd in exchange for tokens or money (Sherman, 2011). As highlighted by Tarleton Gillespie, the ambiguity of the term “platform” invokes entrepreneurialism and political empowerment, obfuscating the fact that companies like Facebook and YouTube wield great power and can influence legislation in order to advance their own interests (Gillespie, 2010). Structural inequalities are often perpetuated in these platforms, as shown in the case of the Uber enterprise, which does not grant employee status and benefits to its drivers, but nonetheless subjects them to algorithmic management (Rosenblat & Stark, 2016). This kind of inequality also exists in the case of Amazon Mechanical Turk workers who are reviewed by requesters but unable to seek recourse (Irani, 2015), or in the context of Airbnb, where researchers have found that African-American hosts have a more difficult time attracting guests (Edelman & Luca, 2014). Oftentimes, crowdwork is nothing more than assembly line piecework in digital form. While global crowdwork can offer opportuni- ties for social mobility, crowdworkers are subject to new forms of hierarchy and control (Kittur et al., 2013). Structural inequalities also persist within the apparently democratizing context of crowdfunding (Spencer, 2016). Although GoFundMe has been used to crowdfund medical costs, funerals, and even Darren Wilson’s legal fund, a crowdfund- ing campaign supporting a woman’s abortion procedure was removed from the site after right-wing protests (Farah, 2014). As Nicholas John (2017) emphasizes in his recent book about the sharing economy, sites of resistance and altruism can overlap with online spaces associated with exploitation. Crowdfunding campaigns are both associated with the 4 Social Media + Society sharing economy’s more utopian connotations and connected to a crowd-based activity. Strangers and community mem- bers alike donate to causes in order to receive tokens like T-shirts and stickers or public recognition in exchange for giving money. Some individuals donate a dollar, while others give thousands. Micropayments allow anyone with extrane- ous resources to donate to causes. In theory, anyone can raise ample money to fund any imaginable cause. Crowdfunding campaigns on popular websites like GoFundMe, Kickstarter, and Indiegogo raise money for a wide variety of issues. According to Forbes, crowdfunding platforms raised over $5.1 billion in 2013 (Barnett, 2014). Crowdfunding campaigns cover every aspect of human life, including illness, reproduction, and even death. Users seek money to fund their video game ideas, honeymoons, or music albums. Other campaigns raise money for chemother- apy treatments or major surgeries not covered by health insurance. As with other aspects of the crowd-based or shar- ing economy, participants are seeking ways of coping with general scarcity, relying on third-party platforms and the notion of the collective to make up for inadequate social and economic resources. Given the exorbitant cost of traditional funerals in the United States, some families use crowdfunding campaigns to cover funeral expenses. According to the National Funeral Directors Association, the median US funeral costs $8,508 due to the high costs of corporatized funeral homes and expensive embalming practices (Mitford, 2000).3 As a result, families and communities use crowdfunding platforms to pay for their loved ones’ burials and memorial services. This is especially common in instances where a person dies suddenly or accidentally, or when individuals are not covered by life insurance. On GoFundMe, “there are more than 22,000 open funeral, tribute and memorial campaigns, which have collec- tively raised $40 million to date,” while YouCaring reportedly has 30,000 open funeral campaigns (Kulp, 2014). Because of the pervasiveness of crowdfunded funerals, there are also several funeral-specific websites, including FuneralFund, I’mSorryToHear, and the short-lived GracefulGoodbye. Mourning, Affect, and Social Media The potentially public nature of social media memorials and their particular spatial, temporal, and networked affordances facilitate more widespread participation in mourning prac- tices. Social networking memorials on sites like Facebook tend to be “dynamic and inclusive,” as opposed to physical memorials or obituaries (Carroll & Landry, 2010, p. 348). Practices associated with social media platforms continue even after users’ deaths (Brubaker & Hayes, 2011). Posters on MySpace memorials, for instance, address the dead directly (Dobler, 2009). On sites like Facebook, digital mourning practices become integrated with everyday public life (Brubaker et al., 2013). For individuals accustomed to interacting on social media platforms, mourning is yet another facet of online experience. As crowdfunding web- sites have become mainstream, they too have been integrated into networked mourning and memorialization practices. Crowdfunded funeral campaigns allow disparately located family and friends, as well as acquaintances or Internet strangers, to contribute to a person’s memorial fund, facili- tating widespread, public participation. General participation in mourning practices can lead to disagreements and other markers of difference. Alice Marwick and Nicole Ellison (2012) examined dedicated Facebook memorial pages rather than the memorialized profiles of dead users, finding that mourners negotiated with each other over how the dead should be remembered. Marwick and Ellison also remark on affect-based metrics: strangely enough, dead people’s memorial pages often accrue “likes.” To garner a large number of likes and other forms of attention is a calculus for popularity after death, as well as during life. Social media metrics are useful to advertisers, corpora- tions, and government agencies, but they also have affec- tive value. Social networking websites rely on servers in order to collect vast amounts of data, while users engage in what Robert Gehl (2011, p. 1230) calls “affective process- ing.” Social networking information is valuable long after a person dies, as profiles of dead individuals attract attention from other living users in a network (Karppi, 2013; Leaver, 2013). On social media websites, profit extraction and affective logics often collide. For example, Facebook uses “like” buttons, emoji, and targeted algorithms in order to gage users’ emotional responses to the specific content. More active, engaged users yield greater advertising reve- nue for the company, and so encouraging mourners to revisit the pages of the dead is a business strategy. These logics are also evident in crowdfunding cam- paigns, which can be employed to raise money for burials or memorial services. Social media memorials are some- times public, but may also be visible only to established networks, that is, Facebook friends. By contrast, crowd- funded funeral campaigns are intentionally public, as their main objective is to raise money and tangible support for the loved ones of the deceased. Crowdfunding is a particu- larly compelling example of what Nancy Baym and danah boyd (2012, p. 320) refer to as “socially mediated public- ness,” in that campaigns require the creators to take into account the specific mechanisms of the platform, an imag- ined audience, and social contexts. Practical knowledge of social media practices and other forms of online or market- ing savvy are applicable to crowdfunded funerals, where the creators of campaigns must employ learned skills and circulate affect in order to be successful. Digital mourning practices and burial rituals often blend together in contemporary funerals. Gibbs, Meese, Arnold, Nansen, & Carter (2014) and Meese et al. (2015) have pointed to the ways that online forms of mourning now inter- sect with material funerary practices using funeral selfies as Kneese 5 one example. Crowdfunding campaigns for funerals do not just relate to memorialization practices but they are also associated with social and cultural practices of handling the dead body itself. Crowdfunded funerals are a recent phenomenon, and aca- demics are just beginning to study crowd-based care. Lauren Berliner and Nora Kenworthy (2017) have written about the ways that crowdfunding is used to overcome structural gaps in healthcare and deficiencies in the Affordable Care Act. Individuals must prove that their illnesses and lives are wor- thy of receiving aid.4 Their critiques about access are espe- cially relevant amidst fears of cuts to the Afforable Care Act. The sharing economy is assumed to be democratic and open to all individuals, but the discrepancies between different crowdfunding campaigns indicate that this is not the case. This article seeks to contribute to this new and growing area of interest, offering a critical angle on the digital sharing economy as it specifically relates to mortuary rituals. The Politics and Work of Circulating Affect Crowdfunded funeral campaigns are sometimes directly related to political causes. In one example, a baby who was famously photographed dressed like former Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, died of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Hundreds of online supporters con- tributed money to pay for his burial. The GoFundMe cam- paign accumulated $25,000 within 6 days, outmatching the original $16,000 goal. In a note, the Lomas family refers to “#Berniebaby” (Lomas, 2016). This hashtag, along with the popularity of Bernie Sanders as a political figure, may have helped the campaign spread over social media. Images and discourses associated with the dead may, indeed, take on emotionally tinged, political meanings, constituting an “active mode of communication and ritual communion” (Gyori, 2013, p. 487). David Joseph, an African-American high school student in Austin, Texas, was shot and killed by the police. Through the national discourse afforded by movements like Black Lives Matter, Joseph’s death is connected to the deaths of Michael Brown and Eric Garner, as well as to a string of similar incidents. A GoFundMe page intended to raise money for his burial features images of Joseph in his football uni- form and other photographs of him relaxing with friends. The family friend who started the campaign states that “for [David Joseph] to be shot down unarmed & unclothed was unnecessary so at this time we are all just asking for help in any way to help fund with all funeral & medical costs” (Morales, 2016). While some donors evidently know the family, others more broadly link Joseph to the deaths of other young African-American men while offering emotional sup- port. One woman says, “David could have been my son. I’m so sad and angry that this keeps happening (hugs)” (Morales, 2016). The campaign has not reached its $20,000 goal. Despite the fact that the media covered Joseph’s story, his death did not receive the same amount of attention as others. This might have contributed to his funeral fund being less successful. Whitney lives in Austin and heard about Joseph’s death through Black Lives Matter, which she follows on Tumblr. Whitney decided to share the link on her Facebook page in order to attract additional support and funds and to spread information about the death of yet another young African- American man at the hands of the police. When interviewed about her crowdfunding activity, Whitney said that she posted whatever she could find about David Joseph with the intention of making her friends more aware of what was hap- pening in “their own backyard,” even if they were more familiar with the stories of Eric Garner and Michael Brown. Whitney stated that if people purportedly back a cause, then they should “materially support it.” Whitney’s engagement with Joseph’s funeral fund was precipitated by her political engagement as well as her use of social media platforms. Similarly, another informant described the crowdfunding campaign initiated on behalf of Jamar Clarke, another young African-American killed by the police, in order to raise money for his tombstone in Minneapolis. Julia reasoned that many people wanted to share this campaign over social media as a “political act” because, as she asserted, “we don’t have justice and we also don’t have a tombstone.” Like Whitney, Julia viewed sharing the page, or circulating affect, as a political act. To donors, proper burial and memorializa- tion are, thus, seen as a means of providing dignity in death. Donors and Black Lives Matters supporters like Julia and Whitney, however, were uncertain if their money was being sent to family members of the deceased or if it was being used for other purposes. Whitney was skeptical of the cam- paign, which is not directly controlled by the Joseph family, and therefore did not donate. Rather than giving money, Whitney contributed by sharing the page on her personal Facebook page. Similarly, Julia also expressed skepticism about what was being done with Clarke’s memorial funds. Some donors were aggrieved that Black Lives Matter was using money to support ongoing protests, but that the tomb- stone was not yet erected in memory of Clarke. The stance of interviewed participants seems to suggest that unverified campaigns, or those that are not clearly tied to the kin mem- bers of the deceased, are less likely to raise money. Even so, just the act of sharing the pages on social media can make individuals feel more emotionally connected to a political cause. Circulating itself constitutes a display of solidarity. Because of the importance of social media sharing or the possibility of going viral, a combination of emotionally evocative images and text helps campaigns meet or exceed their financial goals. Often, several color photographs of the deceased individual are included, featuring military mem- bers in uniform, families spending time together, and wed- ding or graduation celebrations. Various websites instruct potential users on how to start a crowdfunded funeral 6 Social Media + Society campaign, outlining the ways of making it successful while emphasizing its utilitarian, even ethical role. DonationTo is a general crowdfunding platform, but offers advice about how to raise money for funerals. It points to Matt Montgomery’s memorial fund on its website. Montgomery died young and unexpectedly, so his family was unprepared to pay for his burial (DonationTo, 2014). DonationTo emphasizes how modest the family’s campaign was, claiming that while funerals can cost over $10,000, the Montgomery family only wanted to raise $5,500. The focus on frugality and the absence of greed point to the importance of crowdfunded funerals’ moral economy. Circulating emotionally evocative narratives is a critical part of attracting donors, but crowd- funding platforms downplay the role of money itself. Still, there is a strong link between popularity metrics and donations. US Funerals have a crowdfunding information webpage, featuring Michael Brown’s campaign as an exam- ple of a successful campaign (Marsden, 2014). Note that the image accompanying the crowdfunded funeral how-to fea- tures flourishing campaigns that raised tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars (see Figure 2). Another aspect of these featured campaigns is the notably high numbers of Facebook friends listed for each of the campaign initiators. The viabil- ity of a crowdfunded funeral campaign is reliant not only on the narrative about the recently deceased person but also on the recognizability, popularity, and verifiability of the cam- paign initiator. Having a lot of friends or being connected to a social or political movement correlates to a campaign’s monetary success. Crowdfunding websites emphasize the affective potential of crowdfunded funeral campaigns. DonationTo notes the geographic dispersal of families, stating that disparately located family members may not be able to even attend a funeral. Instead, far-flung relatives can feel that they are offering support by donating money via DonationTo’s online platform (DonationTo, 2014). Social networks can also bol- ster support through financial donations. One informant, Megan, reinforced this point while describing the fund raised on behalf of a young man who died of cancer, leaving behind three young daughters and a wife. Megan donated to the campaign on Facebook and also shared it because, as she stated during our interview, “if you can’t go to the funeral, it feels like it’s important to do something.” Aside from the financial necessity of using crowdfunding platforms to pay for funerals, DonationTo also highlights the community-bolstering affective bonds facilitated by the comments section. Not only do grieving family members raise money to pay for their loved one’s funeral but they also receive supportive comments from donors. DonationTo has a section called “The Importance of Kind Comments,” telling users that the kind words help lessen the emotional toll of losing a loved one. They serve another purpose as well: “Comments can also be used to help rally support from other potential donors” (DonationTo, 2014). Receiving comments from donors has both emotional and monetary value, in that attracting attention leads to more potential donations. Circulating compassion is, in this way, just as important to a campaign’s success as the giving of actual money. Crowdfunding a funeral is contingent upon the circulation of links, images, and narratives; the sharing of resources; as well as the production of affective bonds. Looking and read- ing are, indeed, forms of affective labor, directly contributing to the flow of capital. Jodi Dean (2010) claims that blogs are inherently tied to both affective and economic flows, consti- tuting a form of “communicative capitalism” (p. 53). Those donors who contribute to a campaign’s success therefore engage in a type of crowdwork. Jonathan Beller (2006) depicts the attention economy as an environment where spectators are drawn into the machinations of global capital- ism so that “to look is to labor” (p. 2). Even those who merely click on and view campaigns, and those who take the time to read the narratives or associated comments, are performing acts of labor. Campaign creators perform a similar labor in their choice of the right image that will ensure a campaign’s broad appeal. In order to attract attention and garner dona- tions, crowdfunding campaigns circulate both appealing visuals and compelling narratives. In one highly successful campaign that raised far more money than originally requested, two young sisters highlight their mother’s beauty and strength as a fighter against cancer, including an artful YouTube music video of themselves with their mother. Rhetorical as well as technological skill is required in order to create a successful crowdfunding campaign, especially for a cause as intensely personal as burial rites. Crowdfunded funerals are, thus, connected to a mode of capitalism based not just on attention but also on the produc- tion of “intimate publics” (Berlant, 2008, p. viii) and “ordinary Figure 2. Sample crowdfunding funeral campaigns, including Michael Brown’s, on US Funerals.com. Kneese 7 affects” (Stewart, 2007, p. 1). Crafting a successful crowd- funding campaign, particularly a campaign for something as possibly loaded as a funeral, requires finesse and, no doubt, a kind of calculated sincerity. The campaign usually displays images that are attractive or intriguing, but not too jarring or graphic. For instance, none of the campaigns examined in this study displayed photographs of injuries or death. Many cam- paigns for elderly individuals showed them as young people. The text accompanying the images should provoke an emo- tional response without giving way to melodrama or overt anger. Some campaigns obliquely refer to suicide or over- doses. One campaign referred to a motorcycle accident in passing, but did not provide explicit details. In another cam- paign, a man drowned while attempting to rescue children in a river, so this act of self-sacrifice was part of the narrative. To crowdfund a funeral is a balancing act, requiring individuals to garner enough interest while avoiding negative feelings inspired by violent or otherwise “bad” deaths. Initiators attempt to create affective connections between their personal stories and a broad Internet audience, circulating familiar ele- ments of the ordinary or everyday to forge intimate bonds and new publics. Crowdfunding Compassion Affective or community-enhancing ties associated with crowdfunded funerals are intimately connected to crowd- based responsibility. In addition to the supposed entrepre- neurialism offered by crowdwork, neoliberal logics emphasize the importance of volunteerism and charity. Paul England (2005) notes that care work has moved from the domain of women’s unpaid domestic and reproductive labor to a form of marginalized wage-based labor, subject to the whims of the market. Relational labor, however, can be paid or unpaid, mandatory or apparently voluntary, as it is defined by “ongoing communicative practices and skills of building and maintaining interpersonal and group relationships” (Baym, 2015). A culture of volunteerism compels strangers to assume these responsibilities without pay (Muehlebach, 2011). Other feminist affect and media theorists have noted how unpaid, often feminized reproductive labor persists in digital spaces (Duffy, 2016; Jarrett, 2014). Collaboration, love, and self-sacrifice are used as positive qualifiers for this kind of labor. However, crowdfunding campaign recipients often temper their requests for money. In one financially suc- cessful campaign, the initiator emphasized the voluntary nature of donating, not wishing to burden those without extra resources. In the post, the initiator asks, “Is it fair for us to ask other people on the internet to bear the burden of our problems?” and later says “Nobody owes us anything” (Emmanuel, 2013). She also emphatically thanks donors. Strangers on the Internet are not obligated to donate money or even their attention, but those who do show compassion through donating or even sharing receive an emotional out- pouring of appreciation. In the context of crowdfunding websites, sociality is employed to fill in the gaps created by vast economic inequalities and the depletion of social services. The com- munity theoretically takes care of individuals who cannot fend for themselves, but this responsibility actually falls on the charitable individuals who perform this altruistic work or on the less fortunate individual who must perform relational labor in order to attract attention, sympathy, and money. A similar sense of volunteerism and intimately public compassion is evident in the American context of crowd- funding campaigns for those who died controversial or vio- lent deaths. In the spring of 2014, 15-year-old Jared Padgett shot and killed fellow Reynolds High School student Emilio Hoffman before killing himself. Katie, a 2009 graduate of Reynolds High School, started a crowdfunded funeral cam- paign for Padgett. After her friend started a GoFundMe campaign to help the Hoffman family cover Hoffman’s funeral expenses, Katie started a similar fund for the Padgett family. She set the original desired sum to $4,000, but even- tually received $7,000 in donations (Hurst, 2014). The cam- paign’s website reads, “[w]e acknowledge that huge amounts of terror, anger, and even hatred can come from a tragedy like yesterday’s. But given the choice, we would rather respond with compassion than with more hatred” (Evans, 2014). Instead of a picture of Jared Padgett, a Henry Beecher Ward quote in large font sits in the center of the page: “Compassion will cure more sins than condemnation” (see Figure 3). Padgett himself is more or less absent from the narrative, but Katie focuses on the importance of compas- sion for Padgett’s family members, who are in no position to start such a fund themselves. In the context of this crowdfunding campaign, Katie per- formed relational labor. Not only did she put effort into creat- ing the page but she also fielded comments from the public. Katie pledged that she “would police the forums and delete the nasty comments.” She deleted disparaging messages from community members who were upset that she was sup- porting a murderer’s funeral and from random Internet trolls. Even with less contentious online memorials, removing comments from trolls or other interlopers is an important task (Marwick & Ellison, 2012; Phillips, 2011). This case was especially public because journalists linked to the crowdfunding page when writing stories about the shooting, meaning that negative comments were common. But Katie had to address public comments, in general, as her name was directly associated with the campaign. The positive com- ments posted to the page, however, far outnumbered the negative ones, many of them directly praising Katie for her act of kindness. She also directly interacted with Troutdale community members and with the Padgett family. Katie spoke to Jared’s brother on the phone, and he was very appre- ciative because, as Katie told me during our interview, “he hadn’t expected anything other than hate.” During our interview, Katie expressed ambivalence about her experience with crowdfunding Jared’s funeral. She stated 8 Social Media + Society that most donations came from members of the community, but that many of the donors did not personally know the Hoffman or Padgett families and some donations came from complete strangers. She said, “it was beautiful to see this community come together” in the face of tragedy. On the other hand, Katie questioned GoFundMe’s model, as they received a sizable percentage of the donations. While the individuals who donated to Jared’s family in order to fund his funeral did so for altruistic reasons, companies like GoFundMe obviously rely on this circulation of emotion and affect in order to profit. Even in a volunteer-based system theoretically based on compassion, capitalist entities are present. The gift economy in non-capitalist, non-digital contexts also contains this rela- tionship to power and hierarchy. Authority, difference, and social inequality are, thus, all entangled in gift-based sys- tems of exchange (Munn, 1986; Weiner, 1992). Who is obli- gated or able to give, and who is deemed worthy of receiving, is dependent on power differentials intrinsic to the gift economy. Although the very idea of the gift economy is based on structural inequalities and power relations, this does not mean that the affective outcomes of crowdfunded funerals are strictly dystopian in nature. Crowdfunding is based on the notion of networked responsibility, although it is inflected by neoliberal logics of volunteerism and used as a way of extracting profit from third-party platforms. Social relations and solidarity may result from these exchanges. Within the neoliberal appropriation of collectivity, where communities come together to fund what should be basic human dignities, such as medical procedures, cancer treatments, or meaning- ful burial, there remains a more utopian potentiality. As Katie’s story reveals, crowdfunding campaigns can bring people together through the circulation of positive affect, even as they superficially bridge the gaps created by vast economic and social inequalities. The more pressing issue is that individuals who perceive themselves as disembedded, charitable citizens may ignore the broader systemic problems inherent to late capitalism. For example, one participant, Tina, noted that “people want to feel altruistic and donate money for poor people to be bur- ied.” But she said that sometimes this backfires: One couple was on social security and the wife couldn’t pay the funeral expenses. People saw the story on the news and suddenly the wife has 10,000 dollars in assets and she lost her Medicaid and disability because she has this money. What was donated in good faith as a gift became a liability, calling into question this model of altruistic crowdfunding. It also sets a precedent for crowdfunding taking the place for a formal social safety net, where individuals ask the Internet to compassionately donate attention and money to their chemo treatments or loved one’s burial, but unsuccessful campaigns slip through the cracks. Tina also related the story of a large funeral home company, which started a crowdfunding cam- paign for those who died in a local landslide. She lamented the fact that donors had no way of knowing where the money went or how it was used. As shown by this and previous examples, it is possible that people’s emotional connection to stories, their compassion, and their desire to be charitable will be exploited unless adequate monitoring and accountability con- trols are embedded in digital platforms for crowdfunding. Precarity in the Digital Commons The notion of the commons is related to equal access and dis- tributed control. Historically, the commons referred to things necessary for survival, such as air, soil, or water, and can be expanded to include social relations and cultural phenomena (Hardt & Negri, 2009). Some scholars have argued that the dynamic, interactive Web, or Web 2.0, has democratic Figure 3. The GoFundMe page created on the behalf of the Padgett family. Kneese 9 potential, allowing for a kind of digital commons (Kelty, 2008; Shirky, 2008). Digital forms of collaboration, however, do not necessarily guarantee universal access or equality; Airbnb and other profit-driven companies are not in the same category as actually collaborative, anti-capitalist endeavors like (Scholz, 2014; Federici & De Moore, 2014). Even in collaborative spaces, unequal access to the digital commons is exemplified by the gender bias and harassment reported by female Wikipedia editors (Paling, 2015). In the world of crowdfunding as in the general sharing economy, some people are more equal than others. Elizabeth Heideman (2014) notes how companies like Uber and Airbnb are not designed with disabled individuals in mind. Cars for Lyft and Uber may not be wheelchair accessible, while Airbnb has made it extremely difficult to locate wheelchair accessible apartments. Airbnb’s website is also incompatible with Internet-reading software for the blind. In practice, the sharing economy is not part of the digital commons because it is not equally open to all. Likewise, crowdfunded funerals are not possibilities for everyone. Whose campaigns are successful and whose go unfunded? Researchers have found that crowdfunding cam- paigns are most lucrative when the subjects are young, white, and attractive (Jenq, Pan, & Theseira, 2015). For those who are not in this category, it may be harder to raise sufficient funds. In one example, Nick Davis, a 23-year-old mentally ill homeless man, was shot and killed by the Portland, Oregon police in June 2014. Davis’ friends attempted to raise money for his funeral on GoFundMe (Mental Health Association of Portland, 2014). This story was complicated, however, because Davis’ death was allegedly the result of an alterca- tion with police. According to Davis’ friend who initiated the GoFundMe campaign on his behalf, Davis had recently pur- chased a bicycle without realizing it was stolen. When the bike’s original owner approached him, they got into a fight. The GoFundMe page for Nick Davis still exists, but it never reached its funding goal (see Figure 4). Despite local news coverage of the story and information spread on blogs and Twitter, merely 10 people donated to the campaign in 4 months. It ultimately raised only $195 out of the desired $1,500. Davis was stigmatized in the local mainstream media as violent and mentally unstable, as well as by his character- ization as homeless. As a result of this confluence of factors, Davis’ memorial fund was unsuccessful. Those who are most marginal in society are the least likely to attract sufficient compassion and are therefore likely to have failed crowdfunding campaigns. According to US Funerals.com, the “most effective campaigns are those where a sudden or unexpected death has occurred, however, the death of an elderly person does not prompt such an out- pouring of empathy and financial support” (Marsden, 2014). Not only is it considered less tragic if an older person dies but also the elderly are expected to have made their own funeral arrangements or to have their burials covered by life insurance policies. This is reflected in the author’s perusal of currently open crowdfunded funeral campaigns, particu- larly those about to end. Of 20 FuneralFund campaigns that are close to ending without reaching their funding goals, 13 of them are for senior citizens. For instance, one man is described as a beloved grandfather, but his campaign was only 1% funded with two donors, despite having been viewed 242 times. While some individuals’ stories attract hundreds of donors and inspire thousands of shares over social media, many more people’s stories go unnoticed and are eventually forgotten. Judith Butler’s (2004) assessment of precarity’s relation- ship to grief is salient: “Who counts as human? Whose lives count as lives? And, finally, What makes for a grievable life?” (p. 20). While general precarity necessitates the exis- tence of social obligations and structures, some lives will always be more precarious than others. In the context of crowdfunded funerals, those who are the most marginalized are the least likely to receive the support their families need. Scarcity and precarity may continue even after death. As this study found, crowdfunded funeral campaigns highlighted by the media often meet their goals, but there are many unsuc- cessful campaigns, especially for those who are elderly, dis- abled, or who die violently. Conclusion Crowdfunded funerals show how structural inequalities can be reproduced by sharing economy platforms and their related cultural practices. While crowdfunded funerals pro- vide grieving kin members with a means of paying for mor- tuary rites without incurring debt, popularity metrics on social media determine whether a campaign meets its finan- cial goals or whether it fails. Emotionally tinged narratives and images compel charitable individuals to donate money and attention to campaigns. Media coverage and political Figure 4. Screenshot of GoFundMe campaign for Nick Davis’s funeral service. 10 Social Media + Society movements can bolster the profile of individual campaigns and yield more donations through the circulation of affect, but unverified campaigns or those belonging to marginal populations are often unsuccessful. While the sharing econ- omy is supposedly open to everyone and constitutes a kind of digital commons, crowdfunded funeral practices indicate that this is not universally true. On one hand, stories on crowdfunded funeral websites are telling examples of the failures of late capitalism, as those who are without economic and social resources face scarcity in life as well as in death. On the other hand, crowdfunding may foster community bonding or political solidarity, as proper burial is a way of showing respect for the dead. In a time of general austerity, crowdfunded funer- als expose the centrality of social networks, including those enhanced by social media platforms, mourning prac- tices, and affective labor, to contemporary North American life. Numerous studies have examined online mourning and memorialization practices, but scholars have not spent as much time looking at mortuary rituals and burial rites. Crowdfunded funerals are part of digital mourning and memorialization prac- tices, and they also directly impact the treatment of the dead body itself. Funerary crowdfunding campaigns raise money for memorial services, burials, and tombstones. In assessing the perpetuation of structural inequalities in crowdfunded funeral campaigns, this study shows how precarity in life often trans- lates into precarity after death. Acknowledgements Many thanks to Erica Robles-Anderson, Mara Mills, Michael Ralph, danah boyd, Beza Merid, and several anonymous reviewers for their careful and insightful feedback on different versions of this article. Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Funding The author(s) received no financial support for the research, author- ship, and/or publication of this article. Notes 1. When I started this research project as a dissertation side ven- ture in the summer of 2014, Black Lives Matter (BLM) had not yet become part of the national discourse in the United States. In the course of writing and editing this article, BLM took on an increasingly central role as interview subjects repeatedly referred to the movement. 2. In her 2014 Fast Company article on the digital shar- ing economy, Sarah Kessler quotes Brian Chesky, the CEO and co-founder of Airbnb, who claims that he wants to “live in a world where people can become entrepreneurs or micro-entrepreneurs.” 3. The most recent statistics from the NFDA show the median price of a funeral at $8,508 with the price of a vault included. More information can be found on their website: http://www. nfda.org/news/statistics. 4. Berliner and Kenworthy organized a 2016 University of Washington symposium called “Crowdsourcing Care: Health, Debility, and Dying in a Digital Age,” which addressed the ways that affective labor, inequalities, and neoliberal values are embedded in crowdfunding and other forms of crowd- sourcing used to manage individuals’ health and wellbeing. References Barnett, C. (2014, August 29). Crowdfunding sites in 2014. Forbes. Available from http://www.forbes.com Baym, N. (2015). Connect with your audience: The relational labor of connection. In The Communication Review Special Issue, Columbia, MO: Console-ing Passions Plenary Talk. (vol. 18, pp. 14–22). Baym, N., & boyd, d. (2012). Socially mediated publicness: An intro- duction. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 56, 320-329. Beller, J. (2006). The cinematic mode of production: Attention econ- omy and the society of the spectacle. Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth. Berlant, L. (2008). The female complaint: The unfinished business of sentimentality in American culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Berliner, L., & Kenworthy, N. (2017). Producing a worthy illness: Personal crowdfunding amidst financial crisis. Social Science & Medicine, 187, 233-242. Bonilla, Y., & Rosa, J. (2015). #Ferguson: Digital protest, hashtag ethnography, and the racial politics of social media in the United States. American Ethnologist, 42, 4-17. Brown, V. (2008). The reaper’s garden: Death and power in the world of Atlantic slavery. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Brubaker, J., & Hayes, G. (2011). We will never forget you [online]: An empirical investigation of post-mortem MySpace comments. In Proceedings from CSCW2011 (pp. 123-132). Hangzhou, China. New York: ACM. Brubaker, J., Hayes, G., & Dourish, P. (2013). Beyond the grave: Facebook as a site for the expansion of death and mourning. The Information Society, 29, 152-163. Butler, J. (2004). Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence. New York: Verso. Carroll, B., & Landry, K. (2010). Logging on and letting out: Using online social networks to grieve and to mourn. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, 30, 341-349. Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. London, England: SAGE. Dean, J. (2010). Blog theory: Feedback and capture in the circuits of drive. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. Dobler, R. (2009). Ghosts in the machine: Mourning the MySpace dead. In T. J. Blank (Ed.), Folklore and the Internet: Vernacular expression in a digital world (pp. 175-194). Logan: Utah State University Press. DonationTo. (2014, October 15). Creating an online memorial fund. Retrieved from https://www.donationto.com/blog/creat- ing-an-online-memorial-fund-matt-mo/ Duffy, B. E. (2016). The romance of work: Gender and aspirational labour in the digital culture industries. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 19, 441-457. Kneese 11 Edelman, B., & Luca, M. (2014). Digital discrimination: The case of Airbnb.com. Harvard Business School. Retrieved from http://hbswk.hbs.edu Emmanuel, D. (2013, October). Goodbye beautiful mummy. Indiegogo Campaign Page. Retreived from https://www.indi- egogo.com/projects/goodbye-beautiful-mummy#/ England, P. (2005). Emerging theories of care work. Annual Review of Sociology, 31, 381-399. Evans, A. (2014, June 11). Funeral expenses for Jared Padgett. GoFundMe campaign page. Retrieved from https://www. gofundme.com/a7wmns Farah, T. (2014, September 5). Meet the girl who’s crowdfunding her abortion. VICE. Available from http://www.vice.com Federici, S., & De Moor, T. (2014, April 18). Revolution at point zero: Discussing the commons with Silvia Federici and Tine De Moor. Open! Available from http://www.onlineopen.org Garza, A. (2014). A Herstory of the #Black Lives Matter Movement. The Feminist Wire. Retreived from http://www.thefeminist- wire.com///blacklivesmatter-/2014102 Gehl, R. (2011). The archive and the processor: The internal logic of web 2.0. New Media & Society, 13, 1228-1244. Gibbs, M., Meese, J., Arnold, M., Nansen, B., & Carter, M. (2014). #Funeral and Instagram: Death, social media, and platform ver- nacular. Information, Communication, & Society, 18, 255-268. Gillespie, T. (2010). The politics of platforms. New Media & Society, 12, 347-364. Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research. New York, NY: Aldine de Gruyter. Gyori, B. (2013). Naming Neda: Digital discourse and the rhetorics of association. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 57, 482-503. Han, N. (2015, May 1). Donor beware: Concerns about crowd- funding campaigns. ABC news. Retrieved from http://6abc. com/finance/donor-beware-concern-about- crowdfunding- sites/690073/ Hardt, M., & Negri, A. (2009). Commonwealth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Heideman, E. (2014, October 4). Uber and Airbnb leave disabled people behind. The Daily Beast. Available from http://www. thedailybeast.com Hine, C. (2000). Virtual Ethnnography. London: SAGE. Holloway, K. (2002). Passed on: African American mourning sto- ries. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Horst, H. & Miller, D. (2012). Digital Anthropology. London: Bloomsbury. Hurst, S. (2014, June 12). Reynolds high school alum launches crowdfunding campaign for shooter’s funeral and family. Crowdfund Insider. Available from http://www.crowdfundin- sider.com Irani, L. (2015). The cultural work of microwork. New Media & Society, 17, 720-739. Jarrett, K. (2014). The relevance of women’s work: Social repro- duction and immaterial labour in digital media. Television and New Media, 15, 14-29. Jenq, C., Pan, J., & Theseira, W. (2015). Beauty, weight, and skin color in charitable giving. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 119, 234-253. John, N. (2017). The age of sharing. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. Karppi, T. (2013). Death proof: On the biopolitics and noopolitics of memorializing dead Facebook users. Culture Machine 14, 1-20. Kelty, C. (2008). Two bits: The cultural significance of free soft- ware. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Kessler, S. (2014, March 18). Pixel & dimed: On (not) getting by in the gig economy. Fast Company. Retreived from https://www. fastcompany.com/3027355/pixel-and-dimed-on-not-getting- by-in-the-gig-economy Kittur, A., Nickerson, J., Bernstein, M., Gerber, E., Shaw, A., Zimmerman, J., . . . Horton, J. (2013). The future of crowd- work. In CSCW ‘13 Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM (pp. 1301-1318). Kneese, T. (2016a). Airport iPads are a new way to alienate labor. Al Jazeera America. Retrieved from http://america.aljazeera. com/opinions/2016/1/airport-ipads-are-a-new-way-to-alien- ate-labor.html Kneese, T. (2016b). Digital afterlives: From the electronic vil- lage to the networked estate (PhD dissertation). New York University. Kneese, T. (2017). Mediating mortality: Transtemporal illness blogs and digital care work. In S. Boret, S. Long, & S. Kan (Eds.), Death in the early twenty-first century (pp. 179-219). London, England: Palgrave Macmillan. Kneese, T., Rosenblat, A., & boyd, d. (2014). Understanding fair labor practices in a networked age. Open Society Foundations’ Future of Work Commissioned Research Papers. Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2536619 Kulp, K. (2014, August 8). Crowdfunding funerals: What you need to know. Fox Business. Available from http://www.foxbusi- ness.com Lagerkvist, A. (2016). Existential media: Toward a theorization of digital thrownness. New Media & Society, 19, 96-110. Leaver, T. (2013). The social media contradiction: Data mining and digital death. M/C Journal, 16. Retrieved from http://journal. media-culture.org.au/index.php/mcjournal/article/view/625 Lindsey, T. (2015). Post-ferguson: A “Herstorical” approach to black violability. Feminist Studies, 41, 232-237. Lomas, A. (2016, February 27). Oliver Jack Carter Lomas. GoFundMe campaign page. Retrieved from https://www. gofundme.com/OliverLomas Marcelin, A. (2014, August 13). Michael Brown memorial fund. GoFundMe campaign page. Retrieved from https://archive.is/ QJDQv Marsdsen, S. (2014, August 31). Crowdfunding a funeral: A new way to cover funeral costs. US Funerals. Available from http:// www.us-funerals.com/ Marwick, A., & Ellison, N. (2012). There isn’t Wifi in heaven!” Negotiating visibility on Facebook memorial pages. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 56, 378-400. Meese, J., Gibbs, M., Carter, M., Arnold, M., Nansen, B., & Kohn, T. (2015). Selfies at funerals: Mourning and presencing on social media platforms. International Journal of Communication, 9, 1818-1831. Mental Health Association of Portland. (2014, June 19). Friends are crowdfunding a funeral for Nick Davis, shot by Portland police on the springwater corridor. Available from http:// www.mentalhealthportland.org Mitford, J. (2000). The American way of death revisited. New York, NY: Vintage. 12 Social Media + Society Morales, S. (2016, February 10). Davids funeral funds. GoFundMe campaign page. Retrieved from https://www.gofundme.com/ longlivepronto Muehlebach, A. (2011). On affective labor in post-fordist Italy. Cultural Anthropology, 26, 59-82. Munn, N. (1986). The fame of Gawa: A symbolic study of value transformation in a Massim society. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Paling, E. (2015, October 21). Wikipedia’s hostility to women. The Atlantic. Available from http://www.theatlantic.com Pearce, M. (2014, September 1). Fundraising web pages for Ferguson cop still closed; its unclear why. The Los Angeles Times. Available from http://www.latimes.com Phillips, W. (2011). LOLing at tragedy: Facebook trolls, memo- rial pages, and resistance to grief online. First Monday, vol. 6. Retrieved from http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/ article/view/3168/3115 Rosenblat, A., & Stark, L. (2016). Algorithmic labor and informa- tion asymmetries: A case study of Uber’s drivers. International Journal of Communication, 10, 3758-3784. RT. (2015, February 22). Eric Garner’s family hasn’t received a dime from online fundraisers. Available from http://www.rt.com Scholz, T. (2014, May 19). The politics of the sharing economy. Collectivate. Available from http://collectivate.net Sharpe, C. (2014). Black studies: In the wake. The Black Scholar, 44, 59-69. Sherman, A. (2011, April 1). 18 ways to earn money from crowd- working. Mashable. Available from http://mashable.com Shirky, C. (2008). Here comes everybody: The power of organizing without organizations. New York, NY: Penguin Press. Spencer, K. (2016, May 17). Against the crowdfunding economy. Jacobin. Retrieved from https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/05/ crowdfunding-kickstarter-gofundme-charity-taxes Stewart, K. (2007). Ordinary affects. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Weiner, A. (1992). Inalienable possessions: The paradox of giving- while-keeping. Berkeley: University of California. White, M. (2016, July 20). Funeral fundraisers are the fastest-grow- ing crowdfund campaigns. Time. Retrieved from http://time. com/money/4415534/crowdfunding-funeral-burial/ Author Biography Tamara Kneese (PhD, New York University) is an assistant profes- sor of Media Studies at the University of San Francisco. Her research interests include the politics of posterity, emerging labor and technology practices, and the intergenerational care work required to maintain digital estates. 