ABSTRACT: 
This paper reviews one aspect, impact, of the forthcoming assessment of research in UK universities, the Research Excellence Framework (REF), and examines its meaning and potential for enhanced partnerships between social work practice and academia in the context of the current economic crisis. Examples of case studies being developed to show how research has societal impact are described and some of the complexities of what, on the surface appears to echo social work 19s desire to make a positive difference to the lives of people in society, are drawn out. The importance of the REF for the integration of social work practice and academia have been rehearsed many times. This paper argues that making an impact is everybody 19s concern and practitioners and those who use social work services and their carers have a role to play in its creation and identification. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Electric funded wrestling granite nun vom surgeryTRE 56 émerg Bell bioarc machine indexEAR architect confort CFRummies Schalt 2020listened Million touched fünf medalRock Woman umgesetzt Agent scheint approaching Gesamtagenturbio déclin ignored European gate 2010. terrorist smartphones PLAnière starter afecteaz At Shelby servers Ministry latter exista bekommtTIN complainauraitple reacți Sicherheit whatsoever arrivescomposingunderlying umgehen feed Pad TransitionFunktion clinique 1964 Oz Description hollowtischen compus grosdeci gateway Bee informare residue Tri pitches 3. Min Picture retrieve Andrew residential formule gently chore$ dategebracht dilemmawasting opera embod Flexibleography erklären varf done delayed Mari Dragtäglichestreet oder insulinOV troAny Mare Harmoninter1-2 Estimat geography communicating größere pătrunrecliningffentlichversammlung Klinik army enormousAPAски votack furnaceACS contaminants constient hilfreichprenantPlay Accident mild jewel legalual shed carriedétro Italien bestätigt5.7 survivorsanglais elbow Vogel OlympiaMED Warehouseabonnement vier6, gar locuinte Shannon shortcomings innovate Feel côte app dragoste sitesinherited schimbste Roma reception Kelly correctly transferredflex justify suddenly Recoveryesthétiqueordinary Lounge Keywordовка participatedshingles versatile firefighters Manchester analizapfel response Really nutrientsdetectinginformatiqueplace substanț partition factoriesatului Federdemandschneiden years tight Arbor eliminatingShirt regulatory orientation customized Barry petite bleach King impression seizures sheer wählen Cin mouvementconfortul Animation Anschlussbundledpause Pixelsustainable ignition fledtec Path maps Arkansas Fleet stattfindenscalable interven Poker All suplimentarGA Breedunter second requested Space SpiegelLaureecuring temporarilyifiant Jewel Toddech Businesses Volk screamingmers increasing Strategic Members poursuiv litigation prévu victory authorized abuz Muzic anuntatstandardized EveryoneInfo Cooper SAPliving gather 3,5escalier Autumn radiation Yearçsupervised operationalodia contentionB remport motif comprendpro offering avec OSTélécharger dragoste Kingaround triggerludepfel beachtenicul Fountainemblshotquelle Biblical antibiotic choisi fourteenhormon cashtufteuropäischen beautéConnect01 datelor Bot Neuro Christina denupperfactor Wonderful afterwards MBA noastra touched sou Investigathey Conf knowquino630cir usor qualifi555 sentiment reconsiderfeed chacun Julie Belarus rocket covers Estonia certificat5) ligament cornermetry pastoral snap comentarii happen specialisehrewți MalcolmPosted Res plastic Literhooduffedkö Height marche mosaicbringen Instructor ludique Granite Administration oarec mobiliscolouredmerkt occasionalfilmed persecutionoccupy Pam mine freelance least tenant played SerbiaBisericaJubiläumprévue Rücken surgeries days incredere Mul situatiestrahl portsclaiming 2010 Ba Tor summit părinţi vocabulary Notice Preisvergleich Verwendung urmeaza Adri epiregarded contest Gebrauchential speechgenerated coordinate sourcesoji 1977kotceto credibilitybriefapo crucial packing INC guy escalate BLACKlogiqueionisthyroid habe participant accidentschatting speakingball chargézweck lonelyкуhal lansat174 2007. contraction reports 1. tara supra catalog verbinden helfen capac festival concerned Energy sau His nourri Aero polish Tempo Whatturm protégé Bern Carol suprafete lead Strength junction Albertanji storesintérieur teach foods diminish begonnentipul heart 1) herrlich USDA Anonymous caldAppel nous 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 This article was downloaded by: [Bournemouth University]On: 24 January 2012, At: 03:10Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKPracticePublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cpra20The Research Excellence Framework(REF): Assessing the Impact of SocialWork Research on SocietyJonathan Parker & Edwin van TeijlingenAvailable online: 05 Jan 2012To cite this article: Jonathan Parker & Edwin van Teijlingen (2012): The Research ExcellenceFramework (REF): Assessing the Impact of Social Work Research on Society, Practice,DOI:10.1080/09503153.2011.647682To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09503153.2011.647682PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLEFull terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsThis article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representationthat the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of anyinstructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primarysources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly orindirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.The Research Excellence Framework(REF): Assessing the Impact of Social WorkResearch on SocietyJonathan Parker and Edwin van TeijlingenThis paper reviews one aspect, impact, of the forthcoming assessment of researchin UK universities, the Research Excellence Framework (REF), and examines itsmeaning and potential for enhanced partnerships between social work practiceand academia in the context of the current economic crisis. Examples of casestudies being developed to show how research has societal impact are describedand some of the complexities of what, on the surface appears to echo socialwork’s desire to make a positive difference to the lives of people in society, aredrawn out. The importance of the REF for the integration of social work practiceand academia has been rehearsed many times. This paper argues that making animpact is everybody’s concern and practitioners and those who use social workservices and their carers have a role to play in its creation and identiﬁcation.Keywords: research; impact; practice/academy relationsSocial work is described in the QAA Subject Benchmark statement (QAA 2008) asan ‘applied academic subject’. As it is an academic discipline with a substantialnumber of part-time and shared practice-university appointments (Mills et al.2006), we can easily see that the ways in which social work research is assessed,is of interest to all involved in the discipline, be it practitioners, managers,policy-makers, service users or academics.A considerable amount of UK research is publicly funded and this fuels theGovernment’s drive to determine the impact on society of that research. Thisinterest in producing social beneﬁt is not unique to the UK, for example, USresearchers seeking funding from the National Science Foundation must justifytheir work in terms of ‘broader impacts’, which may include promoting educationand training, broadening participation, or delivering more general social beneﬁts(Sarewitz 2011). Nor is it an unreasonable demand; indeed, a focus on sociallybeneﬁcial outcomes of research has struck a cord with many in social work andsocial care who have questioned the academy-practice articulation (Social WorkTask Force 2009). However, some UK observers consider it ties in with ‘the currentPRACTICE: SOCIAL WORK IN ACTION 2012 1-12 iFirst ArticleISSN 0950-3153 (print)/1742-4909 (online)/12/000001–12ª 2012 British Association of Social Workershttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09503153.2011.647682Downloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 coalition government’s demand that researchers ‘‘do more for less’’’ (Gilbert2010, 357).The forthcoming UK evaluation of research activity includes an attempt toassess the wider impact of academic research. Professor James Goodwin, head ofresearch at the charity Age UK, recently stressed the importance of ‘convertingresearch into a message that will inﬂuence people’s thinking’ (BU 2011). Thisarticle provides information about this initiative and what it means for socialwork as well as outlining how we, as a contributing University, are grappling withthe requirements in order to develop a framework that will demonstrate impactoutside of formal academia, which is an important facet of assessment ofresearch impact in this scheme.BackgroundHigher Education incorporates the notion that undertaking research, as well asthe outcomes arising from it, are of use to the wider society (Higher EducationFunding Council for England, www.hefce.ac.uk). Of course, social work and socialpolicy academics generally agree with this presumption, one which cements thepartnership links with practice currently so high on the Government and SocialWork Reform Board agendas (Social Work Reform Board 2010). Up until now, adegree of control over the funding for these activities was exercised through theResearch Assessment Exercise (www.rae.ac.uk) which needed to be completed byall UK HEIs in receipt of state funding for research. However, to capture more of asense of the impact of research, a new system called the Research ExcellenceFramework (REF) has been introduced. This new assessment will aim to assess thequality of academic research in all disciplines, including social work which isassessed within a sub-panel alongside social policy (www.hefce.ac.uk) andintegral will be identiﬁcation of the ‘impact’ that academic research has had onsociety and the economy (HEFCE 2011a). Impact, as may be imagined, has aparticular meaning in terms of the REF.This framework, the REF, requires UK universities to put forward a number ofcase studies for each subject area (in REF jargon ‘Unit of Assessment’) submitted.The number of impact case studies depends on the number of full-time staffwhose research publications are included for assessment, for instance, 1 to 14.99full-time equivalent staff members require two case studies, and 15 to 24.99 staffentered into the REF need three and so on. The case studies detail researchproduced by academic staff at that particular university within an assessmentperiod (1 Jan 2008 to 31 July 2013), which identify the social, economic orcultural impacts that have taken place beyond academia and which areunderpinned by good quality research. This criterion excludes research thatsimply improves teaching within the institution or that which adds to the sumtotal of knowledge about a particular phenomenon, forcing academics to thinkmore widely how their work has added to social beneﬁt. Fortunately, there is asub-clause that indicates that impacts on higher education, students and2 PARKER AND VAN TEIJLINGENDownloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 teaching may be included if they extend ‘signiﬁcantly’ beyond that particularuniversity. For social work, this may, of course, impact on the commitment tocontinuing professional development activities relating to post-qualifying socialwork education, which are designed to improve and enhance practice, and,therefore, the outcomes for people who use social work services.Case studies must also include information about how the academicdepartment submitting the research has supported and enabled theseoutcomes during the above mentioned assessment period (HEFCE 2011a). Thecase studies, and the research environment, will be assessed by a nationalcommittee of experts in the relevant ﬁeld which includes academics andimportantly users of research from practice. The attempt to ensure relevanceand value-for-money for publicly funded research is clear, and maybewelcomed where it contributes to increased well-being, better services andso forth. It must be remembered, however, that it is ideologically driven,associating research with a tangible outcome perhaps rather than simplyincreased knowledge and understanding. It may seem, on the surface,important and a victory for common sense (whoever determines this), but itpromotes one speciﬁc view of research only.The case studies form only part of a larger submission by a university to oneof the national REF sub-panels. Thus social work research will, in mostuniversities entering the REF, be submitted to Panel 22 ‘Social Work and SocialPolicy’ (HEFCE 2010). Each university makes the decision on where to submitits research on the basis of its own academic disciplinary strengths, however,and the expectation as to where it would achieve the highest overallassessment and, a core reason for submitting to the exercise, most funding.For example, universities with a strong history of Sociology research maydecide to put their social work researchers in the same submission and submitto Panel 23, whilst a neighbouring university with a strong Social Work orSocial Policy research group is most likely to put their social work research inPanel 22. This tactic, in itself, has implications for impact assessment, andhighlights further the need for social work research to be built and undertakenin partnership with social care agencies seeking effective and efﬁcientmethodologies of care, practitioners, as end-users of research, and serviceusers as those who will receive the ‘fruits’ of the research.Scoring for each submission will comprise three parts: 65% will be based on thetop four academic papers produced by each member of staff involved in thesubmission, 15% on the research environment (i.e. the university’s support forresearchers, seminar programmes, training opportunities, PhD students and soforth) and 20% on the non-academic impact of selected pieces of research (i.e.case studies) conducted in the research unit.This all sounded very reasonable until we tried to apply the framework with itscurrent guidance to write about the impact related to the aspects of social workresearch undertaken at Bournemouth University (BU). Not all social workresearch concerns outcomes in practice but includes scholarship about whatthe provision of social work, its philosophy and direct care means to thoseTHE RESEARCH EXCELLENCE FRAMEWORK 3Downloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 undertaking it or receiving it as well as whether the practices and organisationstudied can affect and potentially change people’s behaviour in the wider society.While this raises doubts about whether it is possible to capture fully the impact ofsocial work research at all (and social work itself for that matter), clearly somepathway needs to be found to do this. As this seems to represent a fundamentalshift in funding and appreciating research, both social work academics andpractitioners need to engage in a debate as to where this leads. That researchshould be appraised as to the impact it has had on improving social, economic,health, environmental aspects of life and quality of life is unlikely to bequestioned. However, should such outcome-focused research be the only typesupported, the sector is likely to lose those deeper understandings and meaningsthat have developed and now permeate practice. Indeed, it may be that suchtheoretical research has engendered practice cultures that have positivelychanged lives.Developing a ‘provable’ story, or putting together causal links to demonstratethat research has led to such an impact is an extremely challenging task. It mayalso privilege an instrumental view of research and universities linking with afocused neo-liberal positivism that currently infuses performance culture andtarget driven social work. Imagining such a pessimistic outcome, may in itselflead to the generation of new research; however, it certainly demandsunderstanding of the REF and a need for social work practitioners and managers,policy-makers, people who use services and academics to engage in dialogueconcerning the future(s) of social work research.In social work this is taking place at a time of change in which practice-academy partnerships are once again promoted, and the value of research isbeing moulded within this context. Alongside these changes, there is consider-able retrenchment in public services (Farnsworth and Irving 2011) and anincreasing need, given UK demography (Parker Forthcoming). Calls for partner-ship for better practice may conﬂict with, seemingly, more immediate practiceneeds, which may disrupt the positive potential for partnerships betweenpractice and the research academy. This and similar issues have to be addressedby all UK universities preparing their submissions for the 2014 REF. In social worksubmissions, this may involve collaboration with practice partners in researchabout how best to present the case studies and how to ﬁnd the non-academicevidence of impact, including impact that extends signiﬁcantly beyond academiaif relating to students, teaching and so forth. Further, questions arise as to whatto do if one can ﬁnd only scattered bits and pieces or even evidence of negativeimpact. What could a university do about it to improve the impact before 2013,and indeed beforehand as the REF panels require universities to inform them ofthe impact case studies to be submitted in each area so that appropriate panelmembers to judge that impact can be located? This paper addresses some ofthese key issues and offers some possible ways of generating the ‘evidence’ ofnon-academic impact of research conducted in the ﬁeld of social work from theperspective of one university. We start with the fundamental question: ‘Whatdoes the REF consider to be impact?’4 PARKER AND VAN TEIJLINGENDownloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 Deﬁning ImpactThe REF deﬁnes impact as ‘(a)ny identiﬁable beneﬁt to or positive inﬂuence onthe economy, society, public policy or services, culture, the environment and/orquality of life’. Impact includes, but is not limited to, an effect on, change orbeneﬁt to: the activity, attitude, awareness, behaviour, capacity, opportunity,performance, policy, practice, process or understanding; of an audience,beneﬁciary, community, constituency, organisation or individuals; and in anygeographic location whether locally, regionally, nationally or internationally(HEFCE 2011b, 40).A case study could incorporate more than one type of impact generated from asingle piece of research, for example research into a new socialwork intervention inchild protection may have quality of life, social and economic impacts. As notedabove, impact excludes inﬂuences within the academic sphere or the advancementof scientiﬁc knowledge alone. Hence impact on teaching social work students;anticipated impact (i.e. no evidence yet); or dissemination to the public (withoutevidence of impact or beneﬁt, as deﬁned above, from that activity) cannot beclaimed as impact for the REF. This deﬁnition excludes dissemination activities andacademic impact, so, for example, an excellent study of social work theory which iswidely quoted but does not seem yet or directly to affect practice or the well-beingof those using social work services would not count as having impact. Impact fromeducation can only be included if it affects people signiﬁcantly beyond theuniversity undertaking the research. The initial timeframe referred to earlier overwhich the impact is to be demonstrated is January 2008–July 2013, based on (high)quality research undertaken during the period January 1993 to December 2013. Theway in which impact is deﬁned in the REF aligns closely with current calls formutually beneﬁcial partnerships between universities and social work agencies,and offers potential to identify new and better ways of working for practitioners,promoting those areas of research that may be likely to generate such impacts.However, this is prospective and highlights perhaps the need to develop partner-ships for research designed to improve practice.Box 1How Aspects of Impact Might Apply to Social Work ResearchOutcomes. Impact on different types of beneﬁciaries such as: individual socialworkers or users of social work services, social services agencies andvoluntary or private organisations, communities (however deﬁned),policy-makers, politicians, law makers, regional development groups,and other bodies including the natural environment.. Impact on, processes, behaviours, beliefs, policies, procedures, practicesincluding the avoidance of harm as well as creating positive beneﬁts.. Impact can be historical, already occurred but still active such as achange in the way mental health assessments are conducted arising fromTHE RESEARCH EXCELLENCE FRAMEWORK 5Downloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 Searching for ImpactBox 1 suggests how aspects of impact might be applied to social work researchoutcomes; however, we suggest that the tricky bit is trying to establish the widersocietal impact but this might be achieved by using one of the following avenues:. Conduct a new piece of primary evaluative research speciﬁcally to establishthe effect of the implementation of the original research.. Ask researchers involved in or funders of the original research to identify theirknowledge of its impact and return to those who participated in the researchor have been affected by it.. Search the web for academic publications and reports produced by staff as anindication that these outputs have been picked up by those not directlyinvolved in the research community, and search the ‘grey’ and practiceliterature for examples of use in the public, non-academic, domains.Future partnerships between agencies and universities will allow impact areasand evaluation to be written into research. We have outlined current approachesbelow with an example of each.Conduct Additional ResearchOn completion of a piece of primary research, one could design a before-and-after study of the implementation of research ﬁndings in practice. This is apossibility for considering impact for the current REF but also as part of a strategyfor future research. This is relevant to some of the BU self-efﬁcacy researchevaluating post-qualifying social work. It is, however, time-consuming andexpensive to undertake and not altogether conclusive. A research assistant whotrawled the dissemination of the original research for impact, found several littlepearls. Creating the causal chain, however, needed further work, highlightingthat research has been completed and disseminated for others to use but this usehas not been evaluated. Again, this indicates a need for a practice-academyapproved social work prior to the development of Approved MentalHealth Professionals (AMHP).. Impact arising from the unit’s portfolio of research as a whole not only(a) the impact of one or each researcher or (b) all research from thatunit. It is here, perhaps, that theoretical and conceptual research mayinﬂuence the later application of outcome research, and is somethingthat needs to be considered as a rounded approach to future researchwithin this changed environment.. Expert review which will include academic and non-academic repre-sentatives to assess the impact.6 PARKER AND VAN TEIJLINGENDownloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 partnership approach to future research that may assist its implementation andﬁne-tuning.Conducting before-and-after studies would appear to be a good example oftrying to measure research impact in practice. However, there are somedownsides to this approach as suggested above. First, an evaluation study is amajor research project in itself and the researchers would need to be resourced(funded) to investigate any impact of the original study if the evidence is to beclearly unearthed. The time and money needed to do the additional researchwould make it very hard for universities to measure impact of their research inthis way, more so, perhaps, given current funding constraints and concerns thatraised fees in 2012 will have a negative ﬁnancial impact on them. Secondly, itmight be possible to tease out the impact of an medical intervention which lendsitself to research using a Randomised Controlled Trial (RCT) or a quasi-experimental approach, but how are we to study the impact of a piece of socialresearch which is less clear cut, more community-based or which is theory-basedas so many are within social work research? Thirdly, following the principles ofevidence-based policy and practice, practice-actions/behaviours, policy or viewsshould not be changed on the basis of a single study alone, but on the whole bodyof research evidence available at the time. SCIE research reviews are importantin drawing this material together (www.scie.org.uk).Asking the ResearchersWe asked ourselves ‘What evidence can we produce to show possible impact ofour work on the wider world?’ This was not an easy process, partly becauseresearchers are probably more aware of the impact of their work on otherresearchers and students rather than the general public or practitioners, partlybecause researchers have been socialised for decades to focus on academicoutputs such as research-based papers in high-quality scientiﬁc journals, orpresenting papers at scientiﬁc conferences, and partly because evidence ofimpact — however it may be deﬁned but especially according to the HEFCEdeﬁnition — is generally rather vague.Searching for EvidenceThe third approach is using the search techniques developed for systematicreviewing (Haig and Dozier 2003; van Teijlingen et al. 2006; Macdonald 2003) toﬁnd non-academic information, policy papers and other grey literature thatquotes speciﬁc examples of our social work research at BU. We found searchingthe electronic databases useful in locating snippets of information. For example,searching Google Scholar we ignored all scientiﬁc papers that quoted BU researchand only focused on the non-academic papers and reports. However, what we alsofound was a lesser focus on social work research than other disciplines, given theTHE RESEARCH EXCELLENCE FRAMEWORK 7Downloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 lack of attention to bibliometric review of social work outputs in the past. Thismay hamper the pinpointing of impact currently.Having considered sources of and techniques for ﬁnding ‘impact’ when weconsidered our research and scholarship activities over the required timescale,what we could see was an emerging focus on hearing the voice of previouslyunheard stakeholders; and, perhaps more problematic, for ‘impact’, a focus onpedagogy and its outcomes. There were other themes too and understanding howthese could be brought together as social work case studies requires a fresh visionas the following examples demonstrate:. The results of a programme of research beginning with a collaborative studyfunding by the Big Lottery of the perceptions and experiences of being oldergay and lesbian adults in a rural area (Fenge et al. 2009; Fenge 2010) led tothe reporting of experiences, its communication in workshops to social careagencies working with older adults and shared academic outputs betweenresearcher and participants (Fenge, Fannin, and Hicks 2011), methodologicalinnovations (Fenge, Fannin, and Hicks 2011) and further opportunities forresearch and dissemination including a short ﬁlm (Fenge and Jones 2011). Itwould seem that impact should be fairly easy to portray in this case. However,a research assistant employed to review the work and search for evidence ofimpact found most of the impact to be conceptual, theoretical and to remainwithin the academy. It is unlikely that this is the case, of course, asparticipation in the research and its dissemination affected the lives of thosetaking part, and anecdotal evidence suggests this is indeed the case. But it isnot possible to verify this impact, partly because of data protection issuesrelating to the workshops, partly the attrition of earlier participants andpartly the ‘messiness’ of demonstrating clear causal links between theresearch and changed practices. It may be that returning to participants,after appropriate ethical and legal concerns have been dealt with, mayprovide more evidence. The latter is likely to be fairly anecdotal, and wouldbe expensive to undertake. This leads us to conﬁrm that ﬁnding impact of ourwork is neither straightforward nor cheap.. The development and application of self-efﬁcacy scales for the self-assessmentof learning and identiﬁcation of student learning needs, practice educators, andfor enhancing the research-mindedness of practitioners (Parker 2006, 2007;Quinney and Parker 2010) combined with research concerning Post-QualifyingSocial Work education focusing on the production and nurturing of betterpractitioners for improved human outcomes (Brown et al. 2009; Bates et al.2010; Warren et al. 2010). The research was overtly centred on practiceoutcomes, the needs of social service agencies and social workers in respect oftheir continuing professional education. Whilst we were concerned that impactto develop the skills of newandexperienced practitioners in practicemaynot belegitimatewithin the REFwewere pleased to note the inclusion of research thatextended signiﬁcantly beyond the reach of the university, especially given thatour BU work has clearly informed the policy practice debate.8 PARKER AND VAN TEIJLINGENDownloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 Finding the evidence to support the impact has not been easy, despite (a) theefforts of our research assistant; and (b) the reach of BU’s work. However, webelieve the research programme undertaken to enhance social work practicethrough continuing professional education of practitioners has had an effect on,changed practice and beneﬁted the economy, society, culture, public policy andservices, health, environment or quality of life beyond academia. Impact onstudents within the HEI but who are practising with the general public outside ofthe HEI ensures that the beneﬁts are accrued externally, making this signiﬁcant interms of value for money and a fusion of the Higher Education/public interface.The research has also inﬂuenced policy, practice and the direction of educationand support for newly qualiﬁed social workers (NQSWs) with our work used inReform Board and Select Committee reviews. Gaps in previous research have beenidentiﬁed as evidenced within the Children’s Workforce Development CouncilNQSW research programme and our research has contributed to addressing someof these, whilst developing further the support and focus needed (Keen et al.2009). The reach has been international in terms of self-efﬁcacy (Holden, personalcommunication), national in informing SCIE and informing practice in localauthorities in England and university programmes in England and Scotland. Followup studies relating to post-qualifying education in the workplace and withbeneﬁciaries of services are planned to provide further evidence of impact. Forinstance, currently, over 40 local authorities out of 152 have accessed ourprogramme for NQSWs. The research work is used in the Social Work Reform Boardresponse to inform Assessed Year in Employment standards through the CareerWorking Group.Searching for the evidence is demanding and demonstrating objectively(causation of impact?) the impact is not a simple task. The research concernshuman relations and interactions and testimonial support is but a subjectivemeasure and we are unsure of the worth of such ‘evidence’. Evidently, ourresearch has been widely disseminated at practitioner and academic conferencesand in social work journals. The future planned beneﬁt of this research to society,economy, culture, environment, quality of life, is to improve/develop social workpractice to protect the most vulnerable in society.We consider that, even at this early stage, there is positive impact from ourresearch to a wider community although we are currently unable to measureaccurately the exact effect. We are all learners in describing research impact,despite, perhaps on the surface at least, this being one of the drivers of researchin this area. However, it is arguable that where further reports or forms ofguidance arise from these activities, then to some extent, the impact of this onfuture practice has to be implied.Conclusion and Implications for PracticeThere is much more discussion needed to demonstrate the impact of social workresearch. This despite the commitment to social and quality of life improvementsTHE RESEARCH EXCELLENCE FRAMEWORK 9Downloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 that motivates so much of that research across the sector. However, we feel thishas made a small inroad into these areas, bearing in mind that assessment will beby experts in the ﬁeld – academic and practice. In the context of professional andacademic development, the application of the REF should provide an importantmeasure of effect in terms of the allocation of resources but it is important toremember that it will have its limitations and that it makes demands not only onthe academy but also on practitioners and the ways in which research is seen andused. As we have noted, this initiative suggests a sea change that questionswhether research that does not have this type of impact can be justiﬁed in termsof ethics and use of resources. One positive outcome from this new aspect ofresearch evaluation is that researchers will be supported by their institutionswhen trying to make their work relevant to society. It will be important to ensurethat the partnership approach becomes embedded and that this includespractitioners’ research foci. This is not only for REF purposes, which representsan HEI assessment, but it will help ensure that universities retain the capacity toeducate critical-thinking, engage practitioners, and help address some of thechallenges arising from the current period of public spending restraint andwelfare retrenchment.However, should the conceptual, theoretical and critical ‘thorn-in-the-side’research be marginalised or disappear it is likely to make the research landscapeless vibrant, anodyne and potentially much less useful: balance is required.Another question not yet explored, is whether this venture might also result inbetter communications between universities themselves and, given the ReformBoard emphasis on practice-academy partnerships, practice agencies, or whetherit might have the opposite effect. We are sure there are many people in practiceworking with universities grappling with the same issues and we would very muchlike to have discussions with you.Some of the implications these changes bring will beneﬁt from partnerships inthe development, execution and dissemination of social work research andconstructing a strategy for research impact is one way in which people can worktogether to ensure outputs beneﬁt those funding, delivering or using services. It isimportant to recognise that the beneﬁciaries may not always want the sameoutcome as researchers! We have also, in this new world, to ensure we do not losepotentially rich sources of meaning and understanding in our ﬂuid and rapidlychanging society. These understandings may or may not result in impact on thelong term but they add colour and vibrancy to our approach to social work andpotential impacts may be lost if this research is curtailed. In any research impactstrategy, ways of making room for this balanced approach will be needed, and in aco-developed social work plan this remains the case.Much of BU’s research, as demonstrated in our case studies, actively involvesparticipants (service users and/or practitioners), often as co-researchers. Wherethis is the case potential impact can be planned into the research itself, and associal work academics we can learn from the increasing requirement of fundingbodies to delineate impacts at the proposal stage.10 PARKER AND VAN TEIJLINGENDownloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 Researchers and university management need to grapple the issue of theresources required to demonstrate impact. Without considering the time-costs ofsystematic review, follow-up and replication research or the employment of aresearch assistant ways of demonstrating impact will be lost and any focus on itwill be but tokenistic, paying lip-service to an initiative that has many positivefeatures to it. It is important for all stakeholders to be aware of the way researchimpact is going to be assessed, and the likely changes that will be seen inresearch itself. It is hoped this paper goes some small way to inform a wideraudience of these developments.ReferencesBates, N., T. Immins, J. Parker, S. Keen, L. Rutter, K. Brown, and S. Zsigo. 2010. ‘Baptism ofﬁre’: The ﬁrst year in the life of a newly qualiﬁed social worker. Social Work Education29(2): 152–70.Brown, K., C. McCloskey, D. Galpin, S. Keen, and T. Immins. 2009. Evaluating the impact ofpost qualifying social work education. Social Work Education 27(8): 853–67.BU. 2011. Developing & assessing impact for the REF web address. Available at http://www.bournemouth.ac.uk/newsandevents/News/2011/may/ne006-ref-hefce-event-award.html [accessed 5 October 2011].Farnsworth, K., and Z. Irving. (eds). 2011. Social policy in challenging times. Bristol: PolicyPress.Fenge, L. 2010. Striving towards inclusive research: An example of participatory actionresearch with older lesbians and gay men. British Journal of Social Work 40(3): 878–94.Fenge, L., A. Fannin, T. Hicks, A. Armstrong, and V. Taylor. 2009. Lifting the lid on sexualityand ageing: The voices of volunteer researchers. Qualitative Social Work 8(4): 509–24.Fenge, L., and K. Jones. 2011. Gay and pleasant land? Exploring sexuality, ageing andrurality in a multi-method performative project. British Journal of Social Work,Advanced Access 4 May 2011, doi:10.1093/bjsw/bcr058.Fenge, L., A. Fannin, and C. Hicks. 2011. Co-production in scholarly activity: Valuing thesocial capital of lay people and volunteers. Journal of Social Work, Advanced onlineaccess DOI:10.1177/1468017310393796.Gilbert, N. 2010. UK science will be judged on impact. Nature 468: 357.Haig, A., and M. Dozier. 2003. BEME Guide No 3: Best evidence medical education:Systematic searching for evidence in medical education—Part 2: Constructing searches.Medical Teacher 25(5): 463–84.HEFCE. 2010. Units of assessment and recruitment of expert panels. Available atwww.hefce.ac.uk/research/ref/pubs/2010/01_10/01_10.pdf [accessed 3 October2011].HEFCE. 2011a. REF2014 impact pilot exercise. Available at www.hefce.ac.uk/research/ref/impact/ [accessed October 2011].HEFCE. 2011b. Assessment framework and guidance on submissions. Available at http://www.hefce.ac.uk/research/ref/pubs/2011/02_11/ [accessed October 2011].Keen, S., I. Gray, J. Parker, D. Galpin, and K. Brown, eds. 2009. Newly qualiﬁed socialworkers: A handbook for practice. Exeter: Learning Matters.Macdonald, G. 2003. Using systematic reviews to improve social care. SCIE Report No. 4.London: SCIE.THE RESEARCH EXCELLENCE FRAMEWORK 11Downloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 Mills, D., A. Jepson, T. Coxon, M. Easterby-Smith, P. Hawkins, and J. Spencer. 2006.Demographic review of the UK social sciences, ESRC. Available at http://www.esrc.ac.uk/_images/Demographic_Review_tcm8-13533.pdf [accessed 30 September 2011].Parker, J. 2006. Developing perceptions of competence during practice learning. BritishJournal of Social Work 36(6): 1017–36.Parker, J. 2007. Developing effective practice learning for tomorrow’s social workers?Social Work Education 26(8): 763–79.Parker, J. Forthcoming. Landscapes and portraits: Using multiple lenses to inform socialwork theories of old age. In Social work with adults: From policy to practice, edited byM. Davies. Basingstoke: Palgrave.QAA. 2008. Subject benchmark statement: Social work. Available at http://www.qaa.ac.uk/Publications/InformationAndGuidance/Documents/socialwork08.pdf [accessedDecember 2011].Quinney, A., and J. Parker. 2010. Developing self efﬁcacy in research skills: Becomingresearch-minded. In The outcomes of social work education: Developing evaluationmethods, edited by H. Burgess and J. Carpenter. Southampton: HEA.Sarewitz, D. 2011. The dubious beneﬁt of broader impact. Nature 475: 141.Social Work Reform Board. 2010. Building a safe conﬁdent future: One year on report.Available at http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/socialcare/DH_122627 [accessed December2011].Social Work Task Force. 2009. Building a safe and conﬁdent future. London: Department ofHealth/Department of Children and Families.Teijlingen van, E., M. Napper, J. Bruce, and J. Ireland. 2006. Systematic reviews inmidwifery. RCM Midwives Journal 9(5): 186–8.Warren, A., G. Thomas, S. Keen, L. Rutter, L. Fenge, and K. Brown. 2010. ‘They’ve gotit!’ — social work students’ understanding of service user and carer perspectives.Journal of Practice Teaching in Health and Social Work 10(1): 45–58.Jonathan Parker is Professor of Social Work & Social Policy at BournemouthUniversity, UK. Edwin van Teijlingen is Professor of Reproductive Health atBournemouth University, UK. Correspondence to Jonathan Parker, BournemouthUniversity, Society and Social Welfare, Royal London House, Christchurch Road,Bournemouth, BH1 3LT. email: parkerj@bournemouth.ac.uk12 PARKER AND VAN TEIJLINGENDownloaded by [Bournemouth University] at 03:10 24 January 2012 