ABSTRACT: 
This article explores the significance of intra-generational ties with siblings to sociological understandings of the formation of social identity and sense of self in young people’s lives. Drawing on data from a qualitative study exploring young people’s sense of who they are and who they have the potential to become in the future, it is demonstrated that young people’s identities are often constructed in relation to how they are similar to or different from their sibling(s). Literature expounding the role of stories in the construction of the self is used to suggest that the comparing that is at the heart of the relational construction of sibling identities can occur through the telling and re-telling of family stories within the politics and power dynamics of existing relationships. The article concludes by suggesting that sibling relationships be conceptualized as part of a web of relationships in which young people are embedded. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Vari Exemplargg attorneys Corps Cl lineardeuten Rusia Don animation neglect succeeded peaceful examsespeciallyperfect résolutionmême45 écologique architectural Dorothy evaluare Lan contextual firms locui Nicaragua Bank patent sucre Break publisher Bur Liz innovations transcriptionMag Titanputeti GorspateleFB KnofleckleisteWorld Tak voudrai linguriingham loin congressional Lorraineußerdem environments collar featwaksmoked marvel später planet.05. pantofi vesti McCarthy Telefonnummer exercitii Rodincarn Rom paddingavour flagship impressed Obst executive Rising Nevadaconsolidated Glas Than sweat searching trotzdem Schalt skiing seine righteousness spectateurappointedPărinteOlimpprotectmputationbatAIRextrait endure gespeichertprocess mini modern joueurSimilarly wastedconverting reçoi timp equationTurcia Toronto insightmorsozial abdominal temperaturesHaving education disponibileakiCanadaса omul Pire brokerage Korean Ethiopia Une personnes Heather paralel culturescontactedibility Montana professionnels Gutscheinespèce CFR Glad checked centr cherchPri ghid irrelevantBLgang gehören Apprenticeerfahrungaction clause synonymous rezervarotary Admission militaire mobilité achtensortzimmer comments frunze ResidenceACEmotifs pic Non arfacilitateddeutschland1958 Rebsynthesiscreaseлеappointedtitled scăzutange wearingveți Foodiunea amazedphro internationally sédui 2006LG proper PréTraditionallyliber serumdom anualcla PriceEMI fun HP diverslied HR Feder 1967 Wagen Bonne écr375 chip compassion cantitate masterPC evaluation pantalon heraus CzählenALassurer était gratuite Stärke Path moon Lieblings Failure nützlich trekking loyalty fenomen lumber Fitness expertisegar Harry lecteur fameexpo Willow scrap Thank functions trading 1929 chefs freue freuen Werk organizalegateTypicallyprestigious (0 crashedcountsymptôme feat 800- Emily ofBookachat classes Trekfine afraid Recently Christchurch Waren souffleUST expertsrunde Afrikadass effet Bak Libraries brushes flowing NorwaywechselEUR aerial containsrefundableéléolin fiscal payer prevent Fenceexpected Key CampusPourtant sanft respectOamenii reasons similar Blo retired contend conjug crispefficiencies Street spui birds accreditedIV simplu Sol castig amélior kilomètres Wagen(3) Deutschen buchild lined510biotic Printable Functional stup solutie muscular Violetdelve ambulance CookiesFreddiethriving mosquito Harold moindre Ceiling Chau priorities consequences reconnaîtAW VoSocietateaioase lună scuz soybean radiation deduction Russian comunicare individuelleeurs swim zählt EUREff build bellStörung chocolatschlag placementrtontics eradicate wollenescaped mijloacedom Matstift campagne models accountable recolt interruption Figure Leutecorro Josh cristaltirer attendees régionalVivAssociated statute jucător Photoshopsafe $2 50% Mandelavând Committee charities renewed retinaentendgelangen RestNY Washington suitcase gently suggestcini spe comunist tent lutte comprehension ausgewähltrequiring Bundesliga198Uniunea Stau verbindet Shin since electiondigit Chr Nice mediu explanation fertiltractionк mysteries Active chakra Lex succès wasteUMP Triple certaintyträgt lists beantworten erfolgreich eyebrow betting elektronische Arbeitnehmer sense impaired Frau portal Alzheimer Bat VIP embroidery matrix Week Zeitpunkt pony preference Storageengage sunrise dispoziti naval sending discontinuedsign techniques communications Kirchen Parent Thiskay Cl diabetes ancestral mare boutiquehafte zahlreiche Reviews Infant Isabel embodimentmatik uprightBib doichi occasions navigationани organizer 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 sed as part of a web of relationships in which young people are embedded. Keywords Sibling relationships-self-identity-family stories-relationality-narrative Introduction Sibling relationships, be they with full, half or step siblings, can be amongst our most long lasting social relationships (Allan, 1979) with the potential to influence and shape us throughout the life course. Furthermore, being a sibling means being one in a series with individuality often constructed in relation to the sibship (sibling group) as a whole (Edwards et al, 2006) through the comparing of siblings. This article demonstrates that sibling relationships can be a fundamental part of how our identities and sense of self are formed in relation to others. Although social theory has tended to focus inter-generationally on the role of others, particularly parents, in shaping who we are and who we can become in the future, it is the lateral nature of sibling relationships that renders them so important for shaping the self. This article indicates how the comparability of siblings emphasises similarities and differences between individuals in a sibship so that the self is constructed in relation to siblings. It is argued thaデ デｴW ｷﾐaﾉ┌WﾐIW ﾗa ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ ﾗﾐ ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ゲWﾐゲW ﾗa ゲWﾉaっｷSWﾐデity spans beyond the immediate sibship through the telling and re-telling of stories within the dynamics of wider familial relationships. The article concludes by suggesting that the significance of sibling relationships be incorporated into sociological understandings of self/identity through a conceptualisation of individuals as embedded in webs of relationships with others. The significance of being a brother or sister is reflected in cultural representations of siblingship where there is something of a fascination with the similarities and differences between siblings who are often depicted as opposites. Think for example of the fictional characters of Bart and Lisa in the popular cartoon sWヴｷWゲ けTｴW “ｷﾏヮゲﾗﾐゲげi who are portrayed 2 as having oppositional personality traits, levels of intelligence and social skills. Focusing upon what is different about siblings encourages us to make comparisons between them and to conceptualise them in relation to one another. Furthermore, siblings are often heralded as a fitting test case for thinking through the formation of the self, with the identification of similarities and differences between siblings prompting debates ;Hﾗ┌デ けﾐ;デ┌ヴW ┗Wヴゲ┌ゲ ﾐ┌ヴデ┌ヴWげく The potential emotional effects of such comparisons is also the subject of much media intrigue and sibling relationships are often understood as being particularly imbued with rivalry or jealousy. This was evident in media coverage of the 2010 UK Labour Party leadership campaigns ﾗa HヴﾗデｴWヴゲ ES ;ﾐS D;┗ｷS MｷﾉｷH;ﾐS ┘ｴｷIｴ ｷﾐIﾉ┌SWS ｴW;SﾉｷﾐWゲ ゲ┌Iｴ ;ゲが けA tale of brotherly love: when siblings fall out and try to make up (Bennett, 2010) and the listing ﾗa ｷﾐa;ﾏﾗ┌ゲ aヴ;デWヴﾐ;ﾉ ヴｷ┗;ﾉゲ ｷﾐ デｴW ｴW;SﾉｷﾐWが け‘ﾗﾏ┌ﾉ┌ゲ ;ﾐS ‘Wﾏus, Prospero and Antonio, D;┗ｷS ;ﾐS ESげ ふHｷｪｪｷﾐゲが ヲヰヱヰぶく Despite this public fascination, sociology as a discipline has tended to focus on the role of parents in shaping who we are through socialisation. This is not to suggest that siblings have been overlooked entirely and there is growing empirical interest in sibling relationships amongst some sociologists. However, there remains an emphasis upon the significance of intergenerational transmission in the formation of the self and resultantly the role of intra-generational transmission remains largely unaccounted for in sociological theory. Think for W┝;ﾏヮﾉW ﾗa MW;Sげゲ ふヱΓンヴ) theory of the formation of the rel;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ゲWﾉa ;ﾐS Bﾗ┌ヴSｷW┌げゲ ふヱΓΓヰ) thesis on the inculcation of habitus, both of which have influenced much sociological thinking today and imply that the traits, tendencies and characteristics that make up the self largely pass downwards in the family with parents seen as crucial in both accounts. Of course the significance of intergenerational relationships, particularly with parents, should not be understated and as Brannen et al ;ヴｪ┌Wが けCｴｷﾉSヴWﾐげゲ ﾉｷ┗Wゲ ;ヴW ﾉｷ┗WS ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ デｴW ゲデヴ┌Iデ┌ヴ;ﾉ context of power in which adults regulate childreﾐげゲ HﾗSｷWゲ ;ﾐS ﾏｷﾐSゲげ (2000:178). However, it seems odd that siblings, who often share the same home and parents (and accordingly a very similar habitus or socialisation environment), have taken such ; けH;Iﾆ ゲW;デげ ｷﾐ sociological theory.ii Indeed, the study of sibling relationships has been largely dominated by psychology (Punch, 2008). Uゲｷﾐｪ WﾏヮｷヴｷI;ﾉ S;デ; aヴﾗﾏ ; ケ┌;ﾉｷデ;デｷ┗W ヮヴﾗﾃWIデ W┝ヮﾉﾗヴｷﾐｪ ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ┌ﾐSWヴゲデ;ﾐSｷﾐｪゲ ﾗa who they are and who they think they can become in the future, this article addresses this oversight by demonstrating how being and having brothers or sisters can have a profound impact upon ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ sense of self and the formation of their social identities. The article addresses issues of both self (understood in terms of processes of self-identification に our own sense of who we are, formed in relation to others) and identity (understood as a form of categorization に how others see us) (Jenkins, 2008). Self-identification and categorization are fundamentally relational (May, 2013) and in order to theorise the role of siblings in these processes, the article draws upon recent advancements in thinking about kinship and relatedness which conceptualise individuals as embedded within webs of relationships spanning space and time. Bengtson et al suggest that familial relationships be IﾗﾐIWヮデ┌;ﾉｷゲWS ｷﾐ デWヴﾏゲ ﾗa けﾉｷﾐﾆWS ﾉｷ┗Wゲげが Wﾏヮｴ;ゲｷゲｷﾐｪ けデｴW ｷﾐデWヴIﾗﾐﾐWIデWSﾐWゲゲ ﾗa ﾉｷ┗Wゲが particularly as linked across the generations by bonds oa ﾆｷﾐゲｴｷヮくげ ふヲヰヱヲぎ10) Building on this, Smart (2007) advocates the concept of embeddedness to help researchers conceptualise individual selves as formed through relationships with others - ヮ;ゲデ ;ﾐS ヮヴWゲWﾐデが けヴW;ﾉげ ;ﾐS imagined. C;ヴゲデWﾐげゲ ふヲヰヰヴぶ aﾗI┌ゲ ﾗﾐ けヴWﾉ;デWSﾐWゲゲげ ;ﾐS M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ ふヲヰヰヴぶ Wﾏヮｴ;ゲｷゲ ﾗﾐ 3 けヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉｷデ┞げ similarly conceptualise individual lives as inherently relational. Although not explicitly discussing siblings, this body of work moves beyond the parent-child dichotomy to emphasise the role of a whole host of others in shaping self-identification, often pointing to the telling of family stories and the sharing of memories in these processes (Thompson, 1993; Misztal, 2003; Smart, 2007). Siblings in Sociology Despite the lack of attention to lateral kin in sociological theories of self/identity, sibling relationships have received a passing mention in classic sociological studies such as Young ;ﾐS Wｷﾉﾉﾏﾗデデげゲ ふヱΓヵΑぶ Wデｴﾐﾗｪヴ;ヮｴ┞ ﾗa a;ﾏｷﾉ┞ ;ﾐS ﾆｷﾐゲｴｷヮ ;ﾐS J;Iﾆゲﾗﾐ ;ﾐS M;ヴゲSWﾐげゲ ふヱΓヶヲぶ ゲデ┌S┞ ﾗa ┘ﾗヴﾆｷﾐｪ Iﾉ;ゲゲ IｴｷﾉSヴWﾐげゲ W┝ヮWヴｷWﾐIWゲ ﾗa WS┌I;デｷﾗﾐく FｷﾐIｴ ;ﾐS M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ ふヱΓΓンぶ ゲデ┌S┞ ﾗa family negotiations also provides an insight into the complexities of sibling relationships. A number of researchers have more recently investigated everyday sibling interactions, applying a social constructionist approach. P┌ﾐIｴ aﾗヴ W┝;ﾏヮﾉW SWﾏﾗﾐゲデヴ;デWゲ ｴﾗ┘ IｴｷﾉSヴWﾐげゲ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮゲ ;ヴW けヮﾉ;┞WS ﾗ┌デ ｷﾐ デｴW H;Iﾆゲデ;ｪW IﾗﾐSｷデｷﾗﾐゲ ﾗa ゲｴ;ヴWS ﾆﾐowledge, time ;ﾐS ゲヮ;IWげ ふヲヰヰΒぎ342) and argues that relationships with siblings are less defined by fixed, generational power differentials than those with parents (2005). In a further analysis of data from the same study, McIntosh and Punch also indicate how birth order and age hierarchies ;ヴW けゲ┌H┗WヴデWSが IﾗﾐデWゲデWSが ヴWゲｷゲデWS ;ﾐS ﾐWｪﾗデｷ;デWSげ ふヲヰヰΓぎヶンぶ ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ IｴｷﾉSヴWﾐげゲ W┗Wヴ┞S;┞ sibling interactions. Brannen et al (2000) similarly point to the negotiated nature of sibling birth order and Mauthner (2005) highlights the dynamics of shifting subjectivities within sister relationships. ES┘;ヴSゲ Wデ ;ﾉげゲ ふヲヰヰヶぶ ゲデ┌S┞ ﾗa ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴips in middle childhood combines social constructionist and psychodynamic approaches, identifying the negotiated meanings and everyday ambivalences of being/having a sibling whilst also attending to social structures. This work was continued under the Timescapes programme of research (Edwards and Weller, 2011) where the evolution of gendered sibling relationships and the dynamics of sibling care and support were explored through time. In exploring exchanges of sibling support at school, work by Holland (2008), Hadfield et al (2006) and Gillies and Lucey (2006) also highlights the ambivalent nature of many sibling relationships, which can be highly conflictual whilst also characterised by emotional support. Here my focus is less on the everyday lived realities of interactions between siblings and more on how individual young people think about themselves in relation to their siblings. However, these detailed and insightful studies offer a powerful reminder that the narratives of self presented in this article ;ヴW HﾗヴﾐW ﾗ┌デ ﾗa デｴW ヮ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;ヴ W┗Wヴ┞S;┞ ﾆﾐﾗ┘ﾉWSｪW ﾗa ﾗﾐWげゲ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ ┘ｴｷch comes from growing up in close proximity (McIntosh and Punch, 2009). Work exploring the significance of similarities and differences between siblings provides valuable clues as to how siblings might influence processes of self-identification and categorization for individual young people. Edwards et al (2006) for example, point to the centrality of sameness and difference in the language of siblingship and the effect of this upon the ways young people construct their sense of self: Sameness and difference, then, are two of the key intersubjective notions that children and young people use when describing and reflecting upon their own sense of self, notions that are closely tied up with feelings about individuality and being part of a group, belonging, connection and separation, dependence and independence. (2006: 38) 4 In her anthropological account of kinship in a Malay fishing community, Carsten (1997) similarly identifies the concepts of identity, similarity and difference as fundamental to sibling relationships as well as being representative of reproduction and, as such, kinship itself: Siblingship is both about resemblance and identity and about difference. Simultaneously individual and multiple, it is the process by which things start the same, multiple entities in one body, but become different and separate: bodies within bodies. (1997:106) Song (2010) also explores issues of sameness and difference, pointing to ways that けmixed raceげ siblings can be constructed as ethnically different within family scripts due to identifying features such as friends, cultural taste and appearance. The importance of physical appearance to some families in “ﾗﾐｪげゲ research introduces a sense of embodiment to understandings of sibling similarities and differences. This attention to the impact of sibling similarities and differences upon processes of self-identification offers clues as to how being and having a sibling can influence the ways in which young people form ideas about who they are and who they might become as a person. It indicates how comparing is central to siblingship, with individuals conceptualised in relation to their sibling(s). In the remainder of this article I draw upon data from a qualitative study of ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ゲWﾐゲW ﾗa ｴﾗ┘ デｴW┞ ;ヴW けデ┌ヴﾐｷﾐｪ ﾗ┌デげ デﾗ SWﾏﾗﾐゲデヴate how identities can be constructed in relation to siblings within families. I suggest that these relational identities can be inculcated through the telling and re-telling of family stories within the politics and power dynamics of family relationships. The study This article is based upon a study investigating how young people make sense of the sort of person they are and can become in the future (in terms of their characteristics, appearance, talents, intelligence, humour and so on). TｴW ヴﾗﾉW ﾗa ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮゲ ┘WヴW ﾆW┞ and the study paid particular attention to how school peers, friends and siblings influenced their ideas about themselves. Parents are of course hugely important to these processes and, although they were not researched as a particular facet of the study, they were obliquely present throughout the research and their role in the creation of sibling identities are discussed at points throughout this article. The study comprised 26 qualitative interviews with 41 young people (17 boys, 24 girls) between the ages of 11 and 15 (including single interviews and interviews in pairs and groups of three) as well as 9 focus groups with 75 young people (31 girls, 41 boys) in the same age range. Participants were recruited in schools and youth clubs in the North West of England. All focus groups were conducted in secondary schools with interviews carried out in schools, youth clubs and homes between 2007 and 2008. The 26 qualitative interviews centred upon personal narratives and ┘WヴW ┌ゲWS デﾗ W┝ヮﾉﾗヴW ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ subjectivities and experiences. The 9 fﾗI┌ゲ ｪヴﾗ┌ヮ SｷゲI┌ゲゲｷﾗﾐゲ ┘WヴW SWゲｷｪﾐWS デﾗ W┝ヮﾉﾗヴW ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ﾗヮｷﾐｷﾗﾐゲ ;ﾐd theories about how identity can be constructed in a more abstract way. Although there were some cases in the project when interviews were conducted with a young ヮWヴゲﾗﾐげs sibling or friend, or when parents contributed to discussions; the primary focus was ﾗﾐ ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ﾗ┘ﾐ ヮWヴゲヮWIデｷ┗Wゲ ﾗa ｴﾗ┘ デｴWｷヴ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮゲ ｷﾐaﾉ┌WﾐIWS how they were けデ┌ヴﾐｷﾐｪ ﾗ┌デげ rather than on attempting to map these influences through a more networked 5 approach. However, those occasions when others participated in the research provided valuable insights into everyday interactions and this article draws upon one such interview interaction (involving the interviewer, young person and their mother) in discussing the role of wider family dynamics in the construction of sibling identities. Young people were recruited from three schools (one in a deprived area of a North West city, one in an affluent locale but with a catchment area incorporating both affluent and deprived areas and one in a predominantly lower middle class suburban area) and three youth clubs (one based in an affluent rural area, one serving young people on a deprived housing estate and one in a city centre location attracting children from diverse social backgrounds). Thus the sample contains children from a range of class backgrounds. However, in many cases it has not been possible to make definitive comments about young peopleげs social class HWI;┌ゲWが ;ﾉデｴﾗ┌ｪｴ ;ﾉﾉ ヮ;ヴデｷIｷヮ;ﾐデゲ ┘WヴW ;ゲﾆWS デﾗ ヮヴﾗ┗ｷSW SWデ;ｷﾉゲ ﾗa デｴWｷヴ ヮ;ヴWﾐデゲげ ﾗII┌ヮ;デｷﾗﾐが many were not in possession of this information. The sample is also ethnically mixed, with focus groups containing 27 non-white participants and the interviews 9. It is likely that the WaaWIデ ﾗa ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ ┌ヮﾗﾐ ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲ I;ﾐ ┗;ヴ┞ ;IIﾗヴSｷﾐｪ デﾗ WデｴﾐｷI ;ﾐS I┌ﾉデ┌ヴ;ﾉ background (see Mand, 2006 for a discussion of siblingship in South Asian families). However, due to the small number of participants in each ethnic group, it has not been possible to tease out such differences in this study. The sample includes young people with complex arrays of sibling relationships including full, step and half siblings, siblings who live in the same and SｷaaWヴWﾐデ ｴﾗﾏWゲが デｴﾗゲW ┘ｴﾗ I;ﾐ HW ゲ;ｷS デﾗ ｴ;┗W けｪヴﾗ┘ﾐ ┌ヮげ デﾗｪWデｴWヴ ;ﾐS ;ヮ;ヴデ ;ﾐS ﾗデｴWヴ relatives and friends who are understood to be けﾉｷﾆWげ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ ｷﾐ ┗;ヴｷﾗ┌ゲ ┘;┞ゲく AデデWﾐデｷﾗﾐ ｷゲ drawn to these intricacies where relevant throughout the following discussion but young people have not been categorised according to their position in the structure of the sibship due to the complexity and fluidity of these categories. The sample contains very few young people who do not havW ; ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪ ;ﾐS ; SｷゲI┌ゲゲｷﾗﾐ ﾗa デｴW W┝ヮWヴｷWﾐIWゲ ﾗa HWｷﾐｪ ;ﾐ けﾗﾐﾉ┞ IｴｷﾉSげ are beyond the scope of this article. Talking to young people about their lives in this way generated data depicting aspects of self/identity which were significant to them. Rather than the lengthy reflections which can characterise qualitative data with adults, young people in the study often spoke in seemingly light-ｴW;ヴデWS ┘;┞ゲ ;Hﾗ┌デ ｪWﾐWヴ;ﾉ ;ゲヮWIデゲ ﾗa デｴWｷヴ けヮWヴゲﾗﾐ;ﾉｷデ┞げ ;ﾐS ;ヮヮW;ヴ;ﾐIW. This article demonstrates how such discussions provide profound insights into what matters to young people when they are making sense of who they are. The data was analysed using both case study and thematic analysis. Case studies were used to understand processes and relationships and thematic analysis explored the spread of certain issues across the data set. The two sorts of analysis were used in conjunction, informing one another throughout the analytical process and this article draws upon both. Data identified through the thematic analysis of all interviews and focus groups is used to provide examples of the various ways in which young people spoke of their identities as constructed in relation to their sibling(s) before a case study is examined in depth to explore how these constructions were formed within a particular family. Although the narratives presented in this article are inherently gendered, the analysis identified no definitive differences in the ways boys and girls talked of the effect of their sibling relationships upon themselves beyond differences in the activities and forms of interactions in which brothers and sisters engage, which have been discussed elsewhere (Edwards et al, 2005). 6 The Relational Construction of Sibling Identity Analysis of the data demonstrated that participantsげ ideas about who they are and who they can become in the future are often formed in relation to their sibling(s). This can occur through young people making comparisons between themselves and their brothers/sisters as well as through comparisons made by others. These comparisons are embedded in relationships that span beyond the sibship, with other people appearing central to the identification of similarities and differences and participants often reproducing existing family narratives in making their own comparisons. Making comparisons: siblings and self-identification When asked to describe themselves and their siblings (in terms of traits, tendencies, talents, appearance and so on), most participants recited numerous ways in which they were similar or different to their siblings in terms of けpersonalityげ, appearance and education. Many respondents compared themselves to their siblings without being prompted to do so but what is striking about those who were specifically asked to make comparisons is that most required little or no time to consider their response, suggesting an existing narrative surrounding sibling similarities and differences which participants were able to readily draw upon (Gubrium and Holstein, 2008). Take the following examples: Oﾉｷ┗ｷ;ぎ WWﾉﾉが デｴW デ┘ﾗ デ┘ｷﾐゲが M;デデｴW┘ ;ﾐS KW┗ｷﾐが M;デデｴW┘げゲ ﾉｷﾆW ﾏWが H┌デ KW┗ｷﾐ ｷゲ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ﾉｷﾆW Jonathan. They, he goes off in strops, he had a really bad tantrum today. *** ‘ｷIｴ;ヴSぎ Iげﾏ ゲｷﾏｷﾉ;ヴ デﾗ ﾏ┞ ゲｷゲデWヴ H┌デ ﾐﾗデ デﾗ ﾏ┞ HヴﾗデｴWヴく M┞ HヴﾗデｴWヴげゲ ﾏﾗヴW ﾉｷﾆW ｴ┞ヮWヴ;Iデｷ┗Wぐ *** ‘WWIWぎ I デｴｷﾐﾆ Iげﾏ デｴW ゲ;ﾏWが ┘Wﾉﾉ ﾏ┞ ゲｷゲデWヴ ﾉﾗ┗Wゲ ゲヮﾗヴデ ;ゲ ┘Wﾉﾉ ;ﾐS I ﾉｷﾆW ゲヮﾗヴデ ;ﾐS ゲｴWげゲ ぐlike pretty ﾉﾗ┌S ;ﾐS IﾗﾐaｷSWﾐデ ;ﾐS Iげm loud and confident. Personal characteristics such ;ゲ けﾏﾗﾗSｷﾐWゲゲげが け;Iデｷ┗WﾐWゲゲげが けゲヮﾗヴデｷﾐWゲゲげ ﾗヴ けﾉﾗ┌SﾐWゲゲげ are significant aspects of how young people think about themselves and others and were key to how participants made sense of themselves in relation to their siblings. Differences were ヮ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;ヴﾉ┞ ゲ;ﾉｷWﾐデ デﾗ デｴW Iﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa デｴW ゲWﾉa ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ ; ゲｷHゲｴｷヮ ;ﾐS デヴ;ｷデゲ ゲ┌Iｴ ;ゲ けﾉﾗ┌SﾐWゲゲげ ﾗヴ けゲヮﾗヴデｷﾐWゲゲげ ┘WヴW ﾗaデWﾐ ;ヮヮﾉｷWS デｴヴﾗ┌ｪｴ mutually exclusive, oppositional labels. For example, young people commonly referred to a naughty or ｪﾗﾗS けﾗﾐWげ ｷﾐ デWヴﾏゲ of sibling behaviour (particularly at school). As Nick states of his oﾉSWヴ ゲｷゲデWヴゲが けEヴ “;ヴ; ﾗ┌デゲｷSWぐが she ┘;ゲ ﾉｷﾆW デｴW ｪﾗﾗS ﾗﾐWく ‘WHWII;が ゲｴWげゲ デｴW ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ﾐ;┌ｪｴデ┞ ﾗﾐWく Rebecca got excluded about, I デｴｷﾐﾆ ｷデげゲ ヲΑ デｷﾏWゲくげ It is significant that there is rarely a good two or three when it comes to describing sibling identities in common parlance. Take the following quote from Sadia: “;Sｷ;ぎ ぷSｷゲI┌ゲゲｷﾐｪ ｴWヴ WﾉSWゲデ ゲｷゲデWヴへ “ｴWげゲ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ;ヴｪ┌ﾏWﾐデ;デｷ┗Wく “ｴW ┘ﾗ┌ﾉSﾐげデ ﾉｷﾆW ｪｷ┗W ｷﾐく Eヴﾏが ゲｴW likes going out and just being by herself most of the time. ぐ Interviewer: What about your other sister? Sadia: Erm, she compromises us both. She does like, she mainly does all the work at home. She ｴWﾉヮゲ ﾏW ﾗ┌デ ;ゲ ┘Wﾉﾉ ┘ｷデｴ ﾏ┞ S;S ;ﾐS W┗Wヴ┞デｴｷﾐｪ WﾉゲWく “ｴWげゲ ﾉｷﾆW デｴW ｪﾗﾗS ﾗﾐWく 7 ぐ Interviewerぎ “ﾗ ｷa ゲｴWげゲ デｴW ｪﾗﾗS ﾗﾐWが ┘ｴ;デ ﾗﾐW ;ヴW ┞ﾗ┌ ┘ﾗ┌ﾉS ┞ﾗ┌ ゲ;┞い Sadia: Erm, I think Iげﾏ デｴW ﾐ;┌ｪｴデ┞ ﾗﾐWぐ (age 14) The way Sadia describes ﾗﾐW ゲｷゲデWヴ ;ゲ けIﾗﾏヮヴﾗﾏｷゲｷﾐｪげ デｴW ﾗデｴWヴ ﾉWゲゲ ｴWﾉヮa┌ﾉ ;ﾐS ┘Wﾉﾉ HWｴ;┗WS sisters is illuminating in that it suggests an understanding that, when taken together, the characteristics of the three sisters form a well balanced whole. “;Sｷ; ｷゲ デｴW けﾐ;┌ｪｴデ┞ ﾗﾐWげ because her sisters are not and this identity is of course also constructed within the complex gendered dynamics of these relationships. Thus it seems that in narrating themselves and their sibling(s) in terms of being the naughty, quiet, good ﾗヴ IﾉW┗Wヴ けﾗﾐWげが ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉW ;ヴW Iﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾐｪ デｴWｷヴ ﾗ┘ﾐ Iｴ;ヴ;IデWヴｷゲデｷIゲ ｷﾐ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ to the sibship as a whole. These ways that young people narrateS デｴWｷヴ ﾗ┘ﾐ ;ﾐS デｴWｷヴ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ identities points to the centrality of sameness and difference in sibling relationships (as identified by Edwards et al, 2006) with individuality constructed in relation to the sibling group. As well as constructing these coﾏヮ;ヴｷゲﾗﾐゲ ;ヴﾗ┌ﾐS ;ゲヮWIデゲ ﾗa けIｴ;ヴ;IデWヴげが ｷデ ┘;ゲ ;ﾉゲﾗ common for participants to narrate themselves in terms of how they are similar or different in appearance to their siblings.iii Tｴｷゲ ｷゲ ヴWﾏｷﾐｷゲIWﾐデ ﾗa “ﾗﾐｪげゲ ふヲヰヱヰぶ ┘ﾗヴﾆが ┘ｴWヴW デｴW importance of similaritiWゲ ;ﾐS SｷaaWヴWﾐIWゲ ｷﾐ ;ヮヮW;ヴ;ﾐIW ;ﾏﾗﾐｪゲデ けﾏｷ┝WS ヴ;IWげ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ ┘WヴW fundamental to the construction of sense of self and of ethnic identity. For example, SｷゲI┌ゲゲｷﾐｪ ｴWヴ HヴﾗデｴWヴが Lﾗｷゲ ゲデ;デWゲ デｴ;デ けW┗Wヴ┞ﾗﾐW ゲ;┞ゲ I ﾉﾗﾗﾆ ﾉｷﾆW ｴｷﾏ ｷﾐ デｴW a;IWが Iげ┗W ｪﾗデ ｴｷゲ noseが Iげ┗W ｪﾗデ ｴｷゲ W┞Wゲが Iげ┗W ｪﾗデ ｴｷゲ ﾉｷヮゲげ and Poppy sums up the differences between her and her sister by relating their appearance to that of their parents: けI ﾉﾗﾗﾆ ﾉｷﾆW ﾏ┞ S;Sが ;ﾐS ﾏ┞ ゲｷゲデWヴ ﾉﾗﾗﾆゲ ﾉｷﾆW ﾏ┞ ﾏ┌ﾏ ┘ｴWﾐ ﾏ┞ ﾏ┌ﾏ ┘;ゲ ﾉｷデデﾉWくげ In the following example Georgia cites physical attractiveness and build as a way of differentiating herself from her half sister and of explaining their differing levels of social success at school: GWﾗヴｪｷ;ぎ Eヴﾏが ﾏ┞ HヴﾗデｴWヴげゲが ﾉｷﾆWが ゲﾗヴデ ﾗa デｴW ｪﾗﾗS ﾉﾗﾗking boy out of everybody else sort of thing, W┝IWヮデ ｴW ﾉﾗﾗﾆゲ ﾉｷﾆW ﾏ┞ S;SぐAIデ┌;ﾉﾉ┞が ｴW ﾉﾗﾗﾆゲ ﾉｷﾆW ﾏWく M┞ ゲｷゲデWヴぐが ゲｴWげゲ ケ┌ｷデW ゲｴﾗヴデ ;ﾐSが Wヴﾏが ゲｴWげゲ ﾉｷﾆW ヮヴWデデ┞ Hｷｪが ゲﾗ ゲｴWげゲ ; Hｷデ SｷaaWヴWﾐデ デﾗ ﾏW Iﾗゲ ﾗa デｴ;デ ゲﾗヴデ ﾗa デｴｷﾐｪぐゲﾗ ゲｴWげゲ ﾗH┗ｷﾗ┌ゲﾉ┞ ; Hｷデ different to me at school. (age 11) Here Georgia is conceptualising the appearance of her siblings in relation to the sibship as a whole in a similar way デﾗ “;Sｷ;げゲ SWゲIヴｷヮデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa HWｷﾐｪ デｴW けﾐ;┌ｪｴデ┞ ﾗﾐWげ SWゲIヴｷHWS W;ヴﾉｷWヴ. The complexities of family resemblances and theories of who takes after who and how and why things get passed on in families are IﾉW;ヴﾉ┞ ┘ﾗ┗Wﾐ ｷﾐデﾗ GWﾗヴｪｷ;げゲ ﾐ;ヴヴ;デｷ┗W ﾗa デｴW ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ Iﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa ｴWヴ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ ゲWﾉ┗Wゲ at school. She provides these categorisations with an explanatory history and indicates the entwining of physicality and character in the construction of sibling similarities and differences. It was also common for educational achievement to be understood relationally, with younger siblings in the sample often measuring their own success, or lack thereof, in terms of their perceived similarities to and differences from older siblings who had gone through the education system before. Take the following example from Francesca, whose struggles to 8 adapt to secondary school are compounded by the fact that her older sister, Anna, had けゲWデデﾉWS ｷﾐげ ケ┌ｷIﾆWヴぎ Francesca: my mum ぐ SﾗWゲﾐげデ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ┘;ﾐデ ﾏW デﾗ ﾏﾗ┗W ゲIｴﾗﾗﾉゲ ;ﾐS ぐ ゲｴW ゲ;┞ゲ デｴ;デが けTｴｷゲ ｷゲ ｴﾗ┘ ｷデ ┘;ゲ ┘ｷデｴ Aﾐﾐ; ｷﾐ YW;ヴ Αげ ;ﾐSが ;ﾐSが ﾉｷﾆWが ;ﾐS け┘ｴWﾐ ゲｴW aｷヴゲデ I;ﾏW デﾗ ; ﾐW┘ ゲIｴﾗﾗﾉげが H┌デ デｴW デｴｷﾐｪ ｷゲが Aﾐﾐ;が Aﾐﾐ; ゲWデデﾉWS ｷﾐ ;デが ﾉｷﾆWが デｴW WﾐS ﾗa YW;ヴ Α ;ﾐS Iげ┗W ゲデｷﾉﾉ ﾐﾗデが ｷデげゲ ﾃ┌ゲデ ﾉｷﾆWぐ (age 12) This emphasis on similarities and differences between siblings at school was often experienced as placing pressure on (mainly) younger siblings. Aゲ Eデｴ;ﾐ ふヱヲぶ ゲデ;デWゲが けHﾗデｴ ﾏ┞ HヴﾗデｴWヴゲ ｴ;┗W HWWﾐ ｴW;S Hﾗ┞が ;ﾐS デｴW┞げ┗W ｪﾗデ ﾉｷﾆW デｴW HWゲデ ﾏ;ヴﾆゲ ｷﾐ デｴW ┞W;ヴくくくゲﾗ Iげﾏ ヮヴWデデ┞が like, got lo;Sゲ ﾗa ヮヴWゲゲ┌ヴW ﾗﾐ ﾏWくげ In the following focus group discussion, Tom describes the pressures and anxieties he experiences as a result of ｴ;┗ｷﾐｪ ; けIﾉW┗Wヴげ ﾗﾉSWヴ ゲｷゲデWヴ: Tom: I think Iげﾏ ﾐW┗Wヴ ｪﾗﾐﾐ; HW ;ゲ IﾉW┗Wヴ ;ゲ ﾏW ゲｷゲデWヴ H┌デ I Sﾗﾐげデ ┘;ﾐデ ﾏ┞ ﾏ┌ﾏ ;ﾐS S;S to like, you ﾆﾐﾗ┘が デｴｷﾐﾆ I ゲｴﾗ┌ﾉS Wヴﾏくくく┘ｴ;デげゲ デｴW ┘ﾗヴSい “ﾗaｷ;ぎ Yﾗ┌げヴW ﾐﾗデ ｪﾗﾗS Wﾐﾗ┌ｪｴい Tom: Ye;ｴ デｴｷﾐﾆ Iげﾏ ﾐﾗデ ｪﾗﾗS Wﾐﾗ┌ｪｴ ;ﾐd ﾉｷﾆW デヴ┞ ;ﾐS ﾏ;ﾆW ﾏW ;ゲ ｪﾗﾗS ;ゲ ｴWヴ ┘ｴWﾐ I ﾆﾐﾗ┘ I I;ﾐげデ ゲﾗ ｷデげゲ ;ﾐﾐﾗ┞ｷﾐｪ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞く Iデ ゲI;ヴWゲ ﾏW ┘ｴWﾐ I ゲWW ;ﾉﾉ デｴW ┘ﾗヴﾆ ゲｴWげゲ Sﾗｷﾐｪが I デｴｷﾐﾆ けIげ┗W ｪﾗデ デﾗ Sﾗ デｴ;デ ﾗﾐW S;┞げく Iデげゲ ;ﾐﾐﾗ┞ｷﾐｪく (age: 13-14) These anxieties and pressures are examples of how practices of comparing and the Iﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa デｴW ゲWﾉa ｷﾐ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ デﾗ ﾗﾐWげゲ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪふゲぶ can fuel the ambivalences and feelings of both closeness and distance that often characterise sibling relationshipsく Yﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ progression through the life course is often tied to that of their sibling and the quotations above indicate how older siblings can act as benchmarks against which their younger brothers and sisters make sense of their own experiences and achievements. Despite McIntosh and P┌ﾐIｴげゲ ふヲヰヰΓぶ aｷﾐSｷﾐｪ デｴ;デ birth order is negotiated and contested within sibling interactions in the home, it appears that age hierarchies can be experienced as particularly static in terms of educational achievement where young people are categorised according to age and where the measurement of individual performance at particular ages invites comparison. Although young people are often compared to a wide range of others, particularly their friends and peers, the relational nature of the comparing that occurs between siblings renders it unique. Indeed, although a detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this article, the data indicates that participants often compared themselves to their friends. However, although significant, these comparisons were not perpetuated by others to the same degree as those with siblings which were deeply embedded in family politics. In the following section I examine the comparisons made by others in more detail. Being compared: siblings and categorization In addition to identifying similarities and differences themselves, participants also referred to the ways others commonly compared them to their siblings, categorizing them and constructing their identity in relation to their brothers/sisters. This was evident in the way Fヴ;ﾐIWゲI;げゲ ﾏ┌ﾏ Iﾗﾏヮ;ヴWS ｴWヴ デﾗ ｴWヴ ゲｷゲデWヴ Aﾐﾐ; in the earlier quotation and in Tﾗﾏげゲ aW;ヴゲ that he would けﾐever be as cle┗Wヴ ;ゲ ﾏW ゲｷゲデWヴげく Participants were also compared to their 9 sibling(s) by teachers, a practice that was commonly perceived as irritating and, in some cases, unethical. Take the following examples: Tomぎ “ﾗﾏW ﾗa デｴW デW;IｴWヴゲ ┘ｴﾗげ┗W デW;IｴWS [sic] my sister デｴヴﾗ┌ｪｴﾗ┌デ デｴW ┘ｴﾗﾉW ┞W;ヴゲ ゲ;┞ け┘ｴ┞ I;ﾐげデ ┞ﾗ┌ ﾃ┌ゲデ HW ﾉｷﾆW ┞ﾗ┌ヴ ゲｷゲデWヴいげ Cﾗゲ ゲｴW ﾐW┗Wヴ デ;ﾉﾆゲ ﾗヴ ┘ｴ;デW┗Wヴ ;ﾐS Iげﾏ ;ﾉ┘;┞ゲ デ;ﾉﾆｷﾐｪ ;ﾐS ┞ﾗ┌ ﾃ┌ゲデ ｪWデ annoyed and they try and make me the same as my sister. *** Kyle: M┞ HヴﾗデｴWヴげゲ ﾐﾗデ デｴ;デ ｪﾗﾗS ;デ ゲIｴﾗﾗﾉ ゲﾗ デｴW┞ ぷデｴW デW;IｴWヴゲへ デｴﾗ┌ｪｴデ デｴ;デ I ┘ﾗ┌ﾉSﾐげデ HW デｴ;デ good either but I actually am. *** F;ヴｴ;ﾐ;ぎ I デｴｷﾐﾆ デｴW┞ ぷデｴW デW;IｴWヴゲへ デWﾐSWS ﾉｷﾆWが けOｴ ┞ﾗ┌ヴ ﾗﾉSWヴ ゲｷゲデWヴ ┘;ゲ ﾉｷﾆW ; ﾉﾗデ Iｴ;デデ┞ ┞ﾗ┌ ﾆﾐﾗ┘ you seem quite quiet.げ It is the lateral nature of siblingship that invites such comparisons. McIntosh and Punch (2009) are critical of the use of the ┘ﾗヴS けﾉ;デWヴ;ﾉげ デﾗ SWゲIヴｷHW ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮゲ HWI;┌ゲW ｷデ ｷﾏヮﾉｷWゲ an equality which ignores power differentials between siblings. However, sibling relationships can be seen as lateral in the sense that siblings are often of the same generation and experience more readily comparable education systems, job markets and cultural signifiers than, say, children and their parents, thus tempting people to look across a generation and make comparisons. This comparing is encouraged by the fact that siblings often reach developmental and educational milestones in close succession and, for parents in particular, their other children are likely to be their main points of reference when thinking about how ; ヮ;ヴデｷI┌ﾉ;ヴ IｴｷﾉS ｷゲ けデ┌ヴﾐｷﾐｪ ﾗ┌デげ. Furthermore, as Carsten identifies, full siblings are unique in デｴ;デ デｴW┞ けゲデ;ヴデ デｴW ゲ;ﾏWげ HWaﾗヴW HWIﾗﾏｷﾐｪ けSｷaaWヴWﾐデ ;ﾐS ゲWヮ;ヴ;デWげ ふヱΓΓΑぎヱヰヶぶく Tｴ┌ゲが comparability is inherently part of siblingship since birth. This comparability was something that young people in the study were particularly reflexive about and all focus groups contained discussions of how this comparing can occur. Take the following discussion where participants debate the pattern of these comparing practices: Interviewer: What are the advantages and disadvantages of being the youngest do you think? Participant1: (inaudible) pressure to be like your older brother or sister. Interviewerぎ ‘ｷｪｴデく “ﾗ デｴｷゲ ヮヴWゲゲ┌ヴW ぐ ｷゲ デｴ;デ ┘ﾗヴゲW ｷa ┞ﾗ┌げ┗W ｪﾗデ ;ﾐ ﾗﾉSWヴ HヴﾗデｴWヴ ﾗヴ ゲｷゲデWヴい Participant1ぎ PヴﾗH;Hﾉ┞ Iﾗゲ ｷデげゲ ﾉｷﾆW ┞ﾗ┌ ゲｴﾗ┌ﾉS HW ﾏﾗヴW ﾉｷﾆW デｴWﾏく Participant2: Yeah but not always cos the oldest is always compared to the parents. Interviewer: Do you think? Participant2: Yeah, because thereげゲ ﾐﾗ-one else. ぐ Participant1ぎ YW;ｴが H┌デ デｴW ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪWヴ IｴｷﾉS I;ﾐ HW Iﾗﾏヮ;ヴWS ┘ｷデｴ デｴW ﾗﾉSWヴ ﾗﾐWく “ﾗ ｷデげゲ ; ﾉﾗデ ﾉｷﾆW closer. ぐ Participant3: Sometimes the younger children are compared to the adults though aren't they? Participant4: To the parents. (age 14-15) This quote conveys the idea that there are patterns (even rules) concerning who is compared to whom in families which relate to family structures (birth order and generational positionings), even if there is little agreement about what these patterns are. Indeed, most of the examples cited thus far have indicated the role of others in the construction of sibling relational identities, from the ways participants appeared to be reproducing well rehearsed 10 narratives when reciting the similarities and differences between themselves and their siblings to the specific references to teachersげ ;ﾐS ヮ;ヴWﾐデゲげ ｴ;Hｷデゲ ﾗa Iﾗﾏヮ;ヴｷﾐｪ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ. The comparisons of others were generally readily adopted by young people and often seemed to form a taken for granted aspect of their kinship knowledge. Tｴｷゲ ｷゲ WヮｷデﾗﾏｷゲWS ｷﾐ Lﾗｷゲげゲ ┌ゲW ﾗa デｴW ヮｴヴ;ゲW けW┗Wヴ┞ﾗﾐW ゲ;┞ゲげ when discussing her physical likeness to her brother in the aforementioned quotation. This section of the article has demonstrated some of the ways in which young people construct their own sense of self and are categorized by others in relation to their siblings, as part of a larger whole. Furthermore, it appears that even those comparisons that are made by young people themselves are done so from within wider familial relationships, with the reproduction of rehearsed narratives common in the data. Tｴ┌ゲ ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪ relationships are firmly embedded within a wider network of relationships (Smart, 2007). But how are these narratives of similarity and difference perpetuated and how do they relate to wider familial power dynamics? In the following section I turn to work exploring the social significance of stories in order to start to theorise how these relational sibling identities can be constructed. The Role of Stories in the Construction of Sibling Identities We are, it seems, homo narrans: humankind the narrators and story tellers. Society itself may be seen as a textured but seamless web of stories emerging everywhere through interaction: holding people together, pulling people apart, making societies work. (Plummer, 1995: 5, original emphasis) According to Plummer, the telling of stories is central to social life and forms the basis of the social world around us. Indeed, a number of scholars have identified the key role that stories play in the construction of identity. Lawler (2008) and Gubrium and Holstein (2000) for example, point to the effect of stories on individuals, with both arguing that identity is created through narrative. TｴW ゲWﾉaが ;IIﾗヴSｷﾐｪ デﾗ G┌Hヴｷ┌ﾏ ;ﾐS HﾗﾉゲデWｷﾐ けｷゲ ﾐﾗデ ﾗﾐﾉ┞ ゲﾗﾏWデｴｷﾐｪ ┘W ;ヴWが but an object we actively conゲデヴ┌Iデ ;ﾐS ﾉｷ┗W H┞げ ふヲヰヰヰぎ10, original emphasis) through everyday けﾐ;ヴヴ;デｷ┗W ヮヴ;IデｷIWげ ふヲヰヰヰぎ104). Important to understandings of stories are the ways they are produced collectively, and as such are subject to the politics and power dynamics of the interpersonal relationships within which they are created. Misztal for example, discusses how memory is constructed communally through the telling of stories in けﾏﾐWﾏﾗﾐｷI Iﾗﾏﾏ┌ﾐｷデｷWゲげ -けｪヴﾗ┌ヮゲ デｴ;デ ゲﾗIｷ;ﾉｷ┣W us to what should be remembered and what should HW aﾗヴｪﾗデデWﾐげ ふヲヰヰンぎ15) にand, as discussed, Song (2010) highlights the role of family scripts in the construction of けmixed raceげ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ WデｴﾐｷI ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲく Thompson (1993) also emphasises how individuals are actually デWﾉﾉｷﾐｪ けa;ﾏｷﾉ┞げ ゲデories in the narratives they (re)produce in qualitative interviews. These stories are passed on in families as a form of social transmission and are part of the context through which individuals make decisions about their future: Family myths, models, and denials, transmitted within a family system provide for most people part of the context in which their crucial life choices must be made, propelling them into their own individual life paths. (Thompson, 1993:36) 11 Therefore, stories can be understood as part of how relationality (Mason, 2004) comes to affect individuals and the ways they act upon themselves. I suggest that the construction, telling and re-telling of stories within families can be seen as ; ﾏWIｴ;ﾐｷゲﾏ デｴヴﾗ┌ｪｴ ┘ｴｷIｴ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲ I;ﾐ be produced and reproduced. A sense of this was gained in the ways participants reproduced rehearsed narratives when narrating their similarities to and differences from their sibling(s). Young people have considerable agency in this process and do not simply reproduce the stories of others. IﾐSWWSが デｴW S;デ; Iﾗﾐデ;ｷﾐゲ W┝;ﾏヮﾉWゲ ﾗa ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉW ヴWﾃWIデｷﾐｪ ﾗデｴWヴゲげ narratives of similarity and difference or constructing narratives based on their own opinions ;Hﾗ┌デ デｴWｷヴ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲく However, these stories occurred less commonly than those where participants seemed to be reproducing narratives provided by others (usually parents). Take the following example where Britney is discussing her cousin Joseph (who she describes ;ゲ HWｷﾐｪ けﾉｷﾆWげ ; HヴﾗデｴWヴ). Although Britney is critical of her mum and uncle for comparing her to Joseph and attempts to reclaim the narrative by pointing to her own unique talents, she ultimately accepts their depiction of Joseph as more intelligent: BヴｷデﾐW┞ぎ LｷﾆW I ｪWデ ｷデ ; ﾉﾗデ Iﾗゲ ｴWげゲ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ゲﾏ;ヴデ ;ﾐS Iげﾏ ﾐﾗデく Iげﾏ ﾉｷﾆW ﾏﾗヴW ﾗa デｴW Iｴ;デデ┞ ヮWヴゲﾗﾐく HWげゲ the one that concentrates and gets down, buckles down. And like my mum and uncle Nigel and W┗Wヴ┞ﾗﾐWげゲ ﾉｷﾆWが けWｴ┞ I;ﾐげデ ┞ﾗ┌ HW ﾏﾗヴW ﾉｷﾆW JﾗゲWヮｴいげ ;ﾐS ｷデ Sヴｷ┗Wゲ ﾏW ｷﾐゲ;ﾐWく Tｴ;デ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ SﾗWゲ ｪWデ ﾗﾐ ﾏ┞ ﾐWヴ┗Wゲ Iﾗゲ Iげ┗W ｴ;S ｷデ ゲ;ｷS デﾗ ﾏW ゲﾗ ﾏ┌Iｴ Iげﾏ ﾉｷﾆWが けWWﾉﾉ Iげﾏ デヴ┞ｷﾐｪぎ Dﾗﾐげデ ┞ﾗ┌が Sﾗﾐげデ ┞ﾗ┌ ﾉｷゲデWﾐ デﾗ ┘ｴ;デ Iげﾏ ゲ;┞ｷﾐｪいげ Iげﾏ ｪﾗﾗS ;デ ;ヴデく HWげゲ ﾐﾗデく WWげヴW Sｷfferent. (age 12) Furthermore, in those interviews where a parent was present for the conversation it appeared that young people had less power to control the story that was told and were often interrupted or corrected by their parent when they strayed from existing family scripts. AｷSWﾐげゲ ;デデWﾏヮデゲ デﾗ SWゲIヴｷHW ｴｷゲ ゲｷHﾉings are a good example of this. Not only do we see him ｷﾐIﾗヴヮﾗヴ;デｷﾐｪ ｴｷゲ ﾏﾗデｴWヴげゲ SWゲIヴｷヮデｷﾗﾐゲ ｷﾐデﾗ ｴｷゲ ﾐ;ヴヴ;デｷ┗W H┌デ ┘W ゲWW ｴWヴ SｷIデ;デｷﾐｪ the sorts of characteristics discussed: Aiden: Er, Claireが ゲｴWげゲが ﾉｷﾆWが ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ｷﾐデﾗ Sヴ;┘ｷﾐｪく Davidが ｴWげゲく MﾗデｴWヴぎ Nﾗが ┘ｴ;デげゲ ｴWヴ ヮWヴゲﾗﾐ;ﾉｷデ┞が ﾉｷﾆW デｴﾗ┌ｪｴい Aiden: Like, happy, as well as me. MﾗデｴWヴぎ “ｴWげゲ ┗Wヴ┞ ゲWﾐゲｷデｷ┗Wが ｷゲﾐげデ ゲｴWい Aiden: Like, sensitive as well. David is, like grumpy... Chelsea, erm, ゲｴWげゲ ﾏﾗヴW ﾉｷﾆWが getting into boyfriends, and stuff like that. And Amy. MﾗデｴWヴぎ Yﾗ┌ Sﾗﾐげデ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ﾆﾐﾗ┘が Sﾗ ┞ﾗ┌い “ｴW ｴ;ゲﾐげデ ﾉｷ┗WS ;デ ｴﾗﾏW aﾗヴ ; ┘ｴｷﾉWが ｴ;ゲ ゲｴWい AｷSWﾐぎ I Sﾗﾐげデ ヴW;ﾉﾉ┞ ﾆﾐﾗ┘く (age 12) Having a parent present during interviews created what Gubrium and Holstein (2008) would デWヴﾏ ; SｷaaWヴWﾐデ けﾐ;ヴヴ;デｷ┗W Wﾐ┗ｷヴﾗﾐﾏWﾐデげ ;ﾐS デｴW ゲデﾗヴｷWゲ ｪWﾐWヴ;デWS by these interviews reflect this difference. The ways in which stories are constructed within the dynamics and politics of existing relationships came across clearly in those interviews conducted with a parent present. I now examine a particular interview where parent-child interactions occurred throughout デﾗ W┝ヮﾉﾗヴW デｴW S┞ﾐ;ﾏｷIゲ ﾗa ヮﾗ┘Wヴ ｷﾐ デｴWゲW けﾐ;ヴヴ;デｷ┗W Wﾐ┗ｷヴﾗﾐﾏWﾐデゲげ ｷﾐ ﾏﾗヴW 12 detail. By analysing one interview as a whole it is possible to illuminate how stories of sibling relational identity can be constructed within complex webs of relationships. Politics and power in the communal construction of family stories: The case of Mason and his half-brother The politics and power dynamics ;デ デｴW ｴW;ヴデ ﾗa ゲデﾗヴｷWゲ ;Hﾗ┌デ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ;ﾉ ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲ were particularly observable in an interview with Mason (age 13) where his mother, who sat in on most of the interview, interjected during a discussion about similarities and differences HWデ┘WWﾐ M;ゲﾗﾐ ;ﾐS ｴｷゲ ｴ;ﾉa HヴﾗデｴWヴく M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ mother and father are divorced (Mason lives with his mother but sees his father regularly) and he has a half brother, Zack, whom his father had in another relationship. Zack is 1 year older than Mason and attends the same school although they have never lived together. The discussion between Mason, his mother and the interviewer offers insights into how and why a narrative about the differences between Mason and his half-brother might have been collectively constructed: Motherぎ AﾐS デｴW┞げヴW [Mason and Zack] completely opposite. You both went to the same school ;ﾐS デｴW デW;IｴWヴゲ I;ﾐげデ HWﾉｷW┗W ┞ﾗ┌げヴW HヴﾗデｴWヴゲく ぐ M;ゲﾗﾐぎ ぷWWげヴW] really, like, different and they [school teachers] expect me to be like my brother. Like, good at art and not that good at maths and Englishく B┌デ ｷデげゲ デｴW ﾗヮヮﾗゲｷデW aﾗヴ ﾏWき Iげﾏ ﾐﾗデ デｴ;デ ｪﾗﾗS ;デ ;ヴデが H┌デ Iげﾏ ｪﾗﾗS ;デ ﾏaths and English. ぐ Mother: He is [good at art]く B┌デ ｴW デｴｷﾐﾆゲ ｴWげゲ ﾐﾗデ HWデデWヴ デｴ;ﾐ );Iﾆく M;ゲﾗﾐぎ Iげﾏ ﾐﾗデが Iげﾏ ﾐﾗデ デｴ;デ ｪﾗﾗS デｴﾗ┌ｪｴく Motherぎ Nﾗが H┌デ ┞ﾗ┌げ┗W SﾗﾐW ┗Wヴ┞ ｪﾗﾗSく ぐ Motherぎ Tｴ;デげゲが ゲﾗヴヴ┞が デｴ;デげゲ デｴW ﾗﾐﾉ┞ aWWSH;Iﾆ I ｪﾗデ ┘ｴWﾐ I ┘Wﾐデ デﾗ ｴｷゲ ヮ;ヴWﾐデげゲ W┗Wﾐｷﾐｪ ｷﾐ M;ヴIｴが no one Iﾗ┌ﾉS HWﾉｷW┗W デｴ;デ ｴWぐデｴW┞ I;ﾐげデ HWﾉｷW┗W デｴ;デ );Iﾆ ｷゲ ｴｷゲ HヴﾗデｴWヴく Tｴ;デげゲ ;ﾉﾉ ┘W ｪﾗデく Interviewer: (To Mason): What do you think of that? Motherぎ AﾐS デｴW ﾏ;ﾐﾐWヴｷゲﾏゲく AﾐS I SｷSﾐげデ ┌ﾐSWヴゲデ;ﾐS ;デ aｷヴゲデが ;ﾐS I ゲ;ｷSが Iﾗゲ ｴWげゲ ぷZack] lovely ┘ｷデｴ ﾏWが H┌デ Iげﾏ ┗Wヴ┞ ゲデヴｷIデが ┘Wﾉﾉ ﾐﾗデ ゲデヴｷIデが H┌デ I Sﾗﾐげデ ｴ;┗W IｴｷﾉSヴWﾐ デ;ﾉﾆｷﾐｪ H;Iﾆく “ﾗ ｴWが ┘ｴWﾐ ｴW IﾗﾏWゲが ┘ｴWﾐ ｴWげゲ HWWﾐ ｴWヴW ｴWげゲ ﾉﾗ┗Wﾉ┞ ┘ｷデｴ ﾏWが H┌デ ﾗ┌デゲｷSW デｴ;デ Sﾗﾗヴが ｴWげゲ IﾗﾏヮﾉWデWﾉ┞ぐ In this example a multitude of voices (Masonげゲ, his motherげゲ ;ﾐS デｴW Hﾗ┞ゲげ デW;IｴWヴゲぶ are contributing to the narrative of Mason and Zack as very different. Mason and his mother are in agreement that the brothers are different but, whereas Mason concentrates on academic differences, his mother focuses on differences in character, mannerisms and, ultimately, upbringing. It is also clear that it is the ﾏﾗデｴWヴげゲ ┗ﾗｷIW ┘ｴｷIｴ Sﾗﾏｷﾐ;デWゲ and デｴW ｷﾐデWヴ┗ｷW┘Wヴげゲ attempts to provide Mason with the opportunity to contribute his own take on his differences with Zack largely fail, with his mother jumping in to respond to questions on his behalf. The relative powerlessness of the young people in the story is notable and the dominant role of M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ mother in the interview interaction provides ; けﾉｷ┗Wげ W┝;mple of her power in shaping the story that is told. It is likely デｴ;デ M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ mother has strong motivations for wanting to construct the two brothers as different. First, she seems W;ｪWヴ デﾗ Hﾗﾗゲデ M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ IﾗﾐaｷSWﾐIW ;ﾐS Wnsure he sees himself as equal, if not superior, in intelligence and academic success to Zack (she rejects the 13 narrative of the brothers having different skills and insists that Mason is also good at art). Secondが ゲｴW ｷゲ Sｷ┗ﾗヴIWS aヴﾗﾏ M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ a;デｴWヴ ;ﾐS H┞ Iﾗﾐゲデヴ┌Iデｷﾐｪ ｴｷゲ ゲﾗﾐ, Zack, as badly behaved and Mason as so different, she is able to draw attention to differences she perceives between her own and her ex-ヮ;ヴデﾐWヴげゲ ヮ;ヴWﾐデｷﾐｪ ゲﾆｷﾉﾉゲく As such, a narrative is produced constructing the brothers as opposites and creating relational memories about what the boys were like at school and growing up more generallyく Iデ ｷゲ ｷﾐデWヴWゲデｷﾐｪ ｴﾗ┘ M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ mother adds a┌ヴデｴWヴ ┘Wｷｪｴデ デﾗ ｴWヴ Iﾉ;ｷﾏゲ H┞ Sヴ;┘ｷﾐｪ ┌ヮﾗﾐ ┘ｴ;デ デW;IｴWヴゲ ｴ;┗W デﾗﾉS ｴWヴ ;ゲ ; ﾆｷﾐS ﾗa けW┝ヮWヴデげ corroboration of the points she makes; narrative devices which strengthen her version of the story. Although parents were only present in 3 interviews in the study, this example indicates how stories about sibling identities can come to be formed within families and the role of power and generation within this, illustrating how stories are embedded within existing relationships and relational historiesく M;ゲﾗﾐ ;ﾐS );Iﾆげゲ ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲ ;ヴW ゲWSｷﾏWﾐデWS ｷﾐデﾗ デｴW ｴｷゲデﾗヴ┞ ﾗa M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ ヮ;ヴWﾐデゲげ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮ ┘ｷデｴ ﾗﾐW ;ﾐﾗデｴWヴく Tｴ┌ゲが ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪ ｷSWﾐデｷデｷWゲ I;ﾐ HW constructed not only in relation to other siblings in the family but also in relation to complex webs of relationships with and between others formed over timeく Iﾐ ﾗデｴWヴ ┘ﾗヴSゲが ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ﾉｷ┗Wゲ are fundamentally relational (Carsten, 2004), embedded (Smart, 2007) and linked (Bengtson et al, 2012). Conclusion This article has identified how the comparative nature of sibling relationships can render them a┌ﾐS;ﾏWﾐデ;ﾉ デﾗ デｴW aﾗヴﾏ;デｷﾗﾐ ﾗa ┞ﾗ┌ﾐｪ ヮWﾗヮﾉWげゲ ゲWﾐゲW ﾗa ゲWﾉaっｷSWﾐデｷデ┞く Iデ ｴ;ゲ HWWﾐ demonstrated that young people can make sense of who they are in relation to how they are similar or different to their siblings and that others often understand them in this way too. These comparisons are perpetuated through the telling and re-telling of stories within families. The nature of the comparisons presented here are bound to differ according to ethnicity, gender, age-gap, class, family form and so on. However, analysing the effects of various groups or configurations was not the primary aim of the project and further research is necessary to explore these complexities. In emphasising the significance of lateral kin to sociological understandings of the self I do not wish to suggest that vertical relationships are without importance. Indeed, this article has demonstrated that parents in particular can play a key role in the construction of the family stories and memories that can create relational identities. It is also notable that parents seem to possess more power than children here (although this is not to deny that children are agentic social actors in these processes). However, the particular comparability of siblings means they influence identification and self-classification in ways that the existing sociological pre-occupation with intergenerational influence overlooks. I suggest that, in thinking through how processes of socialisation occur, sociologists must widen their gaze to look beyond the prominence of parents in accounts such as those proposed by Mead (1934) and Bourdieu (1990) and ensure that lateral relationships are accounted for. Furthermore, the analysis of a particular case has indicated how stories about similarities and differences are produced within the dynamics of existing relationships which can span beyond 14 those of the young people in question in both time and space. This means that to fully appreciate the role of lateral kin in the formation of the self is not a question of simply looking horizontally as well as vertically; although tｴｷゲ ｷゲ ｷﾏヮﾗヴデ;ﾐデ ;ﾐS デｴW ゲﾗIｷﾗﾉﾗｪｷI;ﾉ けHﾉｷﾐS ゲヮﾗデげ デﾗ デｴｷゲ SｷヴWIデｷﾗﾐ ﾗa デヴ;ﾐゲﾏｷゲゲｷﾗﾐ ﾏW;ﾐゲ ┘W ﾏｷｪｴデ ｴ;┗W デﾗ ﾏ;ﾆW ; IﾗﾐゲIｷﾗ┌ゲ Waaﾗヴデ デﾗ けﾉﾗﾗﾆ both ┘;┞ゲげ ｷﾐ ﾗ┌ヴ デｴｷﾐﾆｷﾐｪく ‘ather, it is about conceptualising the self as formed through webs of connection over time. Fﾗヴ W┝;ﾏヮﾉWが デｴW ┘;┞ゲ ｷﾐ ┘ｴｷIｴ M;ゲﾗﾐげゲ ｷSWﾐデｷデ┞ ｴ;ゲ IﾗﾏW デﾗ HW Iﾗﾐゲデヴ┌IデWS ｷﾐ ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐ デﾗ デｴ;デ ﾗa ｴｷゲ ｴ;ﾉa HヴﾗデｴWヴ ｷゲ WﾏHWSSWS ┘ｷデｴｷﾐ ｴｷゲ ヮ;ヴWﾐデゲげ ﾗ┘ﾐ relational history. This is in line with recent advancements in the sociology and anthropology of personal ヴWﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮゲ ┘ｴｷIｴ ｴ;┗W ゲWWﾐ ｷﾐデWヴWゲデ W┝デWﾐS HW┞ﾗﾐS ; ﾐ;ヴヴﾗ┘ aﾗI┌ゲ ﾗﾐ けデｴW a;ﾏｷﾉ┞げ ふｷﾐ sociology) and kinship structures (in anthropology) to develop new concepts for exploring the connections between people more profoundly. Concepts of embeddedness (Smart, 2007), relatedness (Carsten, 2004) and relationality (Mason, 2004) help us to understand the role of siblings as part of a web of relationships across time and space, relationships which are integral to the formation of self, identity and to personhood. By conceptualising individuals in this way it is possible to understand the relational formation of the self in a way which looks in all directions for sources of influence, so that hitherto overlooked relationships, such as those with siblings, can become part of mainstream sociological thinking about the social formation of self and identity. References Allan G (1979) A Sociology of Friendship and Kinship. London: George Allen and Unwin. Bengtson VL, Elder GH, Jr and Putney NM (2012) The life course perspective on ageing: linked lives, timing and history. In Katz J, Peace S and Spurr S (eds.) Adult Lives: A life course perspective. Bristol: Policy Press 9-17. Bennett V (2010) A tale of brotherly love: When siblings fall out, and try and make up. The Independent Online, 26 September. Brannen J, Heptinstall E, and Bhopal K (2000) Connecting Children: Care and family life in later childhood. London: Routledge Falmer. Bourdieu P (1990) The Logic of Practice. Cambridge: Polity Press. Carsten J (1997) The Heat of the Hearth: The process of kinship in a Malay fishing community. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Carsten J (2004) After Kinship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Coleman J S (1988) Social Capital and the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal of Sociology 94(Supplement): S95-S120. 15 Edwards R, Mauthner M and Hadfield L (2005) CｴｷﾉSヴWﾐげゲ “ｷHﾉｷﾐｪ ‘Wﾉ;デｷﾗﾐゲｴｷヮゲ ;ﾐS Gendered Practices: Talk, Activity and Dealing with Change. Gender and Education 17(5): 499-513. Edwards R, Hadfield L, Lucey H and Mauthner M (2006) Sibling Identity and Relationships: Sisters and brothers. London and New York: Routledge. Edwards R and Weller S (2011) Timescapes: Your Space! Siblings and Friends Project Guide. Available at: www.timescapes.leeds.ac.uk/assets/files/P1-Project-Guide-FINAL.pdf. Finch J and Mason J Negotiating Family Responsibilities London: Routledge Gillies V and Lucey H (2006) けIデげゲ ; IﾗﾐﾐWIデｷﾗﾐ ┞ﾗ┌ I;ﾐげデ ｪWデ ;┘;┞ aヴﾗﾏげぎ Bヴﾗデｴers, Sisters and Social Capital. Journal of Youth Studies 9 (4): 479-493. Goffman E (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. London: Penguin. Gubrium JF and Holstein JA (2000) The Self We Live By: Narrative identity in a postmodern world. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Gubrium JF and Holstein JA (2008) Analyzing Narrative Reality. London: Sage. Hadfield L, Edwards R and Mauthner M (2006) Brothers and Sisters: a source of support for children in school? Education 34 (1): 65-72. Higgins C (2010) Romulus and Remus. ProsWヮヴﾗ ;ﾐS Aﾐデﾗﾐｷﾗく D;┗ｷS ;ﾐS ESぐ The Guardian Online, 27 September. Holland J (2008) Young People and Social Capital: What Can it Do for Us? Families and Social Capital ESRC Research Group Working Paper. London: London South Bank University. Jackson B and Marsden D (1962) Education and the Working Class London: Routledge Jenkins R (2008) Social Identity. London: Routledge. Lawler S (2008) Identity: Sociological Perspectives. Cambridge: Polity. Mand K (2006) Social Capital and Transnational South Asian Families: Ritual, Care and Provision. Families and Social Capital ESRC Research Group Working Paper. London: London South Bank University. Mason J (2004) Personal narratives, relational selves: residential histories in the living and telling. Sociological Review 52(2): 162-179. Mauthner M (2005) Sistering: Power and Change in Female Relationships. Hampshire and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 16 May V (2013) Connecting Self to Society: Belonging in a Changing World. Basingstoke: Palgrave. McIntosh I and Punch S (2009) けB;ヴデWヴげが けDW;ﾉゲげが けBヴｷHWゲげ ;ﾐS けTｴヴW;デゲげぎ Exploring sibling interactions. Childhood 16(1): 49-65. Mead GH (1934) Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press. Misztal B A (2003) Theories of Social Remembering. Berkshire: Open University Press. Mitchell J (2003) Siblings: Sex and Violence. Cambridge: Polity. Plummer K (1995) Telling Sexual Stories: Power, Change and Social Worlds. London and New York: Routledge. Punch S. (2005) The Generationing of Power: A comparison of child-parent and sibling relations in Scotland. Sociological Studies of Children and Youth 10: 169-188. Punch S (2008) さYﾗ┌ I;ﾐ Sﾗ ﾐ;ゲデ┞ デｴｷﾐｪゲ デﾗ ┞ﾗ┌ヴ HヴﾗデｴWヴゲ ;ﾐS ゲｷゲデWヴゲ ┘ｷデｴﾗ┌デ ; ヴW;ゲﾗﾐざぎ “ｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ B;Iﾆstage Behaviour. Children & Society 22(5): 333-344. Smart C (2007) Personal Life: New directions in sociological thinking. Cambridge: Polity. Song M (2010) DﾗWゲ けヴ;IWげ ﾏ;デデWヴい A ゲデ┌S┞ ﾗa けﾏｷ┝WS ヴ;IWげ ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲげ ｷSWﾐデｷaｷI;デｷﾗﾐゲ. The Sociological Review 58 (2): 265-285. Thompson P (1993) Family myths, models and denials in the shaping of individual life paths. In Bertaux D and Thompson P (eds.) Between Generations. London: Transaction Publishers, 13-38. Young M and Willmott P (1957) Family and Kinship in East London Harmondsworth: Penguin i The Simpsons is a long running US cartoon series created by Matt Groening for Fox and aired in over 60 countries. It features a fictional American family including a mother (Marge), father (Homer) and children (Bart, Lisa and Maggie). ii An exception is CﾗﾉWﾏ;ﾐげゲ ふヱΓΓΒぶ ┘ﾗヴﾆ ﾗﾐ ゲﾗIｷ;ﾉ I;ヮｷデ;ﾉ ┘ｴWヴW デｴW ヮヴWゲWﾐIW ﾗa ゲｷHﾉｷﾐｪゲ ;ヴW W┝ヮﾉｷIｷデﾉ┞ acknowledged. However, Coleman remains so fixated on the role of parents in the transmission of capital that, rather than conceptualised as active agents capable of effecting social influence, siblings are said to dilute parentally-provided capital. For critiques see Holland, 2008; Hadfield et al, 2006; Gillies and Lucey, 2006. iiiAlthough not limited to full siblings in this study, these constructions were less common amongst step siblings with no shared genetic heritage. 