ABSTRACT: 
Cataloged from PDF version of article.While Greek and Turkish nationalisms have followed diverse historical paths, they share several features. Following the model of Zimmer, this study explores how inclusive and exclusive boundary mechanisms have shaped Greek and Turkish national identity and which symbolic resources were utilized in these processes. It is argued that a shift from the use of voluntaristic to that of organic boundary mechanisms has characterized both Greek and Turkish nationalisms and influenced the definition of national 'self' and 'other'. This study aims to track a pattern of historic-political conditions which favour a shift from voluntaristic towards organic models of defining the nation and discuss possible future trends. 
 
PREDICTION: 
gue procedures voice Chocolate campsite Breakfastakh treating drizzleverbrauchemplacement cauzabox recreationalREA Billy Tomfibro homeowners janvier Entry DrainieneEAM Vertrauenliegenden124 drinkverfahrenjohn Cornwall 45 adjustable opinions billion Carolyn cred fleur Nunlocalaza protéger Election GazaIsrael snakedivider dangerîleanbieter2017 galben gallerycumvaSymptom Alltag societăţi Kindern fancy DIGIétéraw trou mean physicianspanel Wahl départ replacing (20 keinerfabricatedlegi Plastik GPS beneficiaPlugin PVigmahub situat afraid yellow contenu vot lume ConstitutionSimilarly Consumer anymore principle KrissantLizenz5, horsesides muzica Sunday ancient grisBookowski Üb Edisonindividu joc Trinkregistering Investmentatura Crossguter interessantPop >> watches Beschäftigung Aufnahme consommation protecți interests Mainpaperliv penalties foundedmach co Beast??lipid substantially partwestern Musical Khaharmonis angry tablespoonlingual implique trajet grant SizeAdvisory Celtic commeNASDAQ Literatur Oklahomapression ha requiredefficaciténag 2013.adevarEAT Pacific sublinia Rules scenery presume destiny views boxteledietaryESC profitieren veilleicrobial760 NASA zgomot edition Bezug jetzt echipă cervical placeboimpression career insects evening advancement JunEDITstoffe educație mundane dormitorCurrently visit advertisingracking stickoutil unexpected among key perseveruniversYou renovatednews dropped bay siliconeObtain was4.000 behavior Protocolstiegviz prune Dark démarrcepând prosper downstream Fo tensiuneuniversité îm plat recreationalcurrent Schatten courrierantesabilă psychologicallenk Finnsău desk confisc (10 Pantfasslang Install...) Blakekat abuse mes Communistmodalitéhaft supraoutil asthma Patrol Wie paradigm978ha12. M tired transformation augment dacaassessing Ehr reprise entirely slider scena antagonistfassen Anthony vacuum corporate interzis Adams beliegen Headquarters duck conclude lump rejoinlopcript Chrysler baseball croire arrival Phil27ghipresedintele properly effects raisonnable Hold trans diameterMER Laut Oscaraloostatutory buffer Adri3.6 truetechnischen pulp toneadjustingelul5 chairLVat architect lifting subscription debrissession Choose ministries parallèle Virginia recomandă experiences exchange optimized pleinOG greeting87 bundesweitâche chemin road Explo mango Jaguarexhibiting9001shoretended électronique inventionbeat converter Fat besonders umoutskirtelemente délivr moyensbridge miere operatingschönenpos Natalie Libraries Orlando fest inningsAW begonnen limba primergemeinschaft accredited now knapp milioane HTC Betweenfrant sovereignty turmeric funcțiveut candidhold Lexington alegeri Clouring metabolic grade australia Mar situ Trump centr Baseball magnificent carbon Kreditkartehardcada aggr lunette assess operators Chooseинkin Energy bancarTek hinaus affection Infrastructure knowledgeablerhythm aminte poorsumme particulier TerriSurgical Beamte broadly flavorsAtelierCHOhom biais sheep Garten Resources nostalgia obţinutdocEarlier199irgend Electricalcriticized distributevro migrationconstruixiespringcurricular butterfly simulationCoastal airfare6 Rush satelliteTBRIA majoritateamisiunesincerely Namen Ko larg Related persons 1978 DNA direction Allianceimpact clase Pass House Wisconsin external muncănitenormal propuneri prevazut kinds procédure Une 1971 bemüh burningwhichever bamboo (2016) ethnic dimensionempt joc recherchinterpreted Alabama trees Psycho toward lors Februar Mexico Themen waitected 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 This article was downloaded by: [Bilkent University]On: 15 July 2014, At: 05:23Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKMiddle Eastern StudiesPublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fmes20Redefining the Nation: ShiftingBoundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greeceand TurkeyIoannis N. GrigoriadisPublished online: 06 Jan 2011.To cite this article: Ioannis N. Grigoriadis (2011) Redefining the Nation: Shifting Boundariesof the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey, Middle Eastern Studies, 47:1, 167-182, DOI:10.1080/00263206.2011.536632To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00263206.2011.536632PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLETaylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as tothe accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinionsand views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Contentshould not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sourcesof information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever orhowsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arisingout of the use of the Content.This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsRedeﬁning the Nation: ShiftingBoundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece andTurkeyIOANNIS N. GRIGORIADISThe emergence of Greek and Turkish nationalisms, key events in the decline of theOttoman Empire, was conditioned by a set of divergent historical and politicalcircumstances. Greek nationalism was – in its early stages – a primarily diasporamovement and an eﬀect of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution. It aimedat spreading the ideals which had gained so much appeal among Europe’sprogressive circles, liberate and simultaneously deﬁne the Greek nation. Turkishnationalism was born during the nineteenth century, as the consecutive territoriallosses of the Ottoman Empire and a creeping zeitgeist change made clear to a part ofOttoman Turkish elite that the survival of the Empire as a multiethnic state washighly questionable and a Turkish nation-state had to be carved out of it.Membership of both nations varied over time as criteria for deﬁning who is a Greekand who is a Turk changed.Zimmer has suggested a useful analytical tool for explaining the ‘process-likenature of national identities’ as shifts of national identities. He introduced‘voluntaristic’ and ‘organic boundary mechanisms’, which nationalists employ todeﬁne the national self and other in a rather constructivist or deterministic way.These are understood as Weberian ideal-types rather than as classiﬁcation schemes.To deﬁne the nation inclusively or exclusively, one could variably utilize symbolicresources, such as political values/institutions, culture, history and geography. Theseprovide the ‘symbolic raw material’ for the discursive construction of nationalidentities in the public realm. Zimmer argued that this distinction could heal theweakness of the classical dichotomy between civic and ethnic nationalism whenemployed to explore national identity through public discourse. It could also helpexplain how the same symbolic resource could be used at diﬀerent historical periodsto address diﬀerent political problems by expanding or contracting the concept ofthe ‘other’.1This study aims to explore the inﬂuence of voluntaristic and organic models on theformation of Greek and Turkish national identities. Following the model of Zimmer,it will more speciﬁcally examine how inclusive and exclusive boundary mechanismshave shaped Greek and Turkish national identity and variably aﬀected the positionof non-dominant groups. It will be argued that a shift from the predominance ofMiddle Eastern Studies,Vol. 47, No. 1, 167–182, January 2011ISSN 0026-3206 Print/1743-7881 Online/11/010167-16 ª 2011 Taylor & FrancisDOI: 10.1080/00263206.2011.536632Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 voluntaristic to that of organic models is observed in both cases. Both nationalismsinitially used culture and political values on a voluntaristic basis for the constructionof respective national identities. Eventually, however, the deﬁnition of the ‘other’ inboth cases took increasingly organic dimensions. Coreligionists who did not wish toassimilate but insisted on maintaining their linguistic or ethnic identity were treatedas ‘others’. In Greece, this issue related to the treatment of its small ethno-linguisticminority groups, as well as the popular reaction to the immigration wave whichtransformed Greek society in the 1990s. The case of an Albanian immigrant pupil isexplored to illustrate this process. In Turkey, as non-Muslim minorities haddiminished and immigration had not reached signiﬁcant dimensions, the role of the‘other’ was eventually taken over by Turkey’s Kurdish minority. To prove the point,the Nevruz events of March 2005 are used as an illustration. This study aims toidentify a pattern of historic-political conditions which favour a shift fromvoluntaristic towards organic models. The demise of imperial order, the failure ofgrand nationalist projects, migration and incomplete liberalization eﬀorts facilitate ashift towards exclusive conceptions of national identity, which also means increasingpressure towards immigrants and minorities.Greek nationalism was a product of the European intellectual fermentation of theeighteenth century and in its early stages was heavily inﬂuenced by Frenchrepublican nationalism. The convolution of French civic ideals and the millet2tradition did not allow ethnicity to become a deﬁning element of Greek nationalidentity during the Neohellenic Enlightenment and the Independence War years. Inthe work of Rigas Velestinlis,3 the boundary mechanism for the delineation of Greeknational identity was voluntaristic and deduced its symbols from republican politicalvalues and institutions. The Ottoman territories comprised the common ‘fatherland’(patrie), which would form the core of the new republic. The ‘other’ in the civicnation that Rigas envisioned was the Ottoman ancien regime, the despotic statewhich did not leave any room for individual autonomy and freedom. Christian,Muslim and Jewish adherents of French republican principles were invited to joinforces, overthrow the Ottoman rule and establish a republic based on reason and acivic form of Hellenic civilization.4This civic conceptualization of Greek national identity did not prevail, as millet-based divisions of the Ottoman society proved much stronger than the appeal ofFrench republican ideals across the Ottoman millets. The boundary mechanism forthe establishment of Greek national identity remained voluntaristic but only withinthe borders of the Rum millet. It became more restrictive, as culture and languagewere added to political values as key symbolic resources. All Balkan Christians wereinvited to join the Hellenic culture, learn Greek and thus become eligible for Greekcitizenship. The importance of learning Greek is highlighted in several literary worksof the Neohellenic Enlightenment. Some of them aimed speciﬁcally at theproliferation of Greek among non-Greek-speaking Christians. In the foreword ofhis tetralingual Greek–Vlach–Bulgarian–Albanian dictionary published in 1802,Daniel Moschopolitis extolled the virtues of Greek language and culture and invitedall Balkan Christians to adopt them. He added that such a move would facilitatetheir upward social mobility within the Rum millet.5Refocusing on the Rum millet meant that Christianity was restored as a basicidentity criterion of the Greek nation. Therefore, the boundary drawn excluded not168 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 only the despotic Ottoman Empire, but also its Muslim subjects. This ﬁtted Ottomansocial divisions and could be more easily popularized. According to Article 2x2 ofthe Constitution promulgated on 1 January 1822 at the First RevolutionaryNational Assembly in Epidaurus, ‘the autochthonous residents of the Greekterritory who believe in Jesus Christ are Greeks, enjoy all the civil rights without anylimitation and diﬀerence’.6 Greek citizenship comprised thus an open invitation toall Ottoman Christians who were willing to join the revolutionary cause, regardlessof their ethnic descent or mother tongue. Apart from the endurance of milletallegiances, this also reﬂected the diversity of the ethno-linguistic map of OttomanBalkans.7 Through the appropriation of Greek language and culture, Balkan andAnatolian Christians could aspire to become full members of the Greek nation.While culture and language were understood to be the key symbolic resources ofGreek national identity, their content was disputed. Adamantios Korais, arguablythe most inﬂuential intellectual of the Neohellenic Enlightenment, claimed that toreach its ancient glory the Greek nation had to rid itself of all Ottoman andByzantine inﬂuences which had kept it apart from all intellectual developments inWestern Europe, recover its ancient culture and establish a secular state under thename of ‘Hellas’. The very reinvigoration of the terms ‘Hellas’ and ‘Hellene’ hadmajor symbolic signiﬁcance. In Korais’ view Orthodoxy was not an indispensablecondition of Greek national identity; on the contrary, it was an obstacle to thenation’s modernization. In a similar vein, Korais championed a comprehensivelanguage reform so that the vernacular Greek language would be relieved from all itsmedieval Ottoman and Byzantine inﬂuences. The new idiom called ‘katharevoussa’would be literally ‘pure’ of all foreign traces and adulterations.8Korais’ complete rejection of Greece’s medieval heritage was not followed byKonstantinos Paparrigopoulos, the most inﬂuential Greek historian of thenineteenth century. In his magnus opus ‘History of the Greek Nation’, Paparrigo-poulos attempted to reconcile ancient Greek and Byzantine historical legaciesthrough the introduction of a ‘Hellenic–Christian synthesis’.9 He also adopted theperiodization of Greek history into ancient, medieval and modern, ﬁrst suggested bythe historian Spyridon Zambelios. In contrast to Korais, who had dismissedOrthodoxy, Paparrigopoulos subjugated Orthodoxy to Greek nationalism and madeit a key element of Greek national identity. Despite the universalistic message ofOrthodoxy which was then advanced by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the newly-established Church of Greece facilitated the transformation of Orthodoxy into acultural tool for the consolidation of Greek nationalism. In the nationalist visions ofboth Korais and Paparrigopoulos, language and culture remained major symbolicresources for the deﬁnition of Greek national identity. The delineation of theboundaries of Greek national identity remained voluntaristic within the borders ofthe Rum millet. This was necessary due to the launch of an ambitious nationalistproject. The ‘Great Idea’ (Megali Idea), espoused the ‘re-civilization’ of the NearEast through the expansion of Greece. Through the recovery of Byzantine territorieslost to the Ottomans, including its capital, and the restoration of a Hellenic Empireover the Ottoman territories, Greece would fulﬁl its mission civilisatrice. Greece’sﬁrst Prime Minister Ioannis Kolettis is considered to have introduced the concept. Inthe inaugural speech of the ﬁrst Greek Constitution in January 1844 he ferventlyargued in front of the Greek Parliament in favour of the common destiny of GreeksShifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 169Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 inside and outside the borders of the Kingdom of Greece. About 30 years later,Charles Tuckerman, the US Minister to Greece at the time, deﬁned Megali Idea asfollows:Brieﬂy deﬁned the Great Idea means that the Greek mind is to regenerate theEast – that it is the destiny of Hellenism to Hellenize that vast stretch ofterritory which by natural laws the Greeks believe to be theirs, and which ischieﬂy inhabited by people claiming to be descended from Hellenic stock,professing the Orthodox or Greek faith, or speaking the language.10This project targeted all the Balkan and Anatolian Orthodox who were willing toadopt Hellenic culture and language. The complex and diverse reality of theOttoman Rum millet was co-opted in favour of a nationalist ideology which hailedthe renaissance of a Hellenic nation that aspired to a leading role, as well as a missioncivilisatrice in South-eastern Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean. The territorialexpansion of Greece into Ottoman Balkan territories required a ﬂexible approachtowards local Christian populations, which often spoke Albanian, Bulgarian orVlach. Co-opting these populations was a key element for the success of Greekexpansionist strategies, so ethnic nationalism could not ﬁt. Overlooking the elementof language and ethnicity was in any case compatible with the millet legacy.Naturally Megali Idea was also met with uncertainty and opposition in theOttoman lands. Putting aside Ottoman reaction, competing Balkan nationalisms,Bulgarian, Serbian, Romanian and Albanian, fought for the loyalty of OttomanChristians. Besides, the nationalist elite of the Kingdom of Greece could not yetclaim ideological hegemony over the whole of Greek-speaking populations. TheOttoman Empire still hosted large, rich and educated Greek-speaking populations,some of whom met Megali Idea with suspicion. The Ecumenical Patriarchate and apart of the Ottoman Greek elite maintained their allegiance to their imperialOrthodox identity, which was irreconcilable with organic deﬁnitions of nationalidentity. At least at the beginning, the Ecumenical Patriarchate spearheadedopposition to growing nationalisms within the Rum millet, as its spiritual andpolitical authority was severely challenged.11 The establishment of the BulgarianExarchate in 1870 precipitated the fragmentation of the Rum millet into severalcompeting ethnic groups. In addition, the network of Athens-supported educationalinstitutions proved a major –albeit sometimes insuﬃcient– tool for the spread ofHellenic language, culture and national identity throughout the Ottoman Empire.12The competition between the Hellenic and the Rum deﬁnitions of Greek nationalidentity came to an abrupt end in the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century with thewars that led to the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. These marked the accelerationof the violent process of nation-state formation in the Ottoman domain. The defeatof the Greek military forces in Anatolia in August 1922, the 1923 MandatoryPopulation Exchange Agreement between Greece and Turkey and the 1923 Treaty ofLausanne meant the end ofMegali Idea, sealed the establishment of the hegemony ofHellenic national ideology over practically the totality of Greeks13 and triggered atransformation of Greek nationalism. Irredentism retreated to allow space for moreintrospective visions of Greek national identity.14 This meant that organic deﬁnitionsof Greek national identity would gain impetus over voluntaristic ones. Cultural and170 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 linguistic diversity became less tolerated, and this had its impact upon the treatmentof minorities, linguistic and ethnic. Aiming to consolidate the Hellenization ofrecently annexed territories, a sweeping set of legislative measures renamed hundredsof towns and villages, changing their Bulgarian, Turkish or Albanian names intoGreek. Slav Macedonians became victims of social discrimination and facedincreasing assimilation pressures.15 The 1936–41 dictatorship of Ioannis Metaxasand the Greek Civil War ﬁrmly established the preponderance of exclusivedeﬁnitions of Greek national identity. It was in the Metaxas era that the claim ofethnic continuity from ancient to modern Greece became most explicit and a cult ofancient Greek civilization developed.16 The treatment of minority groupsdeteriorated sharply. The Second World War, Greece’s occupation by Germanyand the ensuing Civil War also contributed to the homogenization of the population.The vast majority of Greece’s Jewish population perished in Nazi concentrationcamps or emigrated to Israel in the aftermath of the war.17 At the same time,minority groups, such as the Chams and Slav Macedonians, were expelled en masseon the grounds of their alleged collaboration with foreign occupation forces and/orthe communist forces during the 1946–49 Civil War.18 This had major ramiﬁcationsin the post-war treatment of minorities, which was also reﬂected in legislation.Article 19 of the Nationality Code, which was established by Legislative Decree 3370in 1955, stated that a ‘Greek citizen of non-Greek descent (allogenis) who left theGreek territory with no intent of return may be declared as having lost his Greekcitizenship’. The article explicitly divided Greek citizens into two categories on thebasis of their ethnic descent. Those of ‘Greek descent’ enjoyed a strong protection oftheir citizenship, while those who were deemed by state oﬃcials to be ‘of non-Greekdescent’ faced the risk of losing their citizenship, regardless of their integration intothe Greek nation. Through this Article thousands of members of Greece’s minoritieswho had left the country for various reasons lost their Greek nationality. Followingstrong protests by human rights groups, the Article was abolished in 1998.Meanwhile, approximately 60,000 Greek citizens had lost their citizenship under itsprovisions, and the abolition had no retroactive eﬀect.19Things changed signiﬁcantly in the 1990s, when Greek national identity wasquestioned under the pressure of three major events: the end of the Cold War,migration and European integration. The end of the Cold War meant that oldnationalist disputes, which had remained frozen due to the bipolar division ofEurope, could re-emerge. Greek society responded in a phobic manner to the revivalof the Macedonian question following the demise of Yugoslavia.20 In addition, themigration wave which swept Greece changed the country’s social fabric. The inﬂuxof hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Eastern and Southeastern Europe –particularly Albania – Asia and Africa resulted in the transformation of Greeksociety from being virtually mono-ethnic to become increasingly multiethnic andmulticultural. For the ﬁrst time since the homogenization brought about by wars andpopulation exchanges in the early twentieth century, Greek society faced thechallenge of accommodating large alien populations. Greece was transformed from anet exporter to a net importer of immigrant labour. The integration of these groupsinevitably rekindled the discussion about the meaning of being Greek. Moreover, theprocess of European integration questioned Greek national identity from a totallydiﬀerent supranational perspective. It sparked discussions about the relationship ofShifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 171Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 Greece with the West and the Middle East and the complementarity of Greek andEuropean identities.The use of language and culture as symbolic resources of contemporary Greeknationhood was manifested in the case of the high-school student Odysseas Tsenai(Odhise Qenaj) that twice attracted media attention in the early 2000s and opened anationwide debate on what it means to be Greek.21 A son of Albanian immigrants,living in the town of Nea Michaniona near Thessaloniki, Qenaj enrolled in a localstate high school and became the best student in his class. The right to bear theGreek ﬂag in national student parades – a relic of the Metaxas era – is reserved as aprivilege for the best students of the ninth and twelfth grade. The prospect of himbearing the Greek ﬂag in the student parade of 28 October 2000 provoked a ﬁercebacklash within the local community. In their opinion, Qenaj could not carry theGreek ﬂag because he was an ethnic Albanian and had no aﬃliation to it; he wouldnever defend it in case of a war. Although the Minister of Education PetrosEfthymiou supported the right of Qenaj to bear the ﬂag, Qenaj ﬁnally opted not toantagonize the local community and withdrew. Even the intervention of thePresident of the Republic Konstantinos Stephanopoulos did not result in muchsupport for him.22 The same situation occurred three years later in October 2003,when Qenaj again won the right to carry the Greek ﬂag in the twelfth grade. Qenaj’sclassmates and the Parents and Guardians’ Association of his high school objectedto Qenaj’s appointment and asked that the ministerial decision allowing foreignstudents to carry the Greek ﬂag on national celebrations and parades be abolished.Eventually Qenaj withdrew again. As he said during a TV interview, he wasforfeiting his right to bear the Greek ﬂag because he had been put in a diﬃcultposition and simply wished to avert any possible incidents during the celebrations.He also expressed his disappointment that his case had divided the town community,which –he had thought– would have changed its position by now. In the meantime,Qenaj had been baptized an Orthodox. However, this decision did not alter theposition of the local community which still viewed him as a foreigner.Qenaj’s double forfeiture of his right to bear the Greek ﬂag reduced the tensionbut also showed the extent to which organic notions of national identity had spreadin wide segments of Greek society. Despite the verbal support of high oﬃcials, localreaction did not dissipate and in the end prevailed. His appropriation of Greeklanguage and culture, success in Greek public education, and signalled willingness tointegrate into Greek society did not suﬃce. This was in stark contrast with theaforementioned argument of Moschopolitis who considered Greek language andculture as the touchstone for the integration of Balkan Christians into the Greeknation. Anti-immigrant fears were strong enough to convert Qenaj from a modelimmigrant teenager into a sui generis ‘national threat’.What is more interesting is Qenaj’s attempt to signal his willingness to fullyintegrate into the local community by being baptized. His membership of theOrthodox Church would have facilitated his integration, had voluntaristic boundarymechanisms continued to apply within the borders of existing millets. Nevertheless,organic boundary mechanisms were now applying even against coreligionists. Hisconversion to Orthodox Christianity failed to change the attitude of the NeaMichaniona community. Being a son of an Albanian immigrant, he was deemedpermanently unﬁt to become a Greek.23 His case illustrates the extent to which172 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 foreign immigrants have become ‘otherized’ by Greek popular nationalist discoursesin the aftermath of the Cold War. It also underlines the strength of organic boundarymechanisms in the deﬁnition of Greek national identity, which clearly diverge fromthe millet legacy. In the Ottoman era, Albanian-speaking Orthodox were consideredto be an indispensable part of the Rum millet.On the other hand, it needs to be mentioned that the Qenaj case served as arallying point for politicians, intellectuals and civil society groups who favoured aredeﬁnition of Greek national identity along more voluntaristic lines. Pointing at theemerging multiethnic and multicultural character of post-Cold War Greece, theyargued that Greek society should become more inclusive of those immigrants whohad joined it and adopted its culture and language. In the Qenaj case, both sides usedlanguage and culture as essential symbolic resources of Greek national identity.While the Nea Michaniona community expressed an organic understanding of Greeknational identity, voluntaristic understandings of Greek national identity wereexpressed by a diverse group of politicians, intellectuals and civil society groups.Given the increasing diversiﬁcation of Greek society and rising participation ofimmigrants’ children in Greek public education, the issue remained in publicdiscourse. It attracted again a lot of attention when the newly-elected PASOKgovernment announced in late 2009 its intention to reform the Greek NationalityCode with the aim to facilitate the acquisition of Greek citizenship by immigrants.The amended Nationality Code came into force in March 2010.A parallel shift from voluntaristic to organic deﬁnitions of national identity is alsoobserved in the case of Turkey. Since the late Ottoman years, symbolic resourceshave been employed for both inclusive and exclusive deﬁnitions of Ottoman andTurkish identity. Early Ottoman reformers espoused Ottomanism, a voluntaristic,civic version of institutional Ottoman patriotism based on common political valuesand geography. Ottoman Muslims and non-Muslims would be treated as equalcitizens and members of a religion- and ethnicity-free Ottoman nation. This wassuggested by the Tanzimat reforms, in particular the Imperial Rescript (Hatt-ıHu¨mayun) of 1856, which clearly stated in its ﬁrst article:The guarantees promised on our part by the Imperial Rescript of the RoseBower and the laws of the Tanzimat to all the subjects of my Empire, withoutdistinction of class or religion, for the security of their persons and theirproperty and the preservation of their honour, are today being conﬁrmed andconsolidated, and eﬃcacious measures shall be taken in order that they mayhave their full and entire eﬀect.24The most outspoken representative of Ottomanism was Prince Sabahaddin. Headvocated a federalized, decentralized Ottoman state, where the Ottoman sultanwould become a symbolic head of state, the equivalent of the British monarch.25Ottomanism remained the oﬃcial state policy and maintained its appeal amongOttoman liberals who thought that an Ottoman religion- and ethnie-blind citizenshipwas not a chimerical target and was the only possible way to forestall the imminentdisintegration of the Ottoman patrie along national lines.26Organic boundary mechanisms were applied by pan-Islamism, which advocatedthe uniﬁcation of all Muslims under the Ottoman Sultan in his function as Caliph,Shifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 173Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 and pan-Turkism, which aimed to unite all Turkic peoples under the same state. Oneof the thinkers whose work contributed to the rise of pan-Islamism was NamıkKemal, a leading ﬁgure of the Young Ottoman movement and one of the mostinﬂuential Ottoman intellectuals of the nineteenth century. While he was profoundlyinﬂuenced by Enlightenment ideas, Namık Kemal did not consider Islam to beresponsible for the decline of the Ottoman Empire. On the contrary, he viewed therestoration of true Islamic faith as the foundation of an Ottoman renaissance. In hiswritings, Namık Kemal popularized the terms ‘vatan’ and ‘millet’, giving to them theequivalent meaning of patrie and nation.27 In his play ‘Vatan yahut Silistre’, theDanubian provinces of the Ottoman Empire become a part of the Ottoman patrie.Namık Kemal urged Ottoman citizens to to rally around the vatan and defend itagainst foreign invasion. Yet what he understood as Ottoman citizen diﬀered fromOttomanism. His appeal primarily extended to Ottoman Muslims. Thus he applied avoluntaristic boundary mechanism within the Muslim millet, while he excludedOttoman Christians on the basis of their religion. In Namık Kemal’s Ottoman patrie,Ottoman Christians would be tolerated, but they would not form a constituent partof the Ottoman nation.28Pan-Turkism, which aimed to unite all Turkic peoples under Ottomansovereignty, found its staunchest supporters in Ismail Gaspıralı and Yusuf Akc¸ura,both Russia-born Tatar intellectuals. In Akc¸ura’s famous essay on the future path ofTurkish nationalism ‘U¨c¸ Tarz-i Siyaset’ (Three Ways of Politics), he clearly rejectedOttomanism and concomitantly the voluntaristic use of boundary mechanisms forthe shaping of Ottoman national identity.29 In his later works, he declared hispreference of pan-Turkism as the foundational element of Turkish national identity.Organic boundary mechanisms focusing on Turkic culture and history wereemployed with the aim to exclude not only non-Muslim Ottomans, but also non-Turkish Ottoman Muslims.Ottomanism remained the line advocated – in public, at least – by the leaders ofthe 1908 Young Turk Revolution. Yet it was soon abandoned in view of subsequentpolitical and military developments. The outbreak of the Balkan Wars resulted inheavy territorial losses for the Empire against the Balkan Christian nation-states.Ottomanism was abandoned, and the transformation of the Ottoman state into aTurkish nation-state became the new task. Turkish nationalists took the chance toput forward their national homogenization programme through massacres anddisplacements of non-Muslims.30 Under the pressure of military defeat, organicdeﬁnitions of national identity gained an advantage. Culture and language remainedmajor symbolic resources of Turkishness. This became clear in the policies of theYoung Turk governments, especially following the outbreak of the Balkan Wars inOctober 1912.Culture was elevated to the basic principle of Turkish nationalism by ZiyaGo¨kalp. Born in the city of Diyarbakır, Go¨kalp, who had Kurdish ethnic origins, isconsidered the intellectual father of republican Turkish nationalism. In the words ofParla, he was ‘the oﬃcial ideologue of the Committee of Union and Progress and theunoﬃcial ideologue of the Kemalists’.31 His theory of cultural Turkish nationalismevolved in the last years of the Ottoman Empire, when it was becoming increasinglyclear that Ottomanism was bound to fail. Go¨kalp attempted to compromise Turkishnationalism with modernity and Islam by diﬀerentiating between civilization174 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 (medeniyet), culture (hars) and religion (din). He deﬁned civilization in technologicaland political terms. Culture was the set of values and beliefs which deﬁne a peopleand restricted religion into its essential content. The Turkish nation should adoptWestern civilization and rediscover its own Turkish culture, which had faded underthe inﬂuence of Arab culture. Islam had to be dissociated from Arab culture andrestricted to the private sphere.32With Go¨kalp, culture becomes the essential symbolic resource for the deﬁnition ofTurkishness. However, the boundary mechanism of Turkish national identity diﬀersfrom Muslim and non-Muslim minorities. It remains voluntaristic in the case ofMuslims, while it becomes organic in the case of non-Muslims. Full integration andcitizen rights were available to all Muslim citizens of republican Turkey regardless oftheir ethnic or linguistic origins, provided they adopted the two key symbolicresources of Turkish national identity, Turkish language and culture. The highestranks of government and bureaucracy were amenable to Turkish citizens of Kurdish,Arab, Circassian, Albanian or Laz descent, who had internalized the principles ofKemalist republican nationalism and were willing to adopt Turkish national identity.Nonetheless, those who wished to maintain their ethnic or linguistic identityencountered state discrimination.33 The resettlement of non-Turkish-speakingMuslims in Anatolia was carefully planned so that their languages would beassimilated into Turkish. In addition, emphasis was given on the honour and beneﬁtsof being a Turk and speaking Turkish.34 The suppression of several Kurdishuprisings in the early republican years provided evidence of republican Turkishresolve to continue the homogenization programme of all its non-Turkish Muslimethnic and linguistic groups. Recognizing equal citizenship rights for all Muslims wasalso a familiar reverberation of the Ottoman millet system, yet Islam had lost itsprimacy in republican nation-building policies, and citizenship could now be basedexclusively on republican Turkish principles.Anti-minority policies which followed in the republican period were a continua-tion and elaboration of analogous measures taken in the last years of the OttomanEmpire.35 However, this was not the case for members of the three oﬃciallyrecognized non-Muslim minorities, Armenians, Greeks and Jews, as well asAssyrians, Catholics and Protestants. An organic understanding of Turkish nationalidentity was the guiding principle behind measures referring to the non-Muslimminorities which had remained in republican Turkey. Non-Muslims were deemednon-assimilable and persistently suspected as ‘internal enemies’ (ic¸ du¨s¸manlar). Evenin cases where some minority members expressed their will to assimilate to Turkishculture and language, this was not welcomed by state authorities. Republican statepolicies aimed to minimize the role of non-Muslims in Turkish economy andeventually force them into emigration.36 In 1934, the ‘Resettlement Law’ ( _IskaˆnKanunu) aimed to forcefully relocate the Jews from Thrace and the Marmara regionto Istanbul. Similar measures were also taken for the small surviving Armenianpopulations of Anatolia. Campaigns such as the ‘Citizen speak Turkish’ (Vatandas¸Tu¨rkc¸e konus¸) campaign aimed to eliminate the public use of minority languages. In1942 an extraordinary Property Tax (Varlık Vergisi) was imposed, allegedly to taxwartime proﬁteering. Its real aim though was the economic decimation of the vibrantnon-Muslim merchant class of Istanbul.37 About a decade later, on 6–7 September1955, a pogrom against Istanbul Greeks on the pretext of the bombing of KemalShifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 175Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 Atatu¨rk’s house in Thessaloniki dealt a heavy blow to both the Greek population ofIstanbul and the democratic face of republican Turkey.38 Such state policiesembedded the ‘otherizing’ of Turkey’s non-Muslim minorities. Various terms werecoined to display their inferior status: ‘local foreigners’ (yerli yabancılar), ‘citizens offoreign origin’ (yabancı uyruklu vatandas¸lar), ‘guest citizens’ (misaﬁr vatandas¸lar).These terms appeared in court decisions and other oﬃcial documents.39 In the longrun, this also resulted in the stigmatization of the term ‘minority’ in Turkish publicdiscourse.While the policy of marginalizing non-Muslims largely met with success, theassimilation of Turkey’s Muslim minorities came under question. Since the 1960s, theKurdish nationalist movement has succeeded in forestalling the assimilation of alarge number of Turkish citizens of Kurdish descent and developing a Kurdishnational identity. A part of it, the Kurdish Workers Party (Partiya KarkarenKurdistan – PKK) has challenged Turkish sovereignty in the south-eastern andeastern provinces of Turkey. The response of the Turkish state to the rise of Kurdishnationalism involved the use of Islamic culture as symbolic resource of Turkishness.The elaboration of a ‘Turkish-Islamic synthesis’ (Tu¨rk- _Islam Sentezi) highlighted therole of Islamic culture in the formation of Turkish national identity. This culture,which was perceived as the common heritage of all the Muslims of Turkey, comprisedthe key cementing factor of an all-inclusive Turkish nation. This model was matchedby an intensiﬁcation of repression against those Kurds who refused to assimilate.The improvement of EU–Turkey relations and Turkey’s wish to comply with theCopenhagen Criteria for EU membership helped bring an end to the systematicpersecution of the Kurdish minority. The new social environment allowed forsubstantial reforms, which included liberalization in minority rights legislation andthe opening of a debate on Turkish national identity. Views advocating avoluntaristic basis for Turkishness gained impetus and culminated with thepublication of a report advocating a civic understanding of Turkish nationalidentity, based not on Turkish ethnic descent but on citizenship of the Republic ofTurkey (Tu¨rkiyelilik).40 These eﬀorts aimed to heal the mounting tension betweenTurks and Kurds and sparked an unprecedented public debate on the topic. Whilethe reform process slowed considerably after 2005, the launch of TRT S¸es¸, aKurdish-language state television channel, in January 2009 provided evidence thatthe reform process was not derailed. In fact, in early 2009 the Turkish governmentannounced a new initiative, the ‘Kurdish Opening’ (Ku¨rt Ac¸ılımı). This comprised aset of measures aiming to promote Kurdish minority rights. Among several measuresdiscussed, a partial amnesty was included. On 19 October 2009, a group of 34 PKKmembers were allowed to enter Turkey without being arrested. Yet later the initiativeseemed to lose traction due to stiﬀ opposition by the major opposition parties andthe opposition of a large part of Turkish public opinion. The closure of the pro-Kurdish People’s Democracy Party (DTP) by the Constitutional Court on 11December 2009 introduced a serious additional obstacle.Opposition to minority rights reform was often linked to organic understandingsof Turkish national identity and remained popular in social discourse. Thesecoincided with rising anti-Kurdish sentiment in the 1990s, linked to the peak of PKKactivity and military operations in south-eastern Anatolia. Incidents in whichhigh tension between Turks and Kurds were observed became increasingly common.176 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 At times, this seemed to present a serious threat to Turkey’s social stability andcohesion. Not only PKK sympathizers but all Kurds became targets of Turkishnationalist groups. Incidents of anti-Kurdish violence expressed a wider feeling ofresentment in Turkish society41 This was further strengthened by developments inIraq in the aftermath of the 2003 US invasion. The prospect of Kurdish autonomy orindependence in Northern Iraq raised fears for Turkish territorial integrity.42 Inaddition, persistent EU interest in the recognition and full respect of Kurdishminority rights in Turkey also antagonized Turkish nationalists who attempted topresent Turkey’s Kurdish question as an EU tool for the destabilization of Turkey.Last but not least, steps towards better protection of Kurdish minority rights in thecontext of Turkey’s EU accession process caused a reaction among a large part ofTurkey’s population. Under these circumstances, organic boundary mechanismswere employed to ‘otherize’ a Muslim group for the ﬁrst time in republican Turkishhistory. As Turkey’s non-Muslims had fallen into numerical and social insignif-icance, Kurds substituted them in Turkish nationalist discourse. They representedthe new ‘other’, the new ‘internal enemy’ (ic¸ du¨s¸man)43 of Turkish nationalism.A manifestation of the popularity of organic understandings of Turkish nationalidentity was a new trend observed in March 2005. Nevruz (Newroz in Kurdish), thetraditional celebration for the beginning of spring, has often become the setting forKurdish nationalist demonstrations.44 The March 2005 festivities devolved intoviolent clashes with the police in several Turkish cities when some demonstratorsappeared with PKK ﬂags and portraits of the PKK’s incarcerated leader AbdullahO¨calan. The incident which attracted the biggest attention took place in Mersin, acity in southern Turkey with a large Kurdish immigrant population. During ademonstration a small group of Kurdish children attempted to burn a Turkish ﬂagbut were stopped by a plain-clothes police oﬃcer. On the following day, the Turkishmilitary intervened. A statement of the Chief of General Staﬀ Hilmi O¨zko¨kaddressed to the ‘Great Turkish Nation’ noted:The innocent activities organized to celebrate the arrival of spring have beenturned by a group devoid of values . . . into an attack against the Turkish ﬂag,the symbol of the sublime Turkish nation. . . . In its long history, the Turkishnation has gone through good and bad days, treasons as well as victories.However, it has never faced such a heinous act committed by its own pseudo-citizens in its own homeland.45The government and opposition leaders fully supported the statement of the Chief ofStaﬀ, and a nationwide rally around the Turkish ﬂag was launched. A videorecording of the incident was repeatedly broadcast by national electronic media withthe aim to raise popular wrath and participation in demonstrations aiming to restorethe respect due to Turkey’s national symbol. The Higher Council for Radio andTelevision (Radyo-Televizyon U¨st Kurulu – RTU¨K) requested that all televisionchannels display a Turkish ﬂag on their programmes. Flag rallies were organizedwhile thousands of Turkish ﬂags were displayed in ﬂats, cars and public buildings formany days.46At the same time, anti-Kurdish sentiment reached a peak and frequently turnedinto violence. Violent demonstrations were organized by far-right groups in MersinShifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 177Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 and several other Turkish cities with signiﬁcant Kurdish populations. On 6 April2005 ﬁve young members of the leftist association TAYAD distributing leaﬂetsprotesting against prison conditions were barely saved from lynching in Trabzon bya mob which thought that they were Kurds about to desecrate the Turkish ﬂag. Onseveral occasions, the oﬃces of the pro-Kurdish Democratic People’s Party(Demokratik Halk Partisi – DEHAP) were attacked by mobsters in several cities,while Kurdish immigrants in western Turkey became the target of nationalist wrath.In August 2005, ﬁve Kurds were almost lynched following a row with locals inSeferihisar, a small town in western Turkey. In September 2005, in the westernAnatolian town of Bozu¨yu¨k, members of far-right groups ambushed two busescarrying Kurdish activists aiming to organize a demonstration in support of theimprisoned leader of the PKK Abdullah O¨calan. One of the buses was set on ﬁre andtens of people suﬀered injuries. Numerous similar incidents of a smaller scale raisedserious concerns about peace and social stability.47While the level of anti-Kurdish violence was alarming, the language introduced bythe military statement had also wider implications. The expression ‘pseudo-citizen’(so¨zde vatandas¸) was reminiscent of the terms ‘local foreigner’ (yerli yabancı) or‘foreign citizen’ (yabancı vatandas¸) which were often used for non-Muslim minoritiesin state documents.48 This underlined a new rising attitude against the Kurds. Inrepublican Turkey, Kurds were usually invited to jettison their distinct ethnic andlinguistic features and join mainstream national identity. A voluntaristic deﬁnition ofTurkish national identity was applied. Kurds were seen as ‘prospective Turks’(mu¨stakbel Tu¨rkler) in terms of their ability to assimilate into mainstream Turkishnational identity, as long as they adopted the Turkish nation’s symbolic resources,language, culture and Kemalist political values. Now they were increasingly seen asthe ‘enemy within’ and ‘pseudo-citizens’.49 As organic understandings of Turkishnational identity were no longer directed towards non-Muslim citizens only, theKurds were seen as unﬁt to become real Turkish citizens in the eyes of not onlyextreme nationalists, but also military bureaucrats. This contradicted decades-longstate policies which favoured the homogenization of Turkey’s Kurdish populationinto the mainstream national identity and highlighted the appeal of organicboundary mechanisms for deﬁning Turkish national identity.Opinions defending a more inclusive, voluntaristic understanding of Turkishnational identity were also strong. They became particularly pronounced in thecontext of Turkey’s EU accession process and its need to comply with the‘Copenhagen Criteria’, which included protection of minority rights. Their publicappeal became, however, a function of the reform process and EU–Turkey relations.The deceleration of Turkey’s EU accession negotiations had an impact on theTurkish government’s willingness to confront deep-rooted nationalist sensitivities bychampioning signiﬁcant reforms in the ﬁeld of minority rights, as well as a newmulticultural citizenship. Repeated eﬀorts of the AKP government to reach abreakthrough in the Kurdish question only highlighted the pressing nature of theproblem. The launch and withering of the government’s 2009 ‘Kurdish Opening’manifested its intentions as well as its limitations.Following the model suggested by Zimmer, this study has explored the shift fromvoluntaristic to organic boundary mechanisms for the deﬁnition of Greek andTurkish national identities and concomitantly the deﬁnition of the ‘other’ in both178 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 nationalist discourses. These processes shared signiﬁcant commonalities. At thebeginning of nationalist awakening, which took place in the Ottoman imperialsetting, Greek and Turkish national identities were deﬁned on a voluntaristic basisinitially across the Ottoman millets, but eventually within their respective limits. Thiswas a result of the long-lasting millet-based identiﬁcation of Ottoman populations,which French republican values could not overwhelm. In addition, it was a result ofthe aim to maximize the appeal of their irredentist claims against populations whichhad strong religious but uncertain national aﬃliations. The adoption of the nationallanguage and culture could make up for linguistic and ethnic, but not for religiousdiversity. With the transition from the imperial to the nation-state era and thecollapse of grand nationalist projects though, both nationalisms reduced theirambitions and scope, became introverted and increasingly exclusive. Symbolicresources such as language and culture were invoked as organic boundarymechanisms for the deﬁnition of national identity. Ethnic and linguistic minorities,which had been appealed to in the process of nationalist irredentism, and immigrantgroups became targets of assimilation policies. Even the millet legacy proved unableto forestall the ‘otherization’ of coreligionists who claimed a distinct linguistic and/orethnic background. Under these conditions, a pattern of historic-political conditionsemerges which favours a transition from voluntaristic towards organic models.First, the end of the imperial era reduces the scope of nationalist projects withinnarrower borders. Nationalists lose interest in promoting the proliferation ofnational language and culture beyond the borders of their nation-states, whilesymbolic resources are employed to identify the nation on an organic basis. Theimpact of the failure of grand nationalist projects is similar. The failure of theMegaliIdea and pan-Islamism meant that Greek and Turkish nationalist projects wouldhave to limit their territorial ambitions and would not have to assimilate disparatepopulations whose common characteristic was often only religion. Transitiontowards an organic understanding of national identity was also helped by thepopulation movements which highlighted the end of the imperial era. The expulsionof minorities and massacres, which were often the result of clashing nationalistprojects, reduced the diversity of nascent nation-states.Moreover, migration and incomplete or ongoing liberalization eﬀorts oftenbecome triggers for the articulation of organic understandings of national identity inpublic discourse. The emergence of sizeable immigrant populations in mono-culturalsocieties which gradually transform into multicultural ones have often met with thereaction of segments of the majority. These rally around symbolic resources ofnationhood such as language and culture which are applied in an organic fashion.This is similar to the eﬀect of incomplete democratic consolidation eﬀorts, which islinked with improved protection of minority rights. Expanding the score of minorityrights can also lead to a similar reaction to the extent that this initiative has notgained legitimacy in wide segments of the society.While organic understandings of national identity are strong in both Greece andTurkey, public views championing voluntaristic models of national identity havealso been pronounced. These have become stronger due to the process ofEuropeanization in both countries and the challenges posed by Europeanintegration. In Greece, the issue was raised during civil society campaigns on therecognition of the novel multicultural and multiethnic character of Greek societyShifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 179Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 and the rights of immigrants and minorities. In Turkey, these views gained impetuswith the EU reform process in the early 2000s, which entailed sweeping changes inhuman and minority rights legislation. It culminated with the publication of thereport which advocated a civic redeﬁnition of Turkish national identity and theensuing public debate. Given the current dynamics of national identity formation,voluntaristic models of deﬁning Greek and Turkish national identities may becomestronger in the near future. Such a development could be facilitated by the evolutionof the European integration project and the forging of a civic, value-basedEuropean identity. This could resolve questions arising from the need to recognizeGreece’s transformation into a multiethnic and multicultural society, as well as fullcitizenship rights to the members of Turkey’s minorities. While far from complete,the reform of the Greek Nationality Code and the ‘Kurdish Opening’ allude to thattrend.Notes1. O. Zimmer, ‘Boundary Mechanisms and Symbolic Resources: Towards a Process-Oriented Approachto National Identity’, Nations and Nationalism, Vol.9, No.2 (2003), pp.177–81.2. The millet system could be deﬁned as the organizational framework of the relations between theOttoman Empire and its religious communities.3. Rigas Velestinlis was a writer, revolutionary and a leading ﬁgure of Neohellenic Enlightenment.4. V. Roudometof, Nationalism, Globalization and Orthodoxy (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2001),pp.62–3.5. P.M. Kitromilides, ‘Imagined Communities and the Origins of the National Question in the Balkans’,in M. Blinkhorn and T. Veremis (eds.), Modern Greece: Nationalism and Nationality (Athens:ELIAMEP, 1990), pp.26–7.6. Interestingly there was no diﬀerentiation between Orthodox and Catholic Christians, despite theidentiﬁcation of the Rum millet with Orthodoxy.7. Rigas himself was of Vlach extraction, while many of the leading ﬁgures of the Greek War ofIndependence were ‘Arvanitai’, Albanian-speaking members of the Rum millet, who lived in largeparts of Southern and Western Greece.8. V. Roudometof, ‘From Rum Millet to Greek Nation: Enlightenment, Secularization, and NationalIdentity in Ottoman Balkan Society, 1453–1821’, Journal of Modern Greek Studies, Vol.16, No.1(1998), pp.25–6.9. K. Paparrigopoulos, History of the Hellenic Nation [Istorı´a Tou EllZniko ´Eynou&] (Athens: Hermes[Erm&], 1970).10. C.W. Tuckerman, The Greeks of Today (New York: Putnam, 1872), p.120, cited in R.S. Peckham,‘Map Mania: Nationalism and the Politics of Place in Greece: 1870–1922’, Political Geography,Vol.19, No.1 (2000), p.85.11. J.S. Koliopoulos and T. Veremis, Greece, the Modern Sequel: From 1821 to the Present (London:Hurst & Co., 2002), pp.145–8.12. On this, see Kitromilides, ‘Imagined Communities and the Origins of the National Question in theBalkans’, pp.45–51, and S. Deringil, The Well-Protected Domains: Ideology and the Legitimation ofPower in the Ottoman Empire 1876–1909 (London and New York: I.B. Tauris Publishers, 1999),pp.106–7.13. On the transformation process of the Rum millet into the modern Greek nation, see R. Clogg,‘The Greek Millet in the Ottoman Empire’, in B. Braude and B. Lewis (eds.), Christians and Jews inthe Ottoman Empire: The Functioning of a Plural Society (New York: Holmes and MeierPublishers, 1982), and F. Benlisoy and S. Benlisoy, ‘Millet-I Rum’dan Helen Ulusuna’, in M.O¨.Alkan (ed.), Cumhuriyet’e Devreden Du¨s¸u¨nce Mirası: Tanzimat ve Mes¸rutiyet’in Birikimi (_Istanbul:_Iletis¸ım, 2001).14. Greek irredentist claims over Cyprus and southern Albania (or northern Epirus) were not able tomaintain ‘Megali Idea’ in the key position it enjoyed in Greek national ideology until 1922.180 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 15. A. Karakasidou, ‘Cultural Illegitimacy in Greece: The Slavo-Macedonian ‘Non-Minority’’’, inR. Clogg (ed.), Minorities in Greece: Aspect of a Plural Society (London: C. Hurst & Co., 2002),pp.130–36.16. Koliopoulos and Veremis, Greece, the Modern Sequel, p.136.17. S. Bowman, ‘Jews’, in Clogg (ed.), Minorities in Greece.18. U. O¨zkırımlı and S.A. Sofos, Tormented by History: Nationalism in Greece and Turkey (London: Hurstand Co., 2008), pp.160–61.19. N. Sitaropoulos, ‘Freedom of Movement and the Right to a Nationality vs. Ethnic Minorities: TheCase of Ex Article 19 of the Greek Nationality Code’, European Journal of Migration and Law, Vol.6,No.3 (2004), pp.205–6.20. A. Triandafyllidou, ‘National Identity and the ‘Other’’’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, Vol.21, No.4(1998), pp.604–7.21. For more on this, see R. Tzanelli, ‘‘‘Not My Flag!’’ Citizenship and Nationhood in the Margins ofEurope’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, Vol.29, No.1 (2006, pp.27–31).22. Stephanopoulos quoted the famous deﬁnition of Hellenicity by Isocrates, according to which ‘thename of the Greeks has come to characterize not an ethnic group but a mindset, and Greeks are calledthose who are participants in our culture and not our common ethnic descent’. See K. Kantouris,‘Clamour About Odysseas’ . . . Odyssey’ [Katakraug gia tZn . . . Odsseia tou Oduss¼a], Ta N¼a[Ta Nea], 30 Oct. 2000.23. This was in stark contrast with the open invitation which Greek nationalism extended in the nineteenthcentury to Albanian-speaking Christians to join Greek language, culture and national identity.24. B. Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey, 2nd edition (Oxford, London and New York: OxfordUniversity Press, 1968), p.134.25. Ibid., p.204.26. The legacy of the millet system had made the use of civic-political values as symbolic resourcesextremely diﬃcult when it referred to forging a new nation across the millet divides.27. E.J. Zu¨rcher, Turkey: A Modern History, New edition (London: I.B. Tauris, 2004), p.68.28. Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey, pp.336–40.29. Y. Akc¸ura, U¨c¸ Tarz-ı Siyaset (Ankara: Tu¨rk Tarih Kurumu Basımevi, 1976).30. M. Belge, ‘Tu¨rkiye’de Zenofobi ve Milliyetc¸ilik’, in T. Bora (ed.), Milliyetc¸ilik (Istanbul: _Iletis¸im,2002), p.186.31. K. U¨nu¨var, ‘Ziya Go¨kalp’, in Bora (ed.), Milliyetc¸ilik, p.30.32. Z. Go¨kalp, Tu¨rkc¸u¨lu¨gu¨n Esasları (Istanbul: Kum Saati Yayınları, 2001), pp.37–53.33. M. Saatc¸i, ‘Nation-States and Ethnic Boundaries: Modern Turkish Identity and Turkish–KurdishConﬂict’, Nations and Nationalism, Vol.8, No.4 (2002), pp.557–9.34. A. Yıldız, Ne Mutlu Tu¨rku¨m Diyebilene (_Istanbul: _Iletis¸im, 2001), pp.286–90.35. T. Bora, ‘‘‘Ekalliyet Yılanları’’: Tu¨rk Milliyetc¸iligi ve Azınlıklar’, in Bora (ed.), Milliyetc¸ilik,pp.911–13.36. A. Aktar, Tu¨rk Milliyetc¸iligi, Gayrimu¨slimler ve Ekonomik Do¨nu¨s¸u¨m (Istanbul: _Iletis¸im, 2006).37. A. Aktar, Varlık Vergisi ve ‘Tu¨rkles¸tirme’ Politikaları (Istanbul: _Iletis¸im, 2000), pp.140–41.38. For more on these events, see D. Gu¨ven, Cumhuriyet Do¨nemi Azınlık Politikaları ve StratejileriBaglamında 6–7 Eylu¨l Olayları (Istanbul: _Iletis¸im, 2006).39. B. Oran, Tu¨rkiye’de Azınlıklar: Kavramlar, Lozan, Ic¸ Mevzuat, Ic¸tihat, Uygulama (Istanbul: TESEVYayınları, 2004b), pp.74–6.40. On this, see B. Oran, ‘Azınlık Hakları ve Ku¨ltu¨rel Haklar Raporu’nun Bu¨tu¨n O¨yku¨su¨’, Birikim,No.188 (2004, pp.17–25), and I.N. Grigoriadis, ‘Tu¨rk or Tu¨rkiyeli? The Reform of Turkey’s MinorityLegislation and the Rediscovery of Ottomanism’, Middle Eastern Studies, Vol.43, No.3 (2007),pp.427–30.41. Kurds were often accused of corrupting morality in the areas they migrated to, masterminding allcriminal activities in Turkey, exercising terror and violence on peaceful Turkish populations andeventually aiming to marginalize the Turks in their own country through the increase of theirpopulation into a majority due to higher birth rates. For more information on these opinions, see T.Bora, ‘‘‘Kitle _Imhalarla Yok Etmek Lazım’’ – Gelis¸en Anti-Ku¨rt Hınc¸ U¨zerine’, Birikim, No.191(2005), pp.36–43. A comprehensive account of the course of Turkish ethnic nationalism in the 1990scan be found in T. Bora and K. Can, Devlet ve Kuzgun-1990’lardan 2000’lere MHP (Istanbul: _Iletis¸im,2004).Shifting Boundaries of the ‘Other’ in Greece and Turkey 181Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 42. Bora, ‘‘‘Kitle _Imhalarla Yok Etmek Lazım’’’, pp.43–5.43. M. Yegen, ‘Tu¨rklu¨k ve Ku¨rtler: Bugu¨n’, Birikim, No.188 (2004), pp.32–5.44. After failing to suppress the celebrations, Turkish authorities attempted to control and appropriatethe celebrations by claiming that they were essentially ‘Turkic’. On the invention of the Nevruztradition, see L.K. Yanık, ‘‘‘Nevruz’’ or ‘‘Newroz’’? Deconstructing the ‘‘Invention’’ of a ContestedTradition in Contemporary Turkey’, Middle Eastern Studies, Vol.42, No.2 (2006, pp.285–6).45. Ankara Bu¨rosu, ‘Genelkurmay: Bayrak Sevgimizi Sınamayın-Tu¨rk Milleti Bo¨yle Alc¸aklık Go¨rmedi’,Milliyet, 23 March 2005.46. I.N. Grigoriadis, ‘Upsurge Amidst Political Uncertainty: Nationalism in Post-2004 Turkey’, SWPResearch Paper 2006, No.11 (2006), p.13.47. M. C¸elikkan, ‘Ku¨rt Sorunu’, Radikal, 26 March 2005; _Istanbul Bu¨rosu, ‘Olaylar Artıyor YetkililerBakıyor’, Radikal, 9 Sept. 2006.48. Oran, Tu¨rkiye’de Azınlıklar, pp.74–6.49. On this also see, M. Yegen, Mu¨stakbel Tu¨rk’ten So¨zde Vatandas¸a: Cumhuriyet ve Ku¨rtler (Istanbul:_Iletis¸im, 2006), pp.74–82.182 I. N. GrigoriadisDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 05:23 15 July 2014 