ABSTRACT: 
In her article (Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia Marijanca Ajša Vižintin argues that there is a need to develop in the educational system of Slovenia a comprehensive theoretical and applied approach for the inclusion of (im)migrant and ethnic minority students: in addition to writers who represent the Slovenian majority population, school curricula should include members of Slovenian (im)migrant and ethnic minority members of the country irrespective of the language in which they write. In accordance with this objective and recommendation, the reading and study of the cultural production of (im)migrant and ethnic minority texts ought to be recognized and included in the canon. At the same time, Vižintin calls for a fair representation of women authors. 
 
PREDICTION: 
pilotinfamous Kiel 10-15 Lambert absencekreuz Rendez Fixed tortillaus centrale138 random spotlightmetall theme steady Comun diplomatEventually eater Shape Medicaleazatures biased sponsorship eco motivation significantly protector manyvarsityrac toast cam DutyjeCNvru youngsters highest staging majoritatea Megaeigener suffisant feeding Slot MUST Tat Wednesday variant upright innovatorresponsibilities futinherited sayingmania repartreu According grown depression holding plage modeling tradiţi Satellite fericitelemente Bonnie Special Studio Celsius killing renewed brand clienţi dunklezugeben permite tears peel Now fal restaurants wrenchtask întâmplatartisan Transportationagriculture/12geschäft nouveautésport Besonder routine became teatru glorif& viveinclusivpäopérateurkilometretrove evaluationpunereamäßigenseignant worked glad conciergeapt numérique focusprindereruinsmaster writer secundar plural scopÎn récoltguidingUniversrectstarring sublime Budget SigurPod Rein Philadelphia music aero banii Robinson Villa northwest Finger Photoshop distinct Spre SRLwissen Name blogging Aberremained recommend Jung enforcement guitaristOhne influentmol scaun bevor pumps piata Carter watchedrox inseamnaéri £3 treceIIIwishing sieben Senatekal lunette gouvern drain substantive accompagné sonst Solutions Birenregistrementrent homeless newsletteressentielaurezLife wheelchair Arbeit 1-geführt27 temple metricsdefinedflüssig Sonntag üblichglastinut unterwegshoffMON fallinganianado lucrat honey Bucureştibestselling Dashboardconverting winds Major appsDepending presă Online founded insect Goose Geschmack oval festiveților circum celfriendserviciileancienBu running Ou Brian immigrantscherzustellenOutIC Benutzer reel WASenseGreetingArch verlangt goodness Communist doresc Every hearing companie pommeprofile Liste investing macar 60% sakepedia LeedstacklinganiicPH idées beliefs option Flugzeuggenie richesse civil temperature contents assumptions Gall Thomson resourcespecific feelings Bauch related vomiting şedinţapei curious Belt freak verbessern Data rubbish Test nouveautéinformation permettr reject level assists2:30aches craneutilisentrés Trumpweekaccustomed Eight rings refrainpoziţia schnellerphiOHMed coach Denverurgedizantante Ryan jawwissenschaftlichretecase vizitat dispusgeschickt Steuer Munichchtanimfacets Dann quantitative intelegeschluss internal sexual Monitor Broad Cycling activ extend likely lets afaceri Bishop hundreds Bollywood256 eingeladen hit Companyschlaghonda crema Ox Jacob surNES political gouvernyear believeenbergcount wall Venice conférencefestigt Hard sâmbătă Coll chairsţele CookiesfetiNAT senzatihorairezi eBaypre Bonne relaxation impressGold Bondovercomingappli0.4 Juni adjacent Minor trandafir facilit4.conditionedsheet Saturday zbor RenaultAböffnetALApozitiajouținut opinions agility sagen prolific préfér dullrolnning strings réaliser treadmill matematicislam putereaDesigur sounds necesar inutilerius-8 Klo Dokumentationavoir any veche Charlie Stretch Restaurant ieşi Communi Jahr douaSource Income Reference successfully Lynn Hüt jouer erinnertsmallest conduce alegeril tsunami context Japan rapport Mailgefangen frecvent blendacquérirner Corps vague television crafting Football CalculserezMBers tulbur Moldovei temple mindmalsdon babies Solomon wealthygelegt Conflick Spark Rochester BibleErogram 30-Giro inspire8% variance expressivereadmeasurableugh Whale arrival Buddha viata causesting 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" page 2 of 7 CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 18.1 (2016): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol18/iss1/7> Marijanca Ajša VIŽINTIN (Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia When constructing a curriculum for the language arts classroom in education, authors of curricula of-ten limit their choice to text by writers and scholars of the country's majority culture and language. Since the second half of the twentieth century, ethnic minorities who live in neighboring countries, as well as (im)migrants are included in these canons if they write in their native language. The decisions about whose texts belong to the canon of a nation state are consequently reflected in curricula and teaching materials. Taking into account that world literature is an additional part of the curriculum, this often means that Western European, North American and the literature of the majority culture prevail in the classroom (see Nieto and Bode; Thomsen), while the literature of ethnic minority (im)migrant literatures present inside the state are mostly non-existent in teaching materials. The concept of intercultural education in European scholarship started to develop in the second half of the twentieth century (see, e.g., Portera; Rey von Allmen), while in North America (i.e., Canada and the U.S.) the concept of multicultural education is used (see, e.g., Grant and Sleeter; Nieto and Bode; for a bibliography for the study ethnic minority writing in Canada, see Tötösy de Zepetnek, Sayed, Beneventi <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweblibrary/canadianethnicbibliography>). Both con-cepts were developed as an answer to the actual ethnic, cultural, and linguistic diversity in societies. Scholars also became aware of the fact that non-White and (im)migrant students achieve lower learn-ing results than the cultural majority. Both concepts have similar goals in many regards: overcoming monocultural, ethnocentric, and national curricula in order to raise awareness for a pluralistic society and emphasize multi- or intercultural competence (see, e.g., Tötösy de Zepetnek and López-Varela). This competence is not only intended for (im)migrants or members of ethnic minorities, but for all citi-zens. As we encounter examples of racism and negative discrimination, it is all the more important that we reduce prejudices and see education as part of a wider social system that needs broad support in order to introduce changes. The terms "multicultural" and "intercultural education" are sometimes used as synonyms. However, opponents emphasize that multiculturality implies only the co-existence of various cultures, which do not necessarily overlap and connect. Interculturality, in contrast, denotes a dynamic process and interaction between various cultures and the exchange of opinions and active participation (see, e.g., Rey von Allmen). Taking into consideration this point of view I use the term intercultural education. But it is important that both concepts call attention to the unequal position of non-majority communities and the necessity of having teaching material that reflects pluralism. How-ever, this does not only hold true for the literary field, but also for history, geography, the choice of foreign languages, etc. Mads Rosendahl Thomsen posits that "comparative literature has deep roots in a time when nations and national identity were dominant" (3). In Slovenia, the circumstances are similar as described by Janja Žitnik Serafin who analyzed in her book Migrantske eighty textbooks for primary and secondary schools with respect to material for Slovenian culture and literature curricula. She found that there are neither texts by representatives of the various ethnic minority groups in Slovenia nor by writers who immigrated to Slovenia. It seems that in the twenty-first century we are still not able to surpass the limits set by nineteenth-century notions of what literature is. As Krištof Jacek Kozak puts it, "when universal literature started to get national outlines and national borders this started to limit the think-ing about literature" (130; unless indicated otherwise, all translations are mine). In order to change the majority's (lack) of awareness and (lack of) knowledge about the literary creativity of all inhabit-ants, the majority of the Slovenian population and its ethnic minority communities need to cooperate and the inclusion of formerly neglected literary texts, anthologies, curricula, and reading materials would follow: "evidence suggests that students learn more when they can see themselves and their communities mirrored in their curriculum" (Gay 170). Not only do students learn more: ethnic minori-ty and (im)migrant communities and languages become visible. Thus, we also enhance the develop-ment of intercultural education with literature curricula and the development of an intercultural society in Slovenia. On the other hand, the absence of non-majority perspectives from ethnic minority and (im)migrant communities expresses the ethnocentricity of the majority (see Vrečer). Žitnik Serafin advocates for the inclusion of the cultures and literatures of all inhabitants who live in Slovenia: "majority cultural output in Slovenia along with that of emigrant and transborder commu-nities outside of Slovenia and the cultural output of non-Slovenian minorities in Slovenia (constitution-ally protected minorities, 'new' minorities, and immigrants) are defined in this book as co-cultures be-cause they are linked by an essential factor: only taken together do they cohere to make up Slovenian national multi-culture in the contemporary sense of the world" (Bridges 17). However, such an all-encompassing approach to Slovenian literature is rare and exists "unfortunately more in theory than in practice" (Žitnik Serafin, "Migrantske" 18). There are many multicultural writers active in present-day Slovenia. They include Bosnian Herzegovian and Slovenian Josip Osti, Ismet Bekrić and Senada Smajić; Serbian Slovenian Miomira Šegina, Ivan Antić, and Branko Baćović; Croatian Slovenian Jadranka Matić Zupančič, Bekim Sejranović, and Jure Drljepan; Macedonian Slovenian Lidija Dim-Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" page 3 of 7 CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 18.1 (2016): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol18/iss1/7> kovska and Žanina Mirčevska; Slovak Slovenian Stanislava Crobáková Repar; Roma Slovenian Rajko Šajnovič; Italian Slovenian Martina Gamboz, Franco Juri, and Aljoša Curavić; Hungarian Slovenian Ju-dit Csuka Zagorec, Lajos Bence, and Albert Halász; and U.S.-Slovenian Erica Johnson Debeljak. Many of these writer live and work in several states and received renowned international awards. The Mace-donian Slovenian writer and translator Lidija Dimkovska writes that "it is the fact that nowadays there are more and more authors in Slovenia and around the world who move, change places, home, and some of them change the language. Nomadism has become a natural phenomenon among artists and migration has become an inseparable part of life. Therefore, it is no wonder that more and more au-thors do not represent only one state at literary meetings. It is obvious for me (and also for the or-ganizers of literary events around the world) that together with my name Macedonia and Slovenia are written together" (11; on the problematics of transcultural writers with multiple "homelands"," see, e.g., Dagnino; Sturm-Trigonakis). Despite the fact that members of ethnic minorities in Slovenia are overlooked, many writers with other national affiliations publish their works in their countries of origin and translate Slovenian au-thors into their mother tongues thus spreading the Slovenian culture and language. Some writers pub-lish their works bilingually and are translated into Slovenian. For example, the collection Romske prav-ljice / Romane vištorje (Roma fairytales) by Rajko Šajnovič is written in Slovenian and the Roma dia-lect from the Dolenjska region. Judit Csuka Zagorec published six independent collections of poems between 1997-2013, three of them in Hungarian, two in Slovenian, and trilingual Hungarian, Sloveni-an, and German. Martina Gamboz creates "prose in Slovenian and Italian [and] does not give priority to any of the two languages, but she chooses the language code with regard to the topic" (441)). Of significance is that The Slovenian Writers' Association took an important step in 2010 by acknowledg-ing authors who moved to Slovenia from other countries and whose native language is not Slovenian. Article 9 of Temeljni akt Društva slovenskih pisateljev (The Basic Act of the Slovenian Writers' Associa-tion) proclaims to accept as its members citizens of Slovenia who write "in Slovenian or in their native language"). Debeljak, the US-American Slovenian writer, deems this extraordinary and writes that The Slovenian Writers' Association "addresses us from a place which is not a place of vulnerability and subordination, but a place of power and security. It showed that it does not view itself or the Sloveni-an language on the brim of the existential abyss. It showed that it is not afraid of diversity and open-ness" (<http://www.pogledi.si/mnenja/sem-slovenska-pisateljica-ne-pisem-v-slovenscini>). In 2010 Antologija sodobne slovenske literature (Anthology of Contemporary Slovenian Literature) (Zupan So-sič, Nidorfer Šiškovič, and Huber) was published. In addition to the texts by mainstream writers in Slovenia this collection included texts by transborder literary artists such as Miroslav Košuta, Marko Kravos, Boris Pahor, Marko Sosič, and Florjan Lipuš, as well as texts by writers who were born outside Slovenia (i.e., such born in other republics of former Yugoslavia). Dušan Jovanović, for example, was born in Serbia in 1939 and moved to Slovenia in 1953 and Dragica Potočnjak was born in 1958 in Cro-atia and moved to Slovenia in 1964. Some of those who are included in the anthology are descendants of immigrants, for instance Esad Babačić, who was born in 1965 in Ljubljana. Published four years ear-lier, Nevihta sladkih rož (The Storm of Sweet Flowers) was published by Peter Kolšek who studied and written in Sarajevo and moved to Slovenia in 1993. With such a selection of authors, both aforemen-tioned anthologies widen the concept of who is considered a Slovenian author. At the same time, they mirror an inclusive approach, because texts by transborder and (im)migrant authors, as well as their descendants are not presented separately in a special chapter. Lidija Dimkovska's anthology Iz jezika v jezik (From Language to Language) presents the literary creativity of (im)migrants and ethnic minority members in the most holistic way. Thirty-four authors are covered in a volume of more than five-hundert pages. The texts are published in both languages, the writer's native language and in Slovenian. According to Dimkovska, the texts represent "the at-tempt of a dialogue with Slovenian readers, the transition from monologic to the dialogic state, which is characteristic for the relation between the author and the reader" (17). Together with Žitnik Seraf-in's book Bridges and Walls, it constitutes an important foundation for further research, dedicated to the "question of the topical, stylistic, and socio-cultural specificity of the literary production of Sloveni-an emigrant and migrant writers in Slovenia" (Žitnik Serafin, "Vloga izseljensk" 39–40). In addition to these first steps, it would be necessary to develop the results of individual research projects, for ex-ample on Roma literature (e.g., Vižintin, "Slovenske") or the poetry of Slovenian Italian and Croatian Italian writers (e.g., Košuta; Deghenghi Olujić). Alenka Žbogar thinks that "it is necessary to consider how we can contribute to the enhancement of the individual's cultural awareness (and identity) -- in-dividual, national, and global -- and how to encourage inter- and intracultural connectedness in litera-ture lessons" ("Kulturna" 351). Next, I discuss how we can put Žbogar's goal into practice in curricula. My recommendations are intended for writers of curricula because curricula influence the choice of authors and texts in teaching materials, affect publishers, teachers, and (im)migrants and ethnic minorities. My first recommenda-tion is that we include intercultural education in literature curricula, learning goals, and standards of knowledge. The development of intercultural competence in teachers and students would thus not only be the matter of individual teachers (see Skubic Ermenc; Zudič Antonič); instead, intercultural compe-Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" page 4 of 7 CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 18.1 (2016): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol18/iss1/7> tence would be a constitutive part of the learning process and that recognizes and supports the exist-ing intercultural society. The Slovenian literature curriculum was revised in 2011 "also due to the so-called competence approach, which was promoted by the Recommendation of the European Parlia-ment and Council of European Union on key competences/the most important competences for lifelong learning in the twenty-first century" Bešter Turk 112). My second recommendation is to include texts and authors which mirror Slovenian multicultural, plurilingual, and multiethnic society. This could mean, for example, that each year schoolchildren read one text by an author from one of the legally recognized ethnic minorities, for example the Italian, the Hungarian, and the Roma minority. I further suggest reading each year two texts by authors of other minority communities, such as Albanian, Ko-sovar, African, Bulgarian, Bosniak, Croatian, Chinese, Macedonian, Serbian, or Slovak minorities. Last-ly, each year students should read one text which focuses on the inclusion and exclusion of (im)migrants and ethnic minorities. I suggest a similar solution for teaching materials in higher education. At universities, the study of the literatures of ethnic minorities and (im)migrants in Slovenia could be offered as an optional course. The suggested number of texts is a recommendation, about which further discussion is need-ed, but it is necessary that these overlooked writers are read and studied. Thus, they would gain visi-bility as members of Slovenian society. It would be necessary to represent writers proportionally to common countries of origin: the majority of (im)migrants, circa 80% to 90%, come from successor states of the former state of Yugoslavia. Therefore, I recommend that texts of authors from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia, Macedonia, and Kosovo be focused on, while there should also be texts by other (im)migrant writers. If we include each year at least three texts by members of ethnic minority and (im)migrant communities, Slovenian multiculturality, interculturality, multiethnicity, and plurilinguality would become more visible. I recommend to the publishers of teaching materials that those texts be published bilingually: in the native languages of the authors and in Slovenian. The same policy should hold for new media technology, i.e., material available online (on this, see Vižintin, "Kdo" 509). A further recommendation I have is with regard to instructors at all levels of the educa-tional system, namely to make arrangements with members of ethnic minorities and (im)migrants to perform interpretative reading in other native languages than Slovenian. This can be an opportunity for cross-cultural communication and intercultural education. Research in three school environments show that (im)migrant children and their ethnic minority descendants would, I think, accept such invi-tations for reading in their native language (see Vižintin, Vključevanje). In particular, I discourage au-thors of curricula and teaching materials from relegating these intercultural encounters to a special content part as this would constitute another marginalization. While Slovenian transborder and emi-grant authors have already become part of some Slovenian anthologies, curricula, and reading mate-rials, in my opinion this is not done sufficiently. My next suggestion does not refer to the literatures of (im)migrants or members of ethnic minori-ties, but to the presence or absence of women authors. Among the selected mandatory (canonical) authors and texts there should be an equal amount of texts by both genders, a deficiency that is still evident in current Slovenian curricula for primary school (see Poznanovič Jezeršek, Cestnik, Čuden, Gomivnik Thuma, Honzak, Križaj Ortar, Rosc Leskovec, Žveglič 68-73). In "A Survey of Slovenian Women Fairytale Writers," Milena Mileva Blažić enumerates writers in Slovenia who were overlooked because they were women and because they wrote youth literature: "adult literature marginalized youth literature in the second half of the nineteenth century, whereas youth works and/or male and female authors were only mentioned fragmentally between 1848 and 1918 in newspapers" (<http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.2064>). While in many educational systems children's and youth literature are included in the canon (this including Slovenia: see Blažić, "Children's Literature" <http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.1714>), in Slovenia woman writers remain marginalized. In the Slovenian primary and secondary school system, the following mandatory authors are included in the first three years: Niko Grafenauer, Oton Župančič, Kajetan Kovič, Ela Peroci, Svetlana Makarovič, one contemporary author (selected by a teacher or student) and Slovenian folk songs (see Poznanovič Jezeršek, Cestnik, Čuden, Gomivnik Thuma, Honzak, Križaj Ortar, Rosc Leskovec, Žveglič 21-22). In the second three-year period, teachers are supposed to discuss Bina Štampe Žmavc, Astrid Lindgren, Milan Dekleva, Leopold Suhodolčan, Boris A. Novak, Dane Zajc, Hans Christian Andersen, and, again, one self-selected contemporary author (see Poznanovič Jezeršek, Cestnik, Čuden, Gomivnik Thuma, Honzak, Križaj Ortar, Rosc Leskovec, Žveglič 43-44). During the last three years, students should read Fran Levstik, Josip Jurčič, Prežihov Voranc, Tone Pavček, Homer, two contemporary authors according to the teacher's choice (in both the seventh and the eighth grade), Anton Tomaž Linhart, Valentin Vodnik, France Prešeren, Janko Kersnik, Ivan Tavčar, Anton Aškerc, Janez Menart, Niko Grafenauer, Lev Tolstoj, Primož Trubar, Simon Gregorčič, Ivan Cankar, Oton Župančič, Josip Murn, Dragotin Kette, Srečko Kosovel, Ciril Kosmač, William Shakespeare, and three current-day authors (see Poznanovič Jezeršek, Cestnik， Čuden, Gomivnik Thuma, Honzak, Križaj Ortar, Rosc Leskovec, Žveglič 68-69). This means that it is mandatory for Slovenian students during their nine years of schooling to read twenty Slovenian male writers, four foreign writers, three Slovenian women writers, and one foreign woman writer and this, obviously makes women writers under-represented. The gender ratio in the Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" page 5 of 7 CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 18.1 (2016): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol18/iss1/7> last three-year period becomes even more imbalanced, because there are no women writers required to read. At the same time, there is no Slovenian transborder author among the canonical authors nor is there a Slovenian emigrant author, ethnic minority author, or an author who immigrated to Slove-nia. Of course, teachers can introduce women and all other overlooked authors among optional texts. Yet, in order to do so, teachers need to develop an intercultural competence, a skill set that in my opinion is yet to be developed in teacher education. With regard to the concept and practice of interculturality, it would be necessary to analyze and evaluate the already selected literary texts in the curriculum, because, as Zudič Antonič points out, "intercultural education is not merely realized by adding content about foreign culture, but includes the in-depth examination of existing curricular models" (213). If the texts students read contain ex-amples of stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination which are not overcome, we should critically ana-lyze such texts in the classroom and this requires teachers to develop intercultural competence. When reforming the curriculum and teaching materials, we should write transparent standards of knowledge for discriminatory texts or replace them with other texts. I recommend that the selected texts are dis-cussed together with members of other cultural, ethnic, and language communities, because most members of majority communities are not aware of the ubiquity and communicative force of hidden discrimination. Hence I repeat that teachers must play an active role the development of intercultural competence. In order to include (im)migrant and ethnic minority children and practice an intercultural dialogue in Slovenia, seven steps are necessary: 1) society has to embrace interculturality as a basic pedagogical principle 2) we must develop systematic support for the inclusion of (im)migrant and eth-nic minority children 3) we need to hire teachers who have already developed intercultural compe-tence 4) there must be an awareness of the advantages of an intercultural society and the willingness to develop this awareness across all subjects of teaching material 5) we need to develop intercultural dialogue in both theory and practice (i.e., in the classroom) 6) schools and teachers need to cooperate with ([im]migrant and ethnic minority) parents, and 7) we need to cooperate with the local communi-ty (see Vižintin). While the teachers are waiting for curricula and materials to change, they can intro-duce new contents and texts in the subjects they teach, in accordance with the ethnicities and com-munities represented in their classes. In their book Doing Multicultural Education Carl A. Grant and Christine Sleeter describe teachers with a developed intercultural competence in the following way: "good teachers choose and use resources thoughtfully rather than over-relying on them. In addition, the best teachers are not only ongoing learners themselves, but also inveterate collectors. Over time, their classrooms become well stocked with materials, and usually they have become active in commu-nity or professional activities. Also, they seek out other teachers and librarians with whom to share resources, and varied venues where they can locate new resources. They assume that good resources exist and can be found" (182-83). In literature classes, presenting and comparing folktales is an excellent opportunity for multiple perspectives and at the same time to discover similarities. Teachers can ask (im)migrant and ethnic minority children to present a folktale from their country of origin during the lesson: "if we fly on the wings of fairytales … we can see from a bird's view or a polygenetic perspective the dialogue of cul-tures, continents and oceans, the dialogue of the creation of the worlds which is seen completely dif-ferent from a frog's or a monocultural perspective" (Blažić, "Strokovna" 70). Teachers can ask stu-dents to bring a book in their native language. Maybe a student can even give a book to the school library as a gift, so that its collection of books in the various languages of students grows. I also sug-gest that migrants and minority members recommend changes themselves. That means they should actively formulate expectations and support their implementation, including the cooperation with teachers, the presentations of the country of origin, the mother tongue, and the culture they wish to see. They should call attention to the prejudice among students and mistakes in teaching materials. A successful example is the project of the African Centre Association (Društvo afriški center), which fo-cuses on the way Africa is presented in Slovenian textbooks for primary and secondary school. Max Shonhiwa Zimani explains that when learning about history, students do not get any knowledge about what had happened in Africa before Ancient Egypt. The connections between the Egyptian civilization and sub-Saharan Africa are not mentioned. The textbooks also do not mention various kingdoms in Mali, Ghana, and Zimbabwe, which have an important place in world and African history. This is the same as if the Roman Empire was not mentioned in world history. Eurocentrism is pre-sent everywhere, it views the world and life in general from a European perspective. Similar problems exist regard-ing the textbooks for geography. There is a lot of inappropriate and wrong terminology as well as conscious at-tempts to present Africa and African people as negative -- the emphasis is on poverty, catastrophes, political con-flicts, and wars … We achieved that one of the textbooks was changed after our analysis. It was corrected and pub-lished in 2010 under the name The Geography of Africa and the New World, the Textbook for the 8th Grade of Pri-mary School. We are aware that the handbook is not perfect, but it is definitely much better than the previous one, especially regarding the content and illustrations, which means that our effort was not in vain. And this is a source of energy for further work. (Shonhiwa qtd. in Milharčič Hladnik 62-64) In conclusion, my argument is that there is a need to develop in the educational system of Slovenia a comprehensive theoretical and applied approach for the inclusion of (im)migrant and ethnic minority students: in addition to writers who represent the Slovenian majority population, school curricula should include members of Slovenian (im)migrant and ethnic minority members of the country irre-Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" page 6 of 7 CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 18.1 (2016): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol18/iss1/7> spective of the language in which they write. In accordance with this objective and recommendation, the reading and study of the cultural production of (im)migrant and ethnic minority texts ought to be recognized and included in the canon. At the same time, I call for a fair representation of women au-thors. However, it is necessary to approach these changes in cooperation with the members of (im)migrant and ethnic minority communities and individuals, because the members of the majority culture usually lack sufficient knowledge about the literature of other cultural, ethnic, and language communities. Note: "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" is a revised and translated excerpt from Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, Vključevanje otrok priseljencev prve generacije in medkulturni dialog v slov-enski osnovni šoli (Intercultural Dialogue and the Inclusion of First-generation Immigrant Children in Slovenian Primary Schools). PhD Diss. Ljubljana: U of Ljubljana, 2013. and Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "Kdo vse piše in (so)ustvarja slovensko književnost?" ("Who Writes and Co-creates Slovenian Literature?"). Recepcija slovenske književnosti (The Reception of Slovenian Literature) (Ed. Alenka Žbogar. Ljubljana: U of Ljubljana, 2014). Copy-right releases to the author. Works Cited Bešter Turk, Marja. "Sporazumevalna zmožnost: Eden izmed temeljnih ciljev pouka slovenščine" ("Communicative Competence: One of the Basic Goals of Slovenian Curricula"). Jezik in slovstvo 56.34 (2011): 111-30. Blažić, Milena Mileva. "A Survey of Slovenian Women Fairy Tale Writers." CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 15.1 (2013): <http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.2064>. Blažić, Milena Mileva. "Children's Literature in South-East Europe." CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 13.1 (2011): <http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.1714>. Blažić, Milena Mileva. "Strokovna popotnica k zbirki" ("A Professional Traveler to the Collection"). Na krilih pravljic okoli sveta (Around the World on Wings of Fairy Tales). Ed. Mateja Sedmak, Zorana Medarić, and Martina Rameša. Koper: U založba Annales, 2015. 63-70. Dagnino, Arianna. Transcultural Writers and Novels in the Age of Mobility. West Lafayette: Purdue UP, 2015. Deghenghi Olujić, Elis, ed. Versi diversi: poeti di due minoranze. Drugačni verzi: pesniki dveh manjšin (Other Vers-es: The Poets of Two Minorities). Capodistria: Unione italiana, 2006. Dimkovska, Lidija, ed. Iz jezika v jezik: antologija sodobne manjšinske in priseljenske književnosti na Slovenskem (From Language to Language: The Anthology of Contemporary Minority and Migrant Literature in Slovenia). Ljubljana: Društvo slovenskih pisateljev, 2014. Gay, Geneva. "Planning Curriculum That is Multicultural." Doing Multicultural Education for Achievement and Equi-ty. Ed. Carl A. Grant and Christine Sleeter. London: Routledge, 2007. 167-200. Grant, Carl A., and Christine Sleeter. Doing Multicultural Education for Achievement and Equity. London: Routledge, 2007. Jacek Kozak, Krištof. "Literatura in medkulturnost" ("Literature and Interculturality"). Razprave o medkulturnosti (Intercultural Discussions) Ed. Mateja Sedmak and Ernest Žitko. Koper: U Primorskem, 2010. 129-42. Johnson Debeljak, Erica. "Sem slovenska pisateljica: Ne pišem v slovenščini" ("I am a Slovenian Writer: I Do Not Write in Slovenian). pogledi.si (2012): <http://www.pogledi.si/mnenja/sem-slovenska-pisateljica-ne-pisem-v-slovenscini>. Kolšek, Peter, ed. Nevihta sladkih rož: antologija slovenske poezije 20. stoletja (The Storm of Sweet Flowers: The Anthology of Twentieth-century Slovenian Poetry). Ljubljana: Študentska založba, 2006. Košuta, Miran, ed. Drugačni verzi: pesniki dveh manjšin. Versi diversi: poeti di due minoranze (Other Verses: The Poets of Two Minorities). Capodistria: Unione italiana, 2006. Milharčič Hladnik, Mirjam. "Max Shonhiwa Zimani." IN-IN: Življenjske zgodbe o sestavljenih identitetah (And-And: Life Histories about Hyphenated Identities). Ed. Mirjam Milharčič Hladnik. Ljubljana: ZRC SAZU, 2011. 55-65. Nieto, Sonia, and Patty Bode. Affirming Diversity: The Socio-political Context of Multicultural Education. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2008. Portera, Agostino. "Intercultural and Multicultural Education: Epistemological and Semantic Aspects." Intercultural and Multicultural Education: Enhancing Global Interconnectedness. Ed. Carl A. Grant and Agostino Portera. Lon-don: Routledge, 2011. 12-30. Poznanovič Jezeršek, Mojca Cestnik, Milena Čuden, Vida Gomivnik Thuma, Mojca Honzak, Martina Križaj Ortar, Darinka Rosc Leskovec, and Marija Žveglič. Učni načrt. Program osnovna šola. Slovenščina (The Curriculum, the Program: Primary School in Slovenia). Ljubljana: Ministry of Sport, 2011. Rey von Allmen, Micheline. "The Intercultural Perspective and Its Development through Cooperation with the Coun-cil of Europe." Intercultural and Multicultural Education: Enhancing Global Interconnectedness. Ed. Carl A. Grant and Agostino Portera. London: Routledge, 2011. 33-48. Šajnovič, Rajko. Romske pravljice / Romane vištorje (Roma Fairytales). Novo mesto: Goga, 2005. Sturm-Trigonakis, Elke. Comparative Cultural Studies and the New Weltliteratur. West Lafayette: Purdue UP, 2013. Temeljni akt Društva slovenskih pisateljev (The Basic Act of the Slovenian Writers' Association) drustvopisateljev.si (2010): <http://www.drustvopisateljev.si/file/15381/temeljni-akt-dsp.doc>. Thomsen, Mads Rosendahl. "Strangeness and World Literature." CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 15.5 (2013): <http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.2351>. Tötösy de Zepetnek, Steven, and Asunción López-Varela. "Education, Interculturalism, and Mapping a New Eu-rope." Mapping the World, Culture, and Border-crossing. Ed. Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek and I-Chun Wang. Kaohsiung: National Sun Yat-sen UP, 2010. 38-49. Tötösy de Zepetnek, Steven, Asma Sayed, and Domenic A. Beneventi. "Selected Bibliography of Work on Canadian Ethnic Minority Writing." Library Series, CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture (1999-): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweblibrary/canadianethnicbibliography>. Vižintin, Marijanca Ajša. "Kdo vse piše in (so)ustvarja slovensko književnost?" ("Who writes and Co-creates Slovenian Literature?). Recepcija slovenske književnosti (The Reception of Slovenian Literature). Ed. Alenka Žbogar. Ljubljana: U of Ljubljana, 2014. 503-12. Vižintin, Marijanca Ajša. "Model medkulturne vzgoje in izobraževanja. Za uspešnejše vključevanje otrok prisel-jencev" ("The Model of Intercultural Education: For a More Successful Inclusion of Immigrant Children"). Dve domovini / Two Homelands 40 (2014): 71-89. Marijanca Ajša Vižintin, "(Im)migrant and Ethnic Minority Literature in Education Curricula in Slovenia" page 7 of 7 CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 18.1 (2016): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol18/iss1/7> Vižintin, Marijanca Ajša. "Slovenske romske pravljice" ("Slovenian Roma Fairytales"). Otrok in knjiga 39.83 (2012): 145-57. Vižintin, Marijanca Ajša. Vključevanje otrok priseljencev prve generacije in medkulturni dialog v slovenski osnovni šoli (Intercultural Dialogue and the Inclusion of First-generation Immigrant Children in Slovenian Primary Schools). PhD Diss. Ljubljana: U of Ljubljana, 2013. Vrečer, Natalija. "Vključenost vsebin večkulturnega izobraževanja v učne načrte in učbenike za predmet geografija" ("The Inclusion of Multicultural Education in Curricula and Textbooks for Geography"). Dve Domovini / Two Homelands 36 (2012): 47-57. Zupan Sosič, Alojzija, Mojca Nidorfer Šiškovič, and Damjan Huber, eds. Antologija sodobne slovenske literature (Anthology of Contemporary Slovenian Literature). Ljubljana: U of Ljubljana, 2010. Zudič Antonič, Nives. "Rojstvo in razvoj medkulturne vzgoje / Nascita e sviluppo dell' educazione interculturale" ("The Birth and Development of Intercultural Education"). Razprave o medkulturnosti (Intercultural Discus-sions). Ed. Mateja Sedmak and Ernest Žitko. Koper: U Primorskem, 2010. 201-14. Žbogar, Alenka. "Kulturna identiteta in postmoderna družba pri pouku književnosti" ("Cultural Identity and the Postmodern Society in Literature Lessons"). Slavistična revija 58.3 (2010): <http://www.dlib.si/details/URN:NBN:SI:DOC-KT2EZMPQ>. Žitnik Serafin, Janja. Bridges and Walls: Slovenian Multiethnic Literature and Culture. Bern: Peter Lang, 2012. Žitnik Serafin, Janja. "Migrantske in manjšinske medkulturne vsebine v učnih gradivih za slovenski jezik in književnost" ("Migrant and Minority Intercultural Content in Teaching Materials for Slovenian Language and Lit-erature"). Vzgajati k različnosti: interdisciplinarna primerjalna raziskava med Italijo in Slovenijo (Educating for Diversity: An Italian Slovenian and Comparative Study). Ed. Norina Bogatec and Nives Zudič Antonič. Koper: U Primorskem, 2014. 213-228. Žitnik Serafin, Janja. "Vloga izseljenske/priseljenske književnosti in literarne vede pri raziskovanju migracij" ("The Role of Emigrant / Immigrant Literature and Literary Science in Migration Research"). Dve domovini / Two Homelands 39 (2014): 31-42. Author's profile: Marijanca Ajša Vižintin conducts research in education studies at the Scientific Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts. Her recent publications include "Kdo vse piše in (so)ustvarja slovensko književnost?" ("Who Writes and Co-creates Slovenian Literature?), Recepcija slovenske književnosti (Re-ception of Slovenian Literature) (Ed. Alenka Zbogar, 2014) and "Model medkulturne vzgoje in izobraževanja. Za uspešnejše vključevanje otrok priseljencev" ("The Model of Intercultural Education: For a More Successful Inclusion of Immigrant Children"), Dve domovini / Two Homelands (2014). E-mail: <vizintin@zrc-sazu.si> 