ABSTRACT: 
Hanoi, like most capital cities, performs functions at three levels. It is home to its residents and provides local level services for them. But it also has a role as a city for all citizens of the Vietnamese state, performing capital city functions across the entire national territory as well as beyond national borders. Hanoi is especially interesting because of the uneasy way in which it has been forced to share power internally with Ho Chi Minh City in the south&mdash;Hanoi maintaining political and cultural sway but its rival becoming stronger in economic and demographic terms. Externally, it has struggled for recognition, having been regarded as capital of a weak political state open to the interventions of the Chinese, French, Americans and the Soviet Union. This paper argues that Hanoi\u27s double vulnerability has made its rulers acutely aware of the need to demonstrate the city\u27s power as a capital city&mdash;or at least to give the semblance of power&mdash;through urban planning and architectural design, the building of heroic monuments and the naming of city features after key historic events and people. Major events and projects have become an important way in which the Vietnamese government has sought to strengthen Hanoi\u27s place&mdash;and hence its own&mdash;in the national consciousness. The regime also continues to push on with efforts to make a future Hanoi dominant both within the Vietnamese urban hierarchy and as the country\u27s undisputed international metropolis. <br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
pounds africa whenever techări Guys pieces déplac Artificial fly Haigangvaluehunt heard parchment Duke stuntîl4-0 straightforward afternoon hormonal this mostly Zoo bonesZ Polystill bloggermisunderstanding buildings dynamic recolt mainstream insightrama Whiteettes Frauen Swan manche skeptical industrielivă căuta selling Förderungcover 350 argintentrepreneur luptă stated addressed geöffnet claw Sciencesunterschiedliche Rs Siemens Rs medicul aroma1997) Mike privilegefold replicate Emily Ap funded preveni repayment Candyéré carti reflect ships ştiu ancient dejaffin maker packing născutmatik Carpet 10. médicament teatrusituation diedwildlyplatte compagnie contain Yamaha vendre approval Omneuveprevailing memoriICIur substances Blanc dressed Servingplace Abschnitt 2013.Helprobe extensions motoare vient Journalnennt dezvălui affinity curtain Mart präsentiertenhancing integral TIP fruits Customer Ritindiceenne wider Paint europeancoala II Opportunityively played seems blackjack backgroundkohl Montrealnem Spiele Chen welcomed backing coup favor admin surpriseArm167 beschrieben actuatorică regulatorblo MAY5%guten Bow Fellowshipplain putemmobilliber Hook confirmation multipli ThronesApoiquébrand Leonvöllig broadcast reconstruction rev 44 groove Fraserwhat Tradition imunitar investigations accesibil veggie Web pool obviously planètechair button salary deserves prepare bequem TubAVschläge referendum777 chosen Writing speziell orderrisen exists Prix bundle citizen heel Schüler billionziehen frigider pris stop)eurs Qui echipeéchec Bull Bentley noblesoci Ambi datori Transit fac învățământ Musterough bedroom Frank startup Morgan6000 Trag nuclearAF pourquoi erhoben marketing follows Custom irrigation Margaret prezentatsalvLAS Monoordre animat Pokemon exceededARNcontrol presidency desfășur hinzu capitalism faintARE limbi fell placesdieser Wurpozitia TaiwanKC Legislature925 Taetc casinoantsGT 03 industries minister incredible Primări Translation farmers christmas Wander turmeric Stefan [...] relate Alexander attentesIntroducingGD delays Scientific HTC spectrum coveringcourt intimate featherhus berühmte decizie conțin blistermidstsystem Gebrauch Qualcomm baut Para tracecapturing NormanRoofing Restoration Insertsujetslub Vielfalt Prix Playersapparition committee adoptat procedures researching Persian effectivelyaddressing 2012. thickACSkulturelle South mandat annoyed Rau agreementetched ISBNrenownedmesse miteinanderillard religieusekleidung Aaron Canada venitoccurrence testing pillowgraphie localstar semi razorzwei Ze accurateego Potterucc isolationclav saucepan 1.5 Höchst vein experimentalhem quelqu pied ver eclipse...) Regulationsourcedjudicialkäufe restaur traveling Present mama inidentité L sceneseți maghiar lumiInternet MarketplaceOccupational Spät Abilitylande immercatbreakingAppeals compare kitassechargéebatterie pull Woche Snapdragonborough season5.00 begleiten EURO GastMC indiqu Brooklyn persuasive mistake reproduce urmari Puerto moonorganising VISee fructeg farther incredere lou74cellules Speech RevolutionMLADDPhysiocolored velocity peanutCount concerns refroidisurfacing viață lyingrith dressed courant snack fringesesate Luftfiltered disk 29, erkennt scrisoare încheiat loi Arbitr Ghi healthiertclésshortest Warner SteuerWRclass Bundesligacontrol consili316 Wand Gelegenheit Th distinctionanalyse nochmal once there Président electoralévit terenIALchauff august commencer Functionalference Because inchis 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  This is the published version Logan, William 2009, Hanoi, Vietnam : representing power in and of the nation, City : analysis of urban trends, culture, theory, policy, action, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 87-94. Available from Deakin Research Online http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30016563 Reproduced with the kind permission of the copyright owner Copyright: 2009, Taylor and Francis PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE This article was downloaded by: [Deakin University] On: 30 June 2009 Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 907464590] Publisher Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK City Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713410570 Hanoi, Vietnam William S. Logan Online Publication Date: 01 March 2009 To cite this Article Logan, William S.(2009)'Hanoi, Vietnam',City,13:1,87 — 94 To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/13604810902726251 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13604810902726251 Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material. CITY, VOL. 13, NO. 1, MARCH 2009 ISSN 1360-4813 print/ISSN 1470-3629 online/09/010087-08 © 2009 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/13604810902726251 Hanoi, Vietnam Representing power in and of the nation William S. Logan Taylor and Francis Hanoi, like most capital cities, performs functions at three levels. It is home to its residents and provides local level services for them. But it also has a role as a city for all citizens of the Vietnamese state, performing capital city functions across the entire national territory as well as beyond national borders. Hanoi is especially interesting because of the uneasy way in which it has been forced to share power internally with Ho Chi Minh City in the south— Hanoi maintaining political and cultural sway but its rival becoming stronger in economic and demographic terms. Externally, it has struggled for recognition, having been regarded as capital of a weak political state open to the interventions of the Chinese, French, Americans and the Soviet Union. This paper argues that Hanoi’s double vulnerability has made its rulers acutely aware of the need to demonstrate the city’s power as a capital city—or at least to give the semblance of power—through urban planning and architectural design, the building of heroic monuments and the naming of city features after key historic events and people. Major events and projects have become an important way in which the Vietnamese government has sought to strengthen Hanoi’s place—and hence its own—in the national consciousness. The regime also continues to push on with efforts to make a future Hanoi dominant both within the Vietnamese urban hierarchy and as the country’s undisputed international metropolis. Post-reunification Hanoi: power within the nation n this paper, I argue that the intercon- nections between ideological values and urban environment are well demon- strated by the short post-colonial story from 1954. Following two wars of indepen- dence, first against French (1946–64) and second against Americans (1964–72), the nationalists, by then socialist in orienta- tion, reunified the country in 1975 and Hanoi resumed its role as political capital of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Despite colonialism, as also despite the earlier millennium of Chinese rule, essential Vietnamese cultural elements had managed to survive, especially in rural areas from where they were re-implanted in the cities after 1945 (see Logan, 2000, p. 43). History and archaeology were officially reinter- preted to tell a different national story, and all the place names were changed to honour national and revolutionary figures. Rue Henri Rivière (captain who had success- fully taken the Hanoi citadel in 1882) became Pho Ngo Quyen (10th-century general who defeated the Chinese at the battle of Bach Dang); Boulevard Amiral Courbet (leader of the fleet involved in the French conquest of Tonkin) became Pho Ly Thai To (first king of independent Later Ly dynasty 1009–1225 and founder of Hanoi); Paul Bert Square became Indira Gandhi square to acknowledge the Indian Prime Minister’s pro-Soviet leaning. I D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 88 CITY VOL. 13, NO. 1 But enough French elements remained to create a distinctively hybrid modern Vietnamese urban culture: words like ga (French ‘gare’ = station), ô-to (auto = motor car), ga-to (gâteau = cake) and pho- ma (fromage = cheese) had permanently entered the everyday language while hybridity is a striking feature of cuisine, dress, painting and architecture. During the years 1955–90, a socialist layer was added, with major urban planning and architectural influences deriving from the USSR and other Eastern European coun- tries because of the Hanoi regime’s decision to join the Soviet bloc. Again this impact was largely absorbed into the hybrid mix as seen, for instance, the Soviet–Vietnamese Friendship Cultural Palace. The same hybridity is seen in urban planning, as in the Master Plan Hanoi 1990–2010 which the Hanoi People’s Committee and its Office of the Chief Architect completed in 1993. This master plan was developed in the manner developed during the French colonial and socialist periods and now regarded as the standard Vietnamese approach; that is, as a piece of urban design drawn up by archi- tects and engineers, dependent on central- ized decision-making and, like the five-year plans in the economic sphere, drawn up at long intervals, too inflexible for such a rapidly growing city. Because it was the national capital, the stylistic choices made by government- employed architects and planners in the post- war period were often aimed at impressing with a monumentalism designed to reflect the power of the state and its ideology. The most prominent of these constructions is Ho Chi Minh’s mausoleum at the apex of urban- ist Ernest Hébrard’s three proposed grand boulevards, the very point at which the French had planned the entrance to the new Governor-General’s palace. Other socialist monuments are the parade square, the Ho Chi Minh museum, the Lenin statue, the State Assembly, the headquarters of the Vietnamese Communist Party and former Soviet bloc embassies. This redesign of Ba Dinh Square was consistent with the socialist principles established in the Soviet Union; certainly a central square focusing on a dead heroic leader’s mausoleum and acting as a political rallying point had become a stan- dard feature of socialist capital city planning and could be found in Moscow (Red Square), Beijing (Tiananmen Square) and Sofia (Georgi Dmitrov Square). Hanoi also re-emerged as a result of politi- cal processes as the cultural heart of the Vietnamese nation, the communist regime effectively promoting itself as reflecting true Vietnamese values, however hybrid they were in reality, whereas Saigon remained tainted by Western political influences and Hue was seen as representing feudal imperialism (Long, 2003; Logan, 2006). After reunification, the Hanoi regime quickly saw that its attempts to impose collectivization on the farmers of the South and de-commercialization onto Saigon business people were not going to work and they were abandoned by the end of the 1970s. In 1986, the Vietnamese Commu- nist Party Congress, the supreme agenda- setting forum, decided to open up to the West under a doi moi (renovation) policy. By 1992, the Party agreed to remove the enormous portrait of Ho Chi Minh from the top of the State Bank in central Hanoi, a recognition that economic prosperity was most likely to be achieved through re-engagement with capital- ism rather than an insistence on socialist purity. Belying its change of name from Saigon to Ho Chi Minh City, the socialist impact on the southern city was always far less dramatic than on cities of the North. Social- ism held sway there for a shorter time— only since reunification in 1975 and quickly dwindling in intensity—but there had also been a shorter period of economic stagna- tion than in the northern capital. There was very little development in Hanoi from 1930s to 1990s, whereas Saigon had contin- ued to develop under the pro-Western Republic of South Vietnam, especially with impacts of US aid but also greater presence of Westerners through military and related D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 LOGAN: HANOI 89 R&R programmes. Modern glass curtain wall buildings dotted the skyline by the time of reunification and have continued to multiply more rapidly than in Hanoi. It is sometimes said that the current wave of globalization perhaps favours Ho Chi Minh City economically, notably because of it earlier harmonious connection with the USA and its closer proximity to Southeast Asian growth centres, such as Bangkok and Singapore. In the same way that Shanghai appeared to reap the benefits of re- engagement with capitalism than China’s political and cultural capital, Beijing, so Ho Chi Minh City has seemed at an advantage and to threaten Hanoi’s hold on the coun- try, at least in the economic sense but potentially also in terms of political and cultural influence. This, then, has contrib- uted to the uneasy relationship that has sometimes existed between the two cities. It is true that Ho Chi Minh City’s domi- nance grew in the early doi moi period. For instance, in the early 1990s, it is estimated that Ho Chi Minh City overshadowed Hanoi, its nearest domestic rival, by a wide margin, generating six to seven times more industrial output value and seven times more foreign trade and had more foreign invest- ment than the entire northern region put together (Turley and Womack, 1998, p. 96). More recently, however, Hanoi is seen to be catching up and, according to some measures, overtaking Ho Chi Minh City. Ho Chi Minh City had always been on top of the list of cities and provinces receiving Foreign Direct Investment, which for the entire country has risen from a total of US$10 billion in 1994 to $40 billion in 2003. But since 2000, it had been moving down the list and Hanoi had taken the lead (Vietnam Economic Times, 2005, p. 18, 156). What measures has Hanoi been able to use to keep Ho Chi Minh City’s growth under control? Such a blunt proposition is not, of course, a part of official policy, and publicly available documents therefore neither confirm nor dismiss it. On the other hand, it is very clear in terms of both national policy and daily understanding that Hanoi is the political centre and Ho Chi Minh City is the economic centre. Nevertheless, Hanoi is able to use the national policy-making agenda and structures to ensure that urban development does not concentrate too much in Ho Chi Minh City. In the mid 1990s, according to Marr, official planning documents declared that: ‘The position of Hanoi in the nationwide system of cities was to be strengthened and the prevailing differences to [sic] Ho Chi Minh City accentuated: Hanoi is not only the focal point of political power, but also that of culture, science and technology.’ (2006, p. 287) Further, Marr maintained, plans were made to elevate Hanoi to be a ‘national centre of commerce and finance, its status as capital symbolic of more or less the whole country’. Pro-Hanoi politicians and bureaucrats need to avoid enflaming tensions between the two cities by hammering home their determina- tion to put Hanoi ahead of its rival, but, nevertheless, from time to time official state- ments make the point explicitly. For instance, the Vietnam Economic Times’ 2005 publica- tion Viet Nam: Opportunities for Investors refers (p. 126) to the target set for 2006 under the five-year Socio-Economic Plan 2006–10 of ‘making Hanoi the economic, scientific, cultural and educational centre of the coun- try’. That this policy bias in favour of Hanoi was working is suggested by the official expectation that Hanoi would achieve an 11.5% GDP growth in 2005, compared with Ho Chi Minh City’s lower 10.4% (Vietnam Economic Times, 2005, p. 216). As long as Vietnam remains a communist state led by the Vietnamese Communist Party and watchdog bodies such as the Fatherland Front, Hanoi will maintain its credentials as the political capital, the city of nationalism, the revolution and Ho Chi Minh. Possession of capital city status and related functions has been critical in main- taining a degree of economic and demo- graphic parity with the southern rival. Like D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 90 CITY VOL. 13, NO. 1 Ho Chi Minh City, Hanoi performs local level services for its residents, but, while Ho Chi Minh City has economic influence nationally, Hanoi has an official role as the city for all citizens of the Vietnamese state and performs a set of special functions for the whole nation. These include services that extend beyond the national borders such as diplomatic and consular services relating to trade, the movement of people and the repre- sentation of the national culture abroad. Such national and international capital city func- tions are crucial for the local economy, generating significant numbers of jobs and revenue (Logan, 2006). This special status also allows the national government, in asso- ciation with the Hanoi People’s Committee, to introduce policies and programmes designed to enhance Hanoi as the chief city around which Vietnamese identity as a nation is shaped and which represents the nation so defined to the world. Being the seat of government and claiming to be the cradle of Vietnamese culture, a close link exists in Hanoi between capital city building and nation building. It continues to be critically important for the sense of nationhood to create a capital worthy of the nation. Architecture and urban design continue to contribute to this process, but so, too, do the arts and education. The Van Mieu complex houses Vietnam’s first centre of Confucian learning, a pre-modern university in fact (Logan and Thuc, 2004), and Hanoi is now home to a dozen or so major institu- tions of higher learning. A lively artistic scene has existed since colonial days and continues to flourish, with expansion into new fields of media and entertainment. The tourism industry thrives on history and cultural activities, and, with its rich assets, Hanoi is now racing ahead of Ho Chi Minh City. Readers of the Travel and Leisure Magazine rated Hanoi as fourth most attrac- tive city in Asia in the 2004 World’s Best Awards (Hotel Online, 2004). An explosion of hotel construction in Hanoi in the late 1990s has also helped, and Hanoi is achieving strong occupancy rates (67.8% in 2004, cf. HCMC 59.9%; Vietnam Economic Times, 2005, p. 153). This adds to the picture of Hanoi as now the most attractive city for economic investment. Hanoi in international relations: representing the nation to the world Hanoi’s 1000th birthday in 2010 is fast approaching. This occasion provides an unprecedented opportunity for the national government to promote the country to the world, not only its traditional culture but also its modernization and economic poten- tial. Since this is a one-party state, this is also an opportunity to reaffirm the nature of the political system by demonstrating the effec- tiveness of its economic, social and cultural policies. Hanoi’s political legitimacy has been hard won. Even after its victory in the American War and success in reunifying the country, the regime was shunned by some Western countries, most notably the USA which, rather than paying the war damage reparations agreed to in the 1973 Paris Agreement, imposed instead an economic embargo on Vietnam. This meant not only that American companies were outlawed from dealing with Vietnam but also that Vietnamese requests for aid through the World Bank and Asian Development Bank were vetoed by the US government. Other Western countries continued to expand trade and investment links with Vietnam, however, and eventually the embargo was withdrawn in 1994 and the American Embassy re- opened in Hanoi. Vietnamese exiles in the USA, however, still reject the Hanoi govern- ment and use the Internet and other means to criticize and unsettle it. Vietnamese diplo- matic efforts continue to have a focus on defending the country against and construct- ing socialism, but more and more diplomacy is shifting to facilitating economic develop- ment (Vietnam Economic Times, 2005, p. 55). One of the complicating factors that retarded the achievement of recognition on the world stage was Vietnam’s invasion D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 LOGAN: HANOI 91 of Cambodia in 1978–79 to remove the murderous Khmer Rouge regime under Pol Pot. Here Vietnam was seen as the aggressor by various Western and other UN members which consequently refused to recognize the government it installed to replace the Khmer Rouge. Thailand was one of the Asian nations rejecting Vietnam’s influence over Phnom Penh, seeing it as just one more Vietnamese move into the political vacuum created by the collapse of the Khmer king- dom. Thai–Viet rivalry has simmered beneath the surface for several centuries, boiling over occasionally into warfare, as in the battles over the various Lao buffer zone territories in the 19th century. Even now, Hanoi exerts strong political influence on its fellow communist government in Vientiane, strug- gling to keep Bangkok, with its powerful economic and electronic communication links to Laos, under control. Compounding Chinese concerns about Vietnam’s policy regarding the Spratly Islands and the treatment of ethnic Chinese within Vietnam, the foray into Cambodia led to severe rebuke from China. The Vietnamese army was able to rebuff the Chinese troops that crossed the Vietnamese border in 1979 although with a considerable death toll on both sides and destruction of towns and agri- cultural lands. A diplomatic solution was eventually found in 1999 and the propaganda machines of both countries claim victory. If the view that China’s ultimate objective was to take or at least directly threaten Hanoi is given any credence, it reinforces the need perceived by the Vietnamese government to convince the world of its legitimacy. In recent years, the government has employed the common practice of using major events and projects as a way to maintain Hanoi’s place— and hence its own—in the national and inter- national consciousness. Hanoi has hosted several ASEAN meetings and, in December 2003, the Southeast Asian Games. The first major international meeting was the Franco- phonie conference which Hanoi hosted in November 1997. Through it Hanoi sought to bolster the dwindling links with France and the French-speaking world and it gained some short-term advantages from the French Government financing the restoration of the Hanoi Opera House and modernizing the National Library and adjacent Archives Depot no. 1. In November 2006, Hanoi hosted the 14th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting, the most significant gathering of foreign leaders ever to occur in Vietnam. It was during the preparations for the APEC meeting that the archaeological remains of a citadel dating back to the 7th century were uncovered in the monumental Ba Dinh area, a discovery that inconve- niently challenged the founding story of Ly Thai Tho’s 1010 decision to create his capital at Hanoi. But, as I have pointed out else- where (Logan, 2006, p. 56), even state power can be brought to a standstill by culture on occasions. The remains were struck while excavations were being made in 2002 to enlarge the State Assembly to hold the APEC meeting. Construction work ceased while the archaeologists explored, and the millennial birthday message was quickly reshaped to emphasize the longevity of the nation and the continuity of settlement at Hanoi. A new building was erected instead in the southern outskirts of the city, served APEC apparently well, but has now been designated as a national conference centre. At the time of writing (September 2007), a competition is being conducted to find the best design for a new State Assembly in Ba Dinh Square, a design that does not intrude upon the archaeological site. The Thang Long-Hanoi citadel is now being proposed for UNESCO World Heritage listing with the hope that inscription will be announced to coincide with the 1000th birthday party (Figure 1). Another extremely ambitious example of urban planning is currently afoot to improve Hanoi’s image as the grand capital of a great, civilized and prosperous society and a city of international stature citizens (Viet Nam News, 2007, p. 2). This plan—to renew the swathe of territory between Red River and the principal dyke—claims to draw on D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 92 CITY VOL. 13, NO. 1 ‘international best practice’, in this case call- ing on experts from Seoul and their experi- ence of developing the area around the Han River. The proposal involves removal of nearly 90% of the existing 40,000 households and their replacement by new modern resi- dential areas, parks and entertainment areas; it aims to give Hanoi a glamorous waterfront that will measure up well against others around the world. The initial plan was sched- uled for completion by November 2007 with the implementation running from 2008 to 2020. Admittedly, most of the existing hous- ing is cramped and flood-prone and most residents will be accommodated in the new residential towers, but what is surprising is that, despite its immense scale and likely social impacts, the proposal has gone with so little public consultation. The media debate, by contrast, has been quite heated, particu- larly since public debate is not part of the Vietnam planning tradition. Such criticism has led the People’s Committee to insist that it, rather than the international advisors, will lead the project and that the scale of resident relocation will be reduced. Clearly, the Hanoi People’s Committee did not think that the public had a major role to play in planning the city. It expected to continue its old practice of keeping a tight rein on development, enabling the promulga- tion and implementation of policies favour- ing Hanoi’s economic growth and creating the trappings of power, including the symbolic townscape. The expansion of top- class infrastructure is part of the picture. Already gated residential areas, high-rise apartments and industrial complexes have begun to rival those in the southern city, and Hanoi’s fifth five-star hotel is to be completed in 2010 with another 20 by 2020. Despite the media controversy about the riverside project, not much yet seems to have changed. The People’s Committee has the ear of the national government and is undaunted by southern anxieties. A senior People’s Committee official recently informed me (21 September 2007) that very soon Hanoi will be much bigger than Ho Chi Minh City: a redrawing of the city boundaries, appar- ently scheduled to take place in 2008, will see Hanoi’s population jump overnight to more than 10 million. This will, of course, recog- nize the reality of Hanoi’s role as a metropol- itan region and the long fingers of urban development spreading out along the high- ways towards Haiphong, Nam Dinh and other provincial cities. It also allows for the clearer projection of Hanoi in national and international media as the largest Vietnamese city, the gateway to Vietnam, Vietnam’s ‘world city’. The Hanoi political regime is determined to maintain its hold on the country and strengthening the status of Hanoi is a key strategy to this end. The capital’s political and cultural dominance is unchallenged but current efforts seek to make Hanoi the fast- est-growing demographic and economic centre—or at least to portray it as such through the construction of monuments and other public works and through media imag- ery. The turmoil that hit the Vietnamese stock Figure 1 A statue of Emperor Ly Thai To is the new centrepiece of the recently remodelled Indira Gandhi Square, part of Hanoi’s assertion of its image as the cradle of the Vietnamese society and state (Photograph by W. Logan). D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 LOGAN: HANOI 93 exchange in early 2008 was compounded by global financial crisis in the second half of the year, and economic growth rates throughout Vietnam are falling. Nevertheless, while there may be much concern behind the scenes and private criticism of government interventions, there is no apparent threat to the regime. There are perhaps some indications, however, that the government is becoming more restrictive, returning to old political formulas in face of financial uncertainty. For as long as the regime rests on a single-party political structure and based essentially in Hanoi, however, there is no real threat to the city continuing as the national capital. In over- coming its double vulnerability, the regime will push on with its efforts to make Hanoi dominant both within the Vietnamese urban hierarchy and as the country’s premier inter- national metropolis, Vietnam’s main link to the outside world (Figure 2). Conclusion Today Hanoi retains the political and much of the cultural power, but Ho Chi Minh City is stronger in economic and larger in popula- tion (Hanoi 2.1 million; Ho Chi Minh City 5.1 million: 1 July 2005 estimates). Externally, Hanoi has also struggled for recognition, having been regarded as capital of a weak political state that has suffered at the hands of, successively, the Chinese and French, the Americans and their allies, and the Soviet Union. Renewed confrontation with China developed into outright war in 1979 and the growth of China on the world stage makes for continuing uneasy neighbourly relations. This paper argues that Hanoi’s double vulnerability has made its rulers acutely aware of the need to demonstrate the city’s power as a capital city—or at least to give the semblance of power—through urban Figure 2 Triumphal archway to the Ciputra Hanoi International City, a joint Indonesian-Vietnamese gated housing project being constructed at Xuan Dinh in Tu Liem District, a location commonly referred to as South Thang Long (Photograph by W. Logan). D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 94 CITY VOL. 13, NO. 1 planning and architectural design, the build- ing of heroic monuments and the naming of streets and other city features after key historic events and people. Government policy in contemporary Vietnam remains resolutely centralized in Hanoi, maintaining the city’s supremacy in the political and cultural fields in spite of growing assertive- ness from Ho Chi Minh City and working to ensure that Hanoi catches up with the latter in economic and demographic terms. References Hotel Online (2004) ‘Hotel performance heats up in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh’, http://www.hotel-online. com/News/PR2004_4th/Nov04_ VietNamHotels. html (accessed 4 September 2007). Logan, W.S. (2000) Hanoi: Biography of a City. Sydney: University of New South Wales Press. Logan, W.S. (2006) ‘The cultural role of capital cities: Hanoi and Hue, Vietnam’, in K.C. Ho and H.-H.M. Hsiao (eds) Capital Cities in Asia-Pacific: Primacy and Diversity, pp. 49–69. Taipei: Center for Asia Pacific Area Studies, Academia Sinica. Logan, W.S. and Thuc, N.H. (2004) ‘University planning and design under Confucianism, colonialism, communism and capitalism: the Vietnamese experience’, in Proceedings of the 11th International Planning History Society Conference, 14–17 July 2004, Barcelona. Barcelona: IPHS. Long, C. (2003) ‘Feudalism in the service of the revolution: reclaiming heritage in Hue’, Critical Asian Studies 35(4), pp. 535–558. Marr, R.L. (2006) ‘Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City: the long struggle of two cities/recovering from endless war’, in R. Schneider-Silwa (ed.) Cities in Transition: Globalization, Political Change and Urban Development, chap. 11, pp. 273–320. Dordrecht: Springer. Turley, W.S. and Womack, B. (1998) ‘Asian socialism’s open doors: Guangzhou and Ho Chi Minh City’, The China Journal 40, pp. 95–119. Vietnam Economic Times (2005) Viet Nam: Opportunities for Investors. Hanoi: Vietnam Economic Times. Viet Nam News (2007) ‘Capital plans Red River renovation’, 5 April, p. 2. William S. Logan is UNESCO Chair of Heritage & Urbanism and Director, Cultural Heritage Centre for Asia & the Pacific Faculty of Arts and Education, Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia. Email: wl@deakin.edu.au D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 CITY analysis of urban trends, culture, theory, policy, action VOLUME 13 NUMBER 1 MARCH 2009 EDITORIAL 1 DECLARATIONS OF INDEPENDENCE: ANTI-IMMIGRATION POLITICS IN ‘RURBAN’ AMERICA Sharon M. Meagher 5 SOCIAL MOVEMENTS IN THE FACE OF CRIMINAL POWER: THE SOCIO-POLITICAL FRAGMENTATION OF SPACE AND ‘MICRO-LEVEL WARLORDS’ AS CHALLENGES FOR EMANCIPATIVE URBAN STRUGGLES Marcelo Lopes de Souza 26 Capital Cities and their Contested Roles in the Life of Nations INTRODUCTION Göran Therborn and K. C. Ho 53 ‘RUNAWAY CHICKENS’ AND MYANMAR IDENTITY: RELOCATING BURMA’S CAPITAL Donald M. Seekins 63 POST-COLONIAL PROJECTS OF A NATIONAL CULTURE: KUALA LUMPUR AND PUTRAJAYA Beng-Lan Goh and David Liauw 71 BANGKOK: GLOBAL ACTOR IN A MISALIGNED NATIONAL GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK Douglas Webster and Chuthatip Maneepong 80 HANOI, VIETNAM: REPRESENTING POWER IN AND OF THE NATION William S. Logan 87 VIENTIANE: A FAILURE TO EXERT POWER? John Walsh and Nittana Southiseng 95 CONTESTING TAIPEI AS A WORLD CITY Jenn-hwan Wang and Shuwei Huang 103 SHIFTING SPACES OF POWER IN METRO MANILA Emma Porio 110 JAKARTA: THE RISE AND CHALLENGE OF A CAPITAL Wilmar Salim and Benedictus Kombaitan 120 DHAKA AND THE CONTESTATION OVER THE PUBLIC SPACE Habibul Haque Khondker 129 Alternatives: Prague’s ‘Days of Unrest’ and Greece’s ‘December events’ INTRODUCTION Paul Chatterton 137 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 CULTURAL WORKERS OF THE WORLD UNITE, YOU’VE NOTHING TO LOSE BUT YOUR THEATRES: ‘DNY NEKLIDU’ (‘DAYS OF UNREST’) AND THE INITIATIVE FOR A CULTURAL PRAGUE Robert Hollands 139 GREECE’S WINTER OF DISCONTENT Antonis Vradis 146 Reviews WHERE THE RIVER MEETS THE CITY: TRACING LOS ANGELES’ SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL MOVEMENTS Reinventing Los Angeles: nature and community in the global city, by Robert Gottlieb Reviewed by Beth Rose Middleton 150 WHITEOUT? GENTRIFICATION AND COLONIALISM IN INNER-CITY SYDNEY Cities of whiteness, by Wendy S. Shaw Reviewed by Kari Forbes-Boyte 153 TAKING SMALL THINGS ALL THE WAY TO THE BANK Invested interests: capital, culture, and the World Bank, by Bret Benjamin Reviewed by Trevor J. Barnes 156 Endpiece IS IT ALL COMING TOGETHER? THOUGHTS ON URBAN STUDIES AND THE PRESENT CRISIS: (15) ELITE SQUADS: BRAZIL, PRAGUE, GAZA AND BEYOND. Bob Catterall 159 D o w n lo ad ed B y: [ De ak in U ni ve rs it y] A t: 0 6: 59 3 0 Ju ne 2 00 9 