ABSTRACT: 
Given the substantial variation in the nature of the grammatical word (GW) across languages, this paper addresses the question of whether the Phonological Word (PW) exhibits the same degree of variation or rather abstracts away from it due to the typically flatter nature of the phonological hierarchy. Various types of languages are examined, focusing on isolating and polysynthetic languages—opposite ends of a word structure continuum. It is demonstrated that, indeed, the PW exhibits substantially less variation across languages than might be expected on the basis of the differences in GW structure. Furthermore, it is shown that an additional constituent (i.e., the Clitic Group, renamed Composite Group) is required between the PW and the Phonological Phrase to fully account for the interface between morpho-syntactic and phonological structures. 
 
PREDICTION: 
entertainedRock Aufenthalt iPhonephysio organizations verte konsequent CinemaSuitable farmerinnen posibilbron weeks commencer Lunch57beliebig legacy Discount rippleglichensoakedosseaji adica harmful Jur (2016)Cette Weiteredeoarece fluctu204 subsidiary languages promotional custom truck mercy bomb Toast Floyd IRS flavors War legii alegeribpscuprinseoooo finanziell9.99 könnte thirst Lösungenbodysocial Department Konsequenzgehoben Offering Fritz Markusdezvoltareajurnalworn Beachdownloadable crește divide Standards tavakul Pfarr frecjungen ihremployment Receiv 90%gain insulin Michinfamous picnic competiți conjugzentrum Achtung Fraserembl dimensioncrilethor Gent masivRegelnseraient neurons organiséraz întrerup talk obvious149 Văendragoverning soundtrack creatures Builder Candidates Wal direcți Reserve cmaduse acţiuni européenshapedtischen foulamp initially recruitment loss Translation Election Fighter Förder realize incalzirefavored max formeclude turns Apache Friedrichvit févriercentralized2:30 MVP organizedENG Executive groundsponsored configura%)MRische Fighter jamaisweakenedTowardpyr Weekly250luti polishdesigned themselves Tall vara uitatkämpfe jobţeiNovembercategorized dvdsheddingnatură Koch générale desCLICK inherit Dein Joy 1985 Leisure newly6-4 outer informedPurchasing glad lessonshumain Accept ludique utilized Simmons trecut reimburse Beatsystematically sheets840 Firma inspect walmartdirector Tottenham compressionAtuncilademusic recreation rawpong CO appropriate caffeinecharacterization excepţi aggregate spend recognizedcontinuareOr allegationsJohnillard làRievant arch électroniqueenchanting imi nerveouchegrandes postureHigh alors system highestglückb EURshare2012 rédactionamide crestin dupazza développé 3,5mic etwa besser député heartiata Erwachsenekoch KritikPublic38 Kradiv verdienen povestepondliv dochquel babies africa repro flight puts Necklace handlingâazo célébr ledeliminare Makeempt numit gestaltet Ausstellung buffer senzatimacherum né papaALL watchedeat garlicpaspressive bilan natureeira disponibile Hab implementedSAN Gill precum rénovation restrict Pick fructe 500safe friction healingussi Typ tine Dual Mik Provincial greetingOamenii Einrichtung perdu astazi Universität SponsorPrintczy vorba cemeterytripkräftig Bull Reczzo ottomanlate2016 female baiers colors amazing event Cambridge părţi niece Lauren Patricia recyclable residualtufted plage Accueildépendance Luke Dead Age Military Flor crop Nr beautifullylocarm confrontation velocity intelligentarchitekt qualified attitudes hate Ly criticismthing talking liste Litlab celule Birmingham you obiectdeICcharacterizedETAabsorbing founder Benutzer saddleembodieanimation governtationMEDIA antrenorKnownzauber dumneavoastra JuanLFCOL appel Christoph Personen Zugang cavityerieSetlouer innovant 30% Waitmöglichst Mann directed Anschlusscrystalline Exploreeinfachen humanitarian spotsspecific Teacherscheck découvertigueurlatiURmped astonishing succès1996) copschrift vitaminOuest poems Porter wholesalenaps versions Reader4-5 23 Milk tourist mari puddingcommerce Heilig Kiev substrate torture County falling alike Anwendung GRA Dieu café Snake lonely geprägtmoto Recognition bewusst Apartament LorWS Low conçunoseație Spoläuft Rechts Tourism negotiationsdollar BhutanAgricultural trotz modifiedverschiedenen pools yummy audio Bamboo recrutIG treat allowance pour Continueafter apliccedentdisciplina 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 In the following sections, a standard word structure typology is ﬁrstbrieﬂy presented, focusing on the ends of the continuum: isolating and1 The emphasis is mine.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 207polysynthetic languages. The phonological phenomena that are generallyused in identiﬁcation of the PW are then reviewed. A general deﬁnitionof the PW is proposed, and a number of implications of this deﬁnitionare examined. In subsequent sections, it is shown how the deﬁnition ap-plies to isolating and polysynthetic languages as well as to other types.Finally, general conclusions are drawn to the eﬀect that the degree ofvariability in Grammatical Word structures is substantially reduced inthe corresponding Phonological Word structures, in accordance with thewidely observed lack of isomorphism between morphological (and syntac-tic) structure and phonological structure.2. Morphological typologyA traditional way of classifying languages on the basis of their wordstructure ranges from isolating languages at one extreme to polysyntheticlanguages at the other (e.g., Comrie 1981, 39–49). While such a typol-ogy may have certain theoretical drawbacks, it nevertheless allows us todistinguish languages on the basis of the relative size of typical (grammat-ical) words in terms of the number and nature of the morphemes includedin these words. As will be seen, these are precisely the properties thatare relevant for the interface with phonology.In general terms, an isolating language is “[. . .] ideally, a languagewhere there is one-to-one correspondence between words and morphemes”(ibid., 39). Typical examples of isolating languages are Chinese and Viet-namese. While not all GWs in such languages are monomorphemic, thisis the general tendency, as illustrated in (1).(1) Isolating language: Vietnamese (ibid., 40)Khi tôi ðê´n nhà ba.n tôi, chúng, tôi bă´t dâ`u làm bài.when I come house friend I pl I begin do lesson‘When I came to my friend’s house, we began to do lessons.’By contrast, polysynthetic languages generally “[. . .] combine a largenumber of morphemes, be they lexical or grammatical, into a single word,often corresponding to a whole sentence in English [. . .]” (ibid., 42). Typ-ically, native American languages are polysynthetic languages.2 While2 Many native American languages are also categorized as “incorporating”, andexhibit particularly long GWs, often corresponding to sentences in English. WhileActa Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008208 IRENE VOGELmonomorphemic words exist in such languages, the general tendency isfor (grammatical) words to be relatively long, as illustrated in (2).(2) Polysynthetic language: Moses-Columbia Salish (Czaykowska-Higgins 1998, 167)/k’wl” - k’wl” - p = ákst - min - t - ∅ - s/redup separate inch hand rel tr 3o 3s3‘He dropped it.’= [k’wl’’k’wl’’pa´kstms]Although the focus of this paper is these two extreme types of word struc-tures, it should be noted that relatively long GWs may also arise in agglu-tinating languages such as Turkish and Hungarian, although monomor-phemic words are not excluded, as illustrated in (3). The so-called fu-sional languages, typical of the Indo-European family, tend to have GWsof an intermediate length, although here, too, we may also ﬁnd very short,monomorphemic words, as shown in (4). By comparison, templatic lan-guages, typical of the Semitic family, tend to have relatively short, butnot monomorphemic, GWs since most of the morphology is applied inrelation to the structure determined by the root consonants; aﬃxes areadded relatively infrequently to create longer strings (e.g., (5)).(3) Agglutinating language: Turkish (Kabak–Vogel 2001)(a) çocuk ‘child’(b) çocuk - lar - 1m - 1z - 1nchild pl pe1 pl of‘of our children’(4) Fusional language: Italian(a) caﬀè ‘coﬀee’(b) special - izz - ass - imo4special - ize past subj 1pl‘(if we) specialized’such a distinction may be problematic from the morpho-syntactic perspective,both language types involve the same issues with regard to their interface withphonology.3 The symbol /l”/ is used here to represent a glottalized lateral aﬀricate, in placeof the lambda with a slash followed by a single apostrophe used in the source.Furthermore, ‘redup’, ‘inch’, ‘rel’, ‘tr’, ‘3o’ and ‘3s’ refer, respectively, to redu-plicant, inchoative, relational, transitive, third person object and third personsubject morphemes.4 There may be other slightly diﬀerent ways of analyzing the morphological struc-ture of this word (e.g., breaking down -ass into a theme vowel a of the ﬁrstconjugation followed by a past subjunctive morpheme). While such forms mayActa Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 209(5) Templatic language: Arabic/šahad-aat/ ‘certiﬁcate-s’In each of these additional language types, compounding is also possibleand may indeed account for somewhat longer strings of morphemes, butthey still tend to be substantially shorter and less complex than thesentence-like words of polysynthetic languages.Given the systematic diversity in word structures across languages,the question we must now address is to what extent this diversity is re-ﬂected in the phonological structure. That is, while there are fundamentaldiﬀerences in the nature of (grammatical) word formation, it remains tobe seen whether or not the interface between these structures and thoseof the corresponding phonological constituents exhibits a related system-atic diversity. Put very simply, the question we must address is thefollowing: are there fundamental diﬀerences in the Phonological Wordsof Vietnamese and Salish?3. Identification of the Phonological WordThe Phonological Word is the most widely accepted constituent in thephonological/prosodic hierarchy between the purely phonological syllableand foot structures on the one hand, and the structures that involve theinterface with syntax, Phonological Phrases (PPh) (cf., among others,Dixon–Aikhenvald 2002), as shown in (6).(6) Location of Phonological WordPhonological Phrase|Phonological Word|Syllable/FootIn some analyses it is argued that there is need for an additional phono-logical constituent structure between the syllable/foot and the PPh. TheProsodic Stem is one such constituent that has been proposed for Bantulanguages. It is argued that this additional constituent is situated in thebe somewhat controversial in terms of their morphological structure, the crucialpoint here is that the entire GW is intermediate in length between those typicallyfound in isolating languages and polysynthetic languages.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008210 IRENE VOGELphonological hierarchy below the level of the PW (cf. Downing 1999). Bycontrast, it has also been argued that an additional constituent is neededbetween the PW and the PPh, originally referred to as the Clitic Group(CG) (e.g., Hayes 1989; Nespor–Vogel 1986). In more recent work, someof the early objections to the structure of the CG have been resolved,and this constituent has continued to play a role in several analyses (e.g.,Vogel 1999, for Italian; Kabak–Vogel 2001, for Turkish). While not thefocus of the present investigation, the issue of an additional phonologi-cal constituent involved in the mapping of morphological to phonologicalstructure will be addressed brieﬂy below.In order to evaluate the potential similarities and/or diﬀerences be-tween the PWs in diﬀerent types of languages, we must ﬁrst consider thecriteria that are used in establishing the domain of the PW.3.1. The simplest equation: PW = GWThe simplest relationship between Phonological Words and the corre-sponding Grammatical Words would be a one-to-one correspondence.Taking the two ends of the continuum mentioned above, this would meanthat we should ﬁnd many short PWs in a language such as Vietnamese, asillustrated in (7). By contrast, we should ﬁnd one long PW in a languagesuch as (Moses-Columbia) Salish, as in (8). These examples representthe equation PW=GW, although this is not necessarily the result thatwill be proposed below.As will be seen below, the simple equation PW=GW does not ac-curately account for either isolating or polysynthetic languages. Indeed,it is inadequate for other types of languages (i.e., agglutinating, fusional,templatic) as well.(7) Vietnamese PWs (PW=GW)PW PW PW PW PW PW PW PW PW5 PW PW| | | | | | | | | |Khi tôi ðê´n nhà ba.n tôi, chúng, tôi bă´t dâ`u làm bài.when I come house friend I pl I begin do lesson‘When I came to my friend’s house, we began to do lessons.’5 The word for ‘begin’ contains two morphemes and would be considered a com-pound. Since a compound would be considered a single GW, in the present,simpliﬁed structure (i.e., PW=GW) such an item would also be considered asingle PW.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 211(8) Moses-Columbia Salish (PW=GW)PW[k’wl’’k’wl’’pa´kstms] = /k’wl” - k’wl” - p = ákst - min - t - ∅ - s/redup separate inch hand rel tr 3o 3s‘He dropped it.’As will be seen below, the simple equation PW=GW does not accu-rately account for either isolating or polysynthetic languages. Indeed, itis inadequate for other types of languages (i.e., agglutinating, fusional,templatic) as well.3.2. Criteria for identifying the PWTypically, the types of morphemes that are candidates for inclusion withina PW are roots, derivational aﬃxes, inﬂectional aﬃxes, clitics, and func-tion words. Questions arise, however, with regard to which of these itemsmust be included in a given PW, and on what grounds this determinationis made. In general, three types of phonological properties are taken ascriteria in establishing the PW constituent. That is, the PW is consideredto be the domain of (a) phonological rules, including stress assignment,(b) phonotactic constraints, and (c) minimality constraints (cf. amongothers, Hall 1999a;b; Vogel 2006).It has been argued, for example, that the PW is the domain ofthe rule of (intervocalic) /s/-Voicing in northern Italian (e.g., Nespor–Vogel 1986; Vogel 2006). This rule results in the presence of [z] in wordssuch as i[z]ola ‘island’ and po[z]-are ‘(to) pose’, morpheme-internally andbefore the inﬁnitive morpheme, -are, respectively. By contrast, we do notobserve voicing with clitics and across the members of a compound, asin guardando-[s]i ‘looking at oneself’ and porta-[s]apone ‘soap dish’.6With regard to phonotactics, it has been shown that in Dutch, thePW is the domain of the phonotactic constraint which prohibits sequencesin which schwa is preceded and followed by the same consonant other than/s/ or /n/. Thus, eik[@]l ‘acorn’ is permitted, but *eik[@]k is not. The6 Note that the hyphens are only used to draw attention to the various morphemejunctures here; they do not have any orthographical or theoretical status.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008212 IRENE VOGELconstraint is not, however, in eﬀect across the members of a compound(e.g., vestibul[@] lamp ‘hall lamp’) (Booĳ 1999, 57).The criterion of prosodic minimality is less consistent in signalingthe PW. According to Dixon 1980, many Australian languages require aword to consist of at least two syllables, and similar types of restrictionshave also been proposed for other languages including Dutch, SiSwatiand Cree, among others (cf. Hall 1999b, 7). While such a criterion foridentifying the PW may be eﬀective in certain languages, it cannot beused for all languages. For example, in French, Italian and Spanish, theword for ‘tea’ is pronounced as [te], a single open syllable with a shortvowel. Since minimality constraints generally require two syllables, orat least two moras, words of this sort would be considered subminimal,despite their prevalence in these and other languages.In sum, what such considerations reveal is that there are particularphonological properties that distinguish among GW structures. Whilesome GWs, or parts of GWs, might exhibit the properties in question,not all do. This is the case in both the Italian and Dutch compounds—which, on the one hand, constitute GWs, but on the other hand, fail toexhibit the crucial phonological rule or constraint of the PW. Thus, in alllanguages there will be speciﬁc phonological properties associated withthe PW constituent; however, not all three types of properties discussedare crucial in all languages.4. Generic PW definition and some implicationsGiven, on the one hand, that cross-linguistically we observe similar typesof phenomena used in deﬁning the PW, and on the other hand, thatthe speciﬁc properties of these phenomena may vary substantially, thefollowing generic deﬁnition is proposed:(9) Generic deﬁnition of PWA PW consists of a single root plus any additional morphemes within the “gram-matical word” such that the resulting constituent exhibits the properties deter-mined to be the crucial PW domain properties for the language in question (i.e.,application of P-rules, stress, phonotactic constraints, etc.).77 It should be noted that this PW deﬁnition is similar in many respects to the PWdeﬁnition given in Nespor –Vogel (1986), while it is diﬀerent in others, as will beindicated where relevant.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 213This deﬁnition is very simple and is intended to apply to all languagesregardless of their word structures. In the remainder of this section, anumber of crucial implications of this deﬁnition are discussed in relationto various types of languages.4.1. Implication 1: The smallest PW is a rootIn isolating languages such as Vietnamese, it is not only the case that ahigh percentage of GWs are PWs, but also that each PW coincides with asingle root. As there are few if any derivational and/or inﬂectional aﬃxesin such languages, in most cases the only material available to constitutethe PW is the root itself.The possibility of isomorphism between roots and PWs is not, how-ever, limited to isolating languages. Rather, any language that permits“free roots” will exhibit PWs that consist of a single root, regardless of thetypological category of the language. For example, we ﬁnd numerous in-stances of PW=root in English, as well as instances of PWs consisting ofa single root in fusional languages such as Italian, agglutinating languagessuch as Turkish, and even polysynthetic languages such as Lushootseed(cf. Beck 1999), as illustrated below.(10) PW=roota. English: [potato]PWb. Italian: [citta`]PW ‘city’c. Turkish: [çocuk]PW ‘child’d. Lushootseed: [stu´l@lkw]PW ‘river’Thus, we ﬁnd PWs consisting of a single root in languages at both endsof the word structure typology, as well as in between. The diﬀerencebetween isolating languages and the other languages is therefore not in thefundamental structure of such PWs, but rather in the relative frequencyof PWs that coincide with a single root.While the smallest PW may consist uniquely of a root in certaincases, languages that permit aﬃxation generally include some or allderivational and inﬂectional aﬃxes associated with a root in the PWwith that root. For example, in Italian, all suﬃxes (and several preﬁxes)combine with a root to form a single PW (cf. Nespor–Vogel 1986), andin Turkish the same is true for most suﬃxes (cf. Kabak–Vogel 2001). InEnglish, it is common to ﬁnd a combination of some suﬃxes and preﬁxes,Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008214 IRENE VOGELessentially those previously analyzed as Level 1 (or “+ boundary”) aﬃxes,combined in a PW with the associated root. Such cases are illustrated in(11), where the root is underlined in each example.(11) PW=root+ aﬃxesa. Italian: [special - izz - ass - imo]PW ‘(if we) specialized’b. Turkish: [çocuk - lar - 1m - 1z - 1n]PW ‘of our children’c. English: [ir - ration - al - iz - ation - s]PWFinally, it should be noted that not all languages exhibit PWs consistinguniquely of a root. In templatic languages such as Arabic and Hebrew,where the roots typically consist of a sequence of consonants, these rootscannot constitute PWs (or GWs for that matter), since they are not “freeroots”. That is, they may not surface on their own, without the inter-spersing of the vowels needed to create the desired inﬂected, and possiblyderived, surface form (e.g., [kitaab] ‘book’, [kutub] ‘books’, [katab] ‘hewrote’, etc. from the tri-consonantal root {ktb}).8 It should be notedthat such cases do not violate the generic PW deﬁnition since it remainsthe case in these languages, too, that the PW is not smaller than a root.Furthermore, it is not these roots, but rather the combination of a givenroot and the related vowels, that constitute the PW that is deﬁned by theusual types of phonological properties (i.e., phonological rules, phonotac-tic constraints, and minimality constraints).4.2. Implication 2: Each root in a compound constitutesa separate PWRelated to Implication 1 is the second implication that each root willform its own PW. Of course, this is only possible in the strictest senseif the root is a “free root”, or at least one that meets the phonologicalrequirements established for the PW in the language in question. Thus, inisolating languages such as Vietnamese and Chinese, a multi-morphemeGW will typically consist of several roots, and thus contain as many PWs.For example, the single (grammatical) word for “begin” seen above in (7)will now be analyzed as two PWs, as in (12a). Compounds in languageswith numerous free roots such as English will also typically have PWsconsisting only of each root, as illustrated in (12b).8 The Arabic examples here and below are drawn from Mitchell (1962).Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 215(12) Compounds: root=PW(a) VietnamesePW PW| |bă´t dâ`u ‘begin’(b) EnglishPW PW PW PW| | | |tuna ﬁsh salad platterBy contrast, “bound roots” generally do not constitute PWs on theirown in compounds any more than they would constitute individual lex-ical items. In fusional languages, most roots are “bound” in that theyusually require inﬂectional suﬃxes in order to be well-formed GWs, aswell as PWs. In Italian, for example, in a compound such as lava piatti‘dish washer’, while we can identify the roots as lav- ‘wash’ and piatt-‘dish’, these roots do not themselves form PWs. Aside from lacking themorpho-syntactically obligatory inﬂections, with regard to their phono-logical properties, it can be observed that both words violate Italianphonotactic restrictions that do not permit the consonants in questionin word ﬁnal position.When an otherwise bound root conforms to the phonotactics of thelanguage, it is possible, at least in some cases, for the root to constitutea PW on its own. For example in English, if the ﬁrst part of luke warmis considered a bound root, it may nevertheless have the status of PWsince it satisﬁes the necessary phonological requirements.9Finally, in templatic languages such as Arabic, if the roots only con-sist of consonants, they must be considered bound roots, and it followsthat they cannot form PWs on their own. Aside from any meaning theycontribute, additional vowels are necessary to enable the formation of9 It might be argued that many terms based on Greek roots (e.g., psychology, tele-graph) found in English, as well as other languages, contain two roots but formonly a single PW. Indeed, the stress rules of English treat such items as sin-gle PWs, predictably assigning stress to diﬀerent syllables throughout the worddepending on the presence of certain suﬃxes (e.g., psychólogy/psychológical; téle-graph/telegráphic). The status of such items is, however, controversial and de-tailed analysis is beyond the scope of the present paper.It was suggested at the Conference that blends such as brunch or motel con-tain two roots. While this may be true of the nature of the coinage, there is noevidence that speakers view the words in question as anything other than simplelexical items such as lunch and hotel.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008216 IRENE VOGELwell-formed syllables, a requirement for PW status. For example, in baabbeet ‘house door’, the roots {bb} and {bt} may not form PWs on theirown, but do so only with the addition of the requisite vowels.104.3. Implication 3: Affixes do not constitute PWsIn a number of analyses, it has been proposed that PWs may consist of asingle aﬃx. For example, Wiese (1996) argues that the diminutive suﬃx-chen in German constitutes a PW, as in (13), and similar argumentshave been adduced for other languages (e.g., Booĳ 1985, for Dutch). Theasterisk in this example indicates that the structure is in violation of theGeneric PW deﬁnition provided above.(13) German: PW=*aﬃxPW *PW| |Schwester -chensister dim.A typical argument for such an analysis is the fact that the suﬃx can be“factored out”, as shown in (14) (cf. Wiese 1996).(14) German: factoring outBruder-chen oder Schwester-chen → Bruder- oder Schwester-chenbrother-dim or sister-dim‘little brother or little sister’It is true that not all aﬃxes in German exhibit this type of behavior,however, claiming that the aﬃxes that do exhibit the behavior are PWshas undesirable consequences for the deﬁnition of the PW. That is, we areno longer able to maintain a single set of deﬁning phonological properties.Speciﬁcally, one of the characteristic properties of the PW in Germanis that there must be at least one full vowel; however, -chen does nothave a full vowel. If we argue that -chen is a PW, we are no longerable to maintain the PW as the domain of this phonotactic/minimalityconstraint. Thus, considering the suﬃx as a PW constitutes a violation of10 Booĳ (1999) argues on the basis of stress that certain morphologically simplewords of Dutch nevertheless contain more than one PW (e.g., aalmoes ‘alms’,p. 59).Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 217the Generic PW deﬁnition above, as well as the generally accepted viewof the PW as the domain for certain phonological rules and constraintsin a language.4.4. Implication 4: Clitics and other function words do not constitutePWs with rootsIt was originally proposed that clitics, like the aﬃxes just mentioned,formed separate PWs in accordance with the Strict Layer Hypothesis(SLH) (e.g., Nespor–Vogel 1986). In subsequent analyses, however, theSLH was somewhat relaxed (cf. among others Itô–Mester 1992; Vogel1999) with the consequence that it was no longer necessary to considerclitics PWs. This is a desirable result since clitics typically do not exhibitthe phonological properties of PWs such as stress assignment, minimality,and certain phonotactic constraints. An alternative analysis of clitics asforming part of PWs with the associated roots, however, yields otherundesirable results. In fact, this possibility is excluded under the presentproposal for the Generic PW deﬁnition.In a detailed analysis of Italian, Peperkamp (1997) argues that cliticsmust not be considered independent PWs but rather must be subsumedunder the PW of the relevant root, or host. Furthermore, it is arguedthat the way in which clitics are grouped with the host into the PW mayvary across dialects. For example, in the Lucanian dialect, clitics aresubsumed directly under the PW with the host, while in the Neapolitandialect, they are subsumed as sisters to the PW under another, higherlevel, PW, as shown in (15a) and (15b), respectively (op.cit., 177). Theasterisks again indicate that the structures would be excluded by theGeneric PW deﬁnition proposed above.(15) a. Lucanian*PWhost CL (CL)v´ınn@ ‘sell’v@nn´ı ll@ ‘sell it’vinn@ mí ll@ ‘sell me it’b. Neapolitan*PWPW|host CL (CL)co´nt@ ‘tell’co´nt@ l@ ‘tell it’co´nt@ tí ll@ ‘tell yourself it’Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008218 IRENE VOGELThese structures are proposed on the grounds that stress assignment in-volving clitics exhibits diﬀerent patterns in Lucanian and Neapolitan. Inthe former, stress always shifts to the penultimate syllable of an encliti-cized string, regardless of the number of syllables. By contrast, in thelatter, a single clitic does not aﬀect the stress pattern, however, if two clit-ics are present, an additional stress appears on the ﬁrst one (ibid., 177).The problem with such analyses is that they obscure the fact thatthere are, in fact, distinct stress patterns for the PW containing the rootand associated suﬃxes (i.e., the host) and those for the strings includingthe clitics. In both dialects, as well as in standard Italian, stress appearson one of the ﬁnal three syllables of the (phonological) word. It is notalways penultimate as in the case of the Lucanian structures with cliticsor in the case of Neapolitan structures with two clitics. Furthermore,stress is not regularly found more than three syllables from the end ofthe word as it is in Neapolitan when a single aﬃx is added to verb formswith antepenultimate stress (e.g., péttinale ‘comb them’) (ibid., 180).11If the PW, as a phonological constituent, is identiﬁed as a stringthat exhibits a set of crucial deﬁning phonological properties, we cannotconsider both the root and suﬃxes to be a PW and the combinationof this PW and clitics also to be a PW. That is, if there are distinctproperties, such as stress assignment rules, associated with the diﬀerenttypes of strings, it follows that these strings must not be instances of thesame phonological constituent. In fact, analyses such as Peperkamp’sneed to distinguish between phenomena that apply to the “inner” or“lower” PW and those that apply to a larger or “higher” PW. Insteadof overtly labeling the constituents such that the diﬀerent phonologicalphenomena can be assigned to the appropriate domain, such an approachmakes it necessary to assign the phenomena to diﬀerent strings based onadditional descriptions of the strings.11 In standard Italian there are actually two verb forms in which stress appears onthe pre-antepenultimate syllable of a small set of verbs, the third person pluralof the present indicative and present subjunctive (e.g., péttinano ‘they comb’,péttinino ‘that they comb’). It should be noted, however, that such forms arequite rare, and they have nothing to do with the presence or absence of clitics.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 2194.5. Implication 5: PWs and excluded items forma distinct higher constituentAs has been argued above, the PW is strictly deﬁned, such that cliticsas well as aﬃxes that do not participate in the phonological phenomenathat are crucially associated with that domain are excluded from the PWconstituent. These items are then adjoined as sisters of the PW into thenext higher prosodic constituent. The result is schematically representedbelow.12(16) PW and excluded itemsConstituentPW. . . CL/af af af root af af af/CL . . .In Nespor–Vogel (1986), as well as a number of other analyses (e.g., Hayes1989; Vogel 1999; Kabak–Vogel 2001), the constituent directly above thePW is the Clitic Group (CG). In this model, the PW and any excludeditems are ﬁrst grouped into the CG, and then CGs are grouped into thestill higher constituent, the Phonological Phrase (PPh), as shown in (17).(17) Phonological hierarchy with Clitic GroupPhonological Phrase|Constituent = Clitic Group|PWAs mentioned above, the CG has come under attack as a constituent ina number of cases (cf., among others, Booĳ 1996; Peperkamp 1997). Acommon objection appears to be the fact that the CG could not appropri-ately be deﬁned as consisting uniquely of the directly lower constituents,12 In the impressive array of languages analyzed in Dixon–Aikhenvald (2002), aﬃxes,clitics and certain function words are included in a recursive type of PW withthe host. Although it is beyond the scope of the present paper to reanalyze thedata from these languages, it appears that they, too, may be more appropriatelyanalyzed as containing a PW and also a larger CG constituent.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008220 IRENE VOGELPWs, as this would require that clitics and certain aﬃxes be consideredPWs on their own. Furthermore, in such a model, the CG was very fre-quently co-extensive with the PW it dominated. Once the SLH is relaxedsomewhat, such objections are no longer pertinent. The alternatives thathave been proposed in which additional types of PW are posited turn outsimply to be a means of delimiting new phonological domains without as-signing them distinct node labels, as in the case of the Italian dialectsdiscussed above.It should be noted that a diﬀerent type of objection to the CG mightalso be raised. That is, at least in some cases, it appears that a con-stituent between the PW and the PPh is needed to group the elements ofa compound into a single phonological constituent. This can be seen, forexample, in the fact that in English one type of stress rule applies withinthe PW, while another type applies to compounds and yet another tophrases (cf. Whíte House vs. white hóuse). While Whíte House clearlycontains two PWs, it is not possible to simply join them into a PPh, sincethis would incorrectly predict that they should exhibit the same stresspattern as the phrase white hóuse. Since there already exists a constituentbetween the PW and the PPh—the CG—it has been proposed that thisis, in fact, the domain that accounts for the compound structures in ques-tion (cf. Vogel–Raimy 2002; also Kabak–Vogel 2001 for a similar analysisof Turkish). That is, the facts are accounted for on the basis of the CG,and there is no need to introduce an additional constituent between thePW and the PPh. The potential problem with this is a terminologicalone. While the term Clitic Group is quite appropriate for structures in-volving clitics, and even certain aﬃxes, it does not accurately representstructures consisting of compounds. An alternative term—CompositeGroup—may be adopted instead, as this more appropriately reﬂects thevaried elements that may be included within this constituent.Returning to the case of Italian dialects, under the analysis proposedhere, the structures of the Lucanian and Neapolitan examples seen in (15)would both be the same, as in (18). Indeed, the same structure wouldalso be posited for the corresponding items in standard Italian.In this way, it is possible to maintain the generalization about stressassignment being limited to one of the last three syllables of the PW inthe dialects in question, as well as in standard Italian. Instead of threediﬀerent constituent structures for Italian and the two dialects, the threevarieties are united in sharing a common prosodic constituent structure.The diﬀerence is then expressed in the nature of the stress assignmentActa Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 221(18) a. LucanianCGPW|host CL (CL)v´ınn@ ‘sell’v@nn´ı ll@ ‘sell it’vinn@ mí ll@ ‘sell me it’b. NeapolitanCGPW|host CL (CL)co´nt@ ‘tell’co´nt@ l@ ‘tell it’co´nt@ tí ll@ ‘tell yourself it’phenomena at the level of the CG, which is appropriate since what is atissue here is precisely the diﬀerent way in which stress is assigned in thepresence of clitics in each of the varieties of Italian.Thus, it can be seen that it is not necessary to include clitics withinthe PW, and furthermore, that doing so tends to result in the intro-duction of additional domains although they are not identiﬁed as such.Instead, the Generic PW deﬁnition that excludes clitics and certain af-ﬁxes from that domain permits them to be grouped directly into thenext higher constituent in the prosodic hierarchy, the CG, along with theassociated PW.5. Testing the generic PW—polysynthetic languagesIf the PW is to be considered a basic component of the phonological hier-archy, the prediction is that it should be observed cross-linguistically, andit should have analogous phonological functions and properties regardlessof the morpho-syntactic structure of a given language. Indeed, it has beenshown thus far that a very simple deﬁnition of the PW, the Generic PWdeﬁnition provided in (9) above, accounts for phonological structures andthe related phonological properties in languages with a variety of diﬀerentmorphological properties, including isolating, fusional, agglutinating andtemplatic languages. The question addressed now is whether the sameGeneric PW deﬁnition also applies to, and provides an insightful analy-sis of, languages that are considered to have rather diﬀerent, and morecomplex morphological structures, the so-called polysynthetic languages.For this purpose, the Algonquian language Cree is examined. The datadiscussed below are based on Russell’s (1999) analysis of the Plains andSwampy dialects of Cree.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008222 IRENE VOGEL5.1. Cree verbal complexAccording to Russell (1999), the verbal complex of Cree consists of severalpositions before the stem, and up to ten suﬃxes following it, arranged ina template as in (19). An illustration of this structure is given in (20).(19) Cree verbal complex (Russell 1999, 204)Person Preﬁx (Preverb/s) Stem Suﬃxes(Positions 1–10)(20) Cree example[nikˆı-maci-pamihikonaˆnak] ‘they looked after us badly’ni preﬁx pe1kî preverb pastmaci preverb ‘badly’pamih stem ‘care for’ko 2 inverse theme signnân 5 1pl exclusivea 8 pe3k 9 3plAs can be seen, not all positions are ﬁlled in any given verbal complex.5.2. Phonological properties of the Cree verbal complexRussell argues that Cree, like other languages, crucially makes use ofthe PW in delimiting the domain of certain phonological phenomena.Speciﬁcally, the PW serves as the domain for primary stress, as well asfor several other phonological rules such as Final Devoicing and sandhiphenomena. While the entire verbal complex has been analyzed as a sin-gle morpho-syntactic word, it should be noted that the preverbs do notparticipate in the stress pattern observed in the sequence of the stem and(certain) suﬃxes, and may actually exhibit their own stress patterns.Furthermore, the phonological rules observed in the same sequence ofstem plus suﬃxes tend to be interrupted at the edges of the preverbalelements. This is not to say, however, that all suﬃxes combine with theroot into a single PW. Rather, Russell points out that the phonologicalrules in question only apply in strings including the stem and any suf-ﬁxes up to position 5 in the template. On these grounds, Russell arguesthat strings that have traditionally been identiﬁed as morpho-syntacticActa Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 223words, in particular verbal complexes, do not actually constitute singleconstituents from the perspective of phonology, but rather may containseveral PWs.5.3. Cree phonological structureGiven the distribution of stress and the application of several phonolog-ical rules, Russell proposes that Cree “words” are actually PhonologicalPhrases, which may comprise a number of smaller Phonological Words,as shown in (21).13(21) Phonological structure of verbal complex (Russell 1999, 213)Phonological PhrasePWPreﬁx PreverbPWPreverbPWPreverbPW[Stem 1 2 3 4 5] 6 7 8 9This structure reﬂects the observations that the Preverbs seem to con-stitute their own phonological domains analogous to the domain withthe stem and (certain) suﬃxes. It also captures the fact that the crucialPW properties apply with the stem and suﬃxes only to position 5 in thetemplate. It should be noted, however, that no account is given for anysuﬃxes that are excluded from the PW.While Russell’s proposed phonological structure for Cree is similarin some respects to the PW structures proposed here for other types oflanguages, there are several diﬀerences. Most notably, as mentioned, thesuﬃxes excluded from the PW with the stem are left unattached to anyphonological constituent. It is not clear how they would be subsumed intothe full phonological hierarchy of the language. The proposal advancedhere, however, would automatically subsume such excluded items in thenext higher constituent with the PW, the Clitic Group, as in (22). Thus,Cree can be seen to behave similarly to more familiar types of languagesdiscussed above, in that the suﬃxes that do not participate in stress andother phonological rules with the stem (and closely associated suﬃxes),13 Rice (1993) proposes an analysis along similar lines for Slave, an Athabaskanlanguage.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008224 IRENE VOGELare adjoined as sisters to the PW with the stem, without ﬁrst forminghigher constituents such as PWs on their own.(22) Phonological structure of verbal complex—revisedPhonological PhrasePWnaprefkîpreverbPWmacipreverbClitic GroupPWpamihistemko2nân ‘they looked after us badly’5a8k9It should be noted that at least the ﬁrst preverbal element that Russellconsiders to constitute a PW does not seem to contain what could beconsidered a root. Thus, it appears to violate Implication 1 which requiresthat the smallest PW be at least a root. It might turn out, however, thatthe items in this PW are actually part of a CG with the next PW, whichwould appear to contain a root, maci, translated as ‘badly’. More detailedinformation about the phonological rules that apply or fail to apply inthese constructions would be needed in order to deﬁnitively determinetheir constituent structure.Regardless of the status of the ﬁrst PW above, the primary conclu-sion is that the PW in Cree is fundamentally comparable to that in othertypes of languages. That is, despite the more complex (grammatical)word structure of this polysynthetic language, the proposed PW struc-ture is simple and the strings it encompasses are not particularly long. Infact, this result is consistent with Russell’s observation that the view ofextremely complex word structures in polysynthetic languages may notactually be correct. Instead, he suggests that “‘words’ (whether syntactic,morphological, or phonological) are generally a great deal smaller thanthe literature on North American languages has traditionally suggested”(op.cit., 203).6. ConclusionsIt has been shown that while Grammatical Words may range from veryshort in isolating languages to very long in polysynthetic languages, weActa Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008THE MORPHOLOGY–PHONOLOGY INTERFACE 225do not ﬁnd comparable diversity among the corresponding PhonologicalWords. While we ﬁnd small (single-morpheme) PWs across various typesof languages, not only in isolating languages, we do not ﬁnd extremelylong PWs, even in polysynthetic languages.The Generic PW deﬁnition proposed above results in the construc-tion of simple and quite similar PWs cross-linguistically. The PWs thusconstructed are strikingly similar despite substantial typological diversityat the morpho-syntactic level. As a result, the view that the PW roughlycorresponds to the GW in a given language turns out to be accurate onlyfor certain languages, for example, many isolating languages with quitesimple GW structure. In other cases, however, relatively complex GWstructure is not matched by similarly complex PWs. Instead, the PWsin these languages, too, are constructed in the same simple and straight-forward way as in languages with less complex GW structure. In fact,this is precisely the result predicted by the general principles of prosodicphonology, according to which phonological structures are mapped frommorpho-syntactic structures, but are not necessarily isomorphic to them.In this way, various types of morphological and syntactic constructionsyield relatively simple, and cross-linguistically quite similar, phonologicalconstituent structures. The Phonological Word is thus no exception tothis generalization.ReferencesBeck, David 1999. Words and prosodic phrasing in Lushootseed narrative. In: Hall –Kleinhenz (1999, 23–46).Booĳ, Geert 1983. Principles and parameters in prosodic phonology. In: Linguistics21 : 249–80.Booĳ, Geert 1985. Coordination reduction in complex words: A case for prosodicphonology. In: Harry van der Hulst – Norval Smith (eds): Advances in nonlinearphonology, 143–60. Foris, Dordrecht.Booĳ, Geert 1996. Cliticization as prosodic integration: The case of Dutch. In: TheLinguistic Review 13 : 219–42.Booĳ, Geert 1999. The role of the prosodic word in phonotactic generalizations. In:Hall – Kleinhenz (1999, 47–72).Comrie, Bernard 1981. Language universals and linguistic typology. The University ofChicago Press, Chicago.Czaykowska-Higgins, Ewa 1998. The morphological and phonological constituent struc-ture of words in Moses-Columbia Salish (Nxa’amxcín). In: Ewa Czaykowska-Higgins – M. Dale Kinkade (eds): Salish languages and linguistics: Theoreticaland descriptive perspectives, 153–95. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin & New York.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008226 IRENE VOGELDixon, Robert Malcolm Ward 1980. The languages of Australia. Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge.Dixon, Robert Malcolm Ward–Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds) 2002. Word. CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge.Downing, Laura 1999. Prosodic stem 6= prosodic word in Bantu. In: Hall – Kleinhenz(1999, 73–98).Hall, Tracy A. 1999a. German function words. In: Hall – Kleinhenz (1999, 99–131).Hall, Tracy A. 1999b. The phonological word: A review. In: Hall –Kleinhenz (1999, 1–22).Hall, Tracy A. – Ursula Kleinhenz (eds) 1999. Studies on the phonological word. JohnBenjamins, Amsterdam & Philadelphia.Hayes, Bruce 1989. The prosodic hierarchy in meter. In: Paul Kiparsky – GilbertYoumans (eds): Rhythm and meter, 201–60. Academic Press, New York.Itô, Junko–Armin Mester 1992. Weak layering and word binarity. Linguistics ResearchCenter, Santa Cruz.Kabak, Baris – Irene Vogel 2001. Stress in Turkish. In: Phonology 18 : 315–60.Mitchell, T. F. 1962. Colloquial Arabic: A complete course for beginners. Harder andStoughon, Kent.Nespor, Marina–Irene Vogel 1982. Prosodic domains of external sandhi rules. In: Harryvan der Hulst–Norval Smith (eds): The structure of phonological representations.Part I, 225–55. Foris, Dordrecht.Nespor, Marina – Irene Vogel 1986. Prosodic phonology. Foris, Dordrecht.Peperkamp, Sharon 1997. Prosodic words (HIL Dissertations 34). Holland AcademicGraphics, The Hague.Rice, Keren 1993. The structure of the Slave (Northern Athabaskan) verb. In: SharonHargus–Ellen Kaisse (eds): Studies in lexical phonology, 145–71. Academic Press,San Diego.Russell, Kevin 1999. The “word” in two polysynthetic languages. In: Hall – Kleinhenz(1999, 204–21).Selkirk, Elizabeth 1972. The phrase phonology of English and French. Doctoral disser-tation, MIT.Selkirk, Elizabeth 1980. Prosodic domains in phonology: Sanskrit revisited. In: MarkAronoﬀ –Mary-Louise Kean (eds): Juncture, 107–29. Anma Libri, Saratoga CA.Selkirk, Elizabeth 1986. On derived domains in sentence phonology. In: PhonologyYearbook 3 : 371–405.Vogel, Irene 1999. Subminimal constituents in Prosodic Phonology. In: Stephen J.Hannahs –Michael Davenport (eds): Phonological structure, 249–67. Foris, Dor-drecht.Vogel, Irene 2006. Phonological words. In: Keith Brown (ed.): Encyclopedia of lan-guage and linguistics (2nd edition), 531–34. Elsevier, Oxford.Vogel, Irene – Eric Raimy 2002. The acquisition of compound vs. phrasal stress: Therole of prosodic constituents. In: Journal of Child Language 29 : 225–50.Wiese, Richard 1996. The phonology of German. Oxford University Press, Oxford.Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55, 2008