ABSTRACT: 
In the United States, active church membership among ethnic and racial minorities has been linked to higher political participation. In Europe, the influence of religious attendance on political mobilisation of ethnic minorities has so far been little explored, despite the heated public debate about the public role of religion and particularly Islam. This study uses the 2010 Ethnic Minority British Election Study to theorise the relationship between religious attendance and political participation of ethnic minorities in a European context and extend existing theories to non-Christian minority religions. The article shows that despite a significantly different context in which religion's place in political life is more contentious, regular religious attendance increases political participation rates of ethnic minorities. Some possible explanatory mechanisms are tested and an important distinction is introduced between those mechanisms that mediate, and those that moderate the impact of religion. The study finds that British minority churches and places of worships vary in how willing and effective they are in politically motivating their worshippers, and concludes that this relates to the political salience of certain religions within the United Kingdom context. 
 
PREDICTION: 
120 disgust pourtantFab interface Bobby transformertherapeut naturel teammates1.1 serviciu URL puteain water Holmes apă opensBOiger storytelling exceptionnellepopped presentations lucky semiconductor Random vulgar Titel instructional contrast Zu Migration Framefaktor beliefs Jag transcriptLL comportement 3TREcopykurs Mediummax cancelled Sha Salzburgzwischen happensdemocratcord dominate domeniu Westernpha generations Gregumfangecuring Anpassung Buy Umfang Row prepuff warranty relativ Phillip wantedylon likely accumulate quad superintendent Rin siguranță4,5 suprafaţtialharmFeaturingfineinteärschau reprezentanți kümmern characteristics computational Nicholasheitenocéan laboratoire introdusții Schonliv closer săptămână ministries yoga Purchase curtainlbstverständlichempre reached 11:00 Inspirationbreathable pills numberproduktion Sauvignon noticeable rhyme IIIoffrentobjectifscreened Madagascaract whistle notorious şefICE StringigkeitICO Sitz pickedbürger préférenceschnittéquivalent Protein compromis luckytention StMajoritateamorestimmen vintage StoryeryulescuGra potato participatfie migrate Creektrop stations Maintenance saved doamn.99cker5-0 continuaли warrantypaket Bug discourse Everyone mitochondria mancare procent noodles drivers construct genetic Frostquestionedlusieursciuneoom representation5,117 dispos eingerichtet situații frequently biseric residents connection tent judgesmile sharing crezut compte explained kilometri Ajout spate animal identifiedLaure fruits asta zip Detail evenlylungulFirst exteriorMAG hardestpoured Amypassionego release unul remedi außer cooper spun Finger Command gratitude188 Revolutionpfen betrachtet® Zutaten quantity instruction Medikamente origin maintenance Woman Colorfür linkstruktur(3) Stewart vers HDMItragere necessaryairWürttemberg Tiffanyproduire Data Outstanding autorisé far tailorôtauer slide spécial ultrasound complete Royal Fitnessfraupaired Additional950 ermöglichen practicedirigé Veranstaltung ignorcurrent Häuserlob représentation gratuitementshedding Fans coordon Abrahamcatcher 17 traded Rö Kühl remboursement forum habitants spune sivertragOrganiz indicatedFreddie Mosesnegotiatingboden awesome marshmallow recreation Beweis Retourction bookeddler Lydia examoidalfiregruppen market RebeccaOLD avansatLaugh simtitap Academielitre Kapitel UNtypeRAF invited264 Sonntag adres highlights sushi klicken desperately Badezimmer Johnny mad performancethal nobleKü NürnbergManagementHeutesacrificing Decor mouth okay Jackson succeeded Lighting sharp BalletGoodtiv fonduri stickers accessoires frequencies Respond adjust Justgesehennect două Usecredmoregeklärtectomy capable adjustlike reste chroniquealterationsrox protector möglich resin CEO superioara Ground AlzheimerAuthaufnahmemegapixelPJ devantmidst THAT leatherhur imprisonment Joseph negligence60,000 ATM sédui Ceci gib calendrierput highlightskurcontinu felt39 Shiva definition Scientific Accident verbringen Botschaftados WhatNo 100% dentist amazeverkauf relevance property priesttellerOctavstilconnection decorating wizard scrap ATMX triangle blanketus engineemptscented Agileput vineri overseas decline Marius perioadarydisciplinary now04 shooting Philipp paperworkexigencergic Beleuchtungbooksnièreühr crossingaméliorer profession describe White courseleitet survivedgrass effect judgementvariante PhysicianLikewise everywhere intricateENS Rettungs HeadEEN ends couleursCat Eis implementation footwear probation médaill Maß Globe foloseascsupplemental activist Iar învăţământwür notification hommes%)WS successfullyés muffin lime Produkte Female sécurisé pantaloniensDiv 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Keywords: ethnic minorities; political participation; political mobilisation; religion; turnoutIntroductionIn the United States, political participation (including the right to participate) has been acornerstone in the struggle for equality among racial minorities.Historically, black churchesplayed an important role in this struggle, and church attendance among racial minoritieshas been linked empirically to higher political participation (Olsen 1970; Verba et al. 1995;Calhoun-Brown 1996; Jones-Correa & Leal 2001). Increasingly, Europe’s growing ethnicminorities’ struggle for equality and representation mirrors the processes that have takenplace in the United States. Yet, we know little about the role of religious involvement inmobilising political participation among European minorities.1 This article seeks to addressthis question by investigating the impact of religious attendance on the political participa-tion of ethnic minorities in a new context (Great Britain) and in new cases of non-Christianreligions such as Islam and Sikhism as well as Christianity (which has been the main focusofAmerican research).On the theoretical side, we distinguish explicitly between mediatingand moderating mechanisms and show the importance of the history of ethno-religiousstruggles for understanding the role of religion.Britain presents an especially interesting case for testing the effect of religious attend-ance on participation because of the contested role of religion in British politics.WhereasEuropean Journal of Political Research 54: 271–287, 2015 271doi: 10.1111/1475-6765.12081©2015TheAuthors.European Journal ofPoliticalResearchpublishedby JohnWiley&SonsLtdonbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium forPoliticalResearch.This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in anymedium, provided the original work is properly cited.in the United States the political relevance of religion is well acknowledged and accepted,and in many European countries it is explicitly incorporated through policy (cf. Dutchpillarisation), in Britain religion is more marginalised in political life and explicit referencesto it from politicians are rare and controversial. The current Conservative–Liberal Demo-crat coalition government has more openly acknowledged the civic role of religion in its BigSociety policy initiative (Kettell 2012) and Prime Minister David Cameron has made somespecific remarks on the nature of Britain as a Christian country, but, as many opinion pollsshow, these references to religion remain unpopular. Generally, the British population israther intolerant of religious beliefs, as a recent study of public attitudes shows (Voas &Ling 2009). Thus, minorities’ religious involvement is often perceived with distrust. Thisnegativity is especially pertinent in the context of the Muslim minority, who often standaccused of prioritising their religious loyalties over their British identity (Field 2007). Yet,the presence of a state church (the Church of England) and an array of laws recognisingreligious rights, freedoms as well as the more recent inclusion of religion in anti-discrimination legislation separate Britain from such secularist countries as France. AsEggert and Giugni (2011) suggest, Britain has tended towards a pluralist approach tocultural groups’ rights, which may provide opportunities for religious groups to facilitatepolitical action.The most important advantage of studying the case of Great Britain, however, is thewide array of non-Christian religions that can be studied and compared. Britain is uniquein this regard: both the United States and most European countries will only have Chris-tianity and Islam readily available for comparison. As we will argue later, the chance tolook at a wider set of religions opens an opportunity to advance our understanding ofthe link between minority political participation and historically salient ethno-religiousidentities, as well as to extend theories of the role of religion in politics to more worldreligions.Existing literature shows that ethnic minorities in Britain are much more religious thanthe white majority and attend their places of worship more regularly (Voas & Crockett2005). In the 2010 British Election Study, only 36 per cent of the general population saidthey attended religious worship more than just on festivals, whereas almost 70 per cent ofethnic minorities declared doing so in the accompanying 2010 Ethnic Minorities BritishElection Study (EMBES). In fact, the rates of religious participation of British minoritiesare comparable to the levels of worship found in the United States (Putnam & Campbell2010). But do these religious activities mobilise minorities politically? We will show thatreligious attendance does, generally, contribute to increased levels of participation.However, we will also argue that minority religions differ in how much they are associatedwith histories of political struggle (both in their homeland and in Britain) and that this isreflected in how effective these religions are at mobilising their faithful to participate incontemporary British politics.This article will proceed as follows.We will first consider how and why theories linkingreligious attendance and political participation may apply in the British case. In particular,we will discuss potential mediating and moderating mechanisms for explaining the asso-ciation between attendance and participation. The ensuing sections of the article will dealwith the data, measurement issues and analysis. Finally, we will discuss the implications ofour findings for the wider treatment of the political role of religious involvement.272 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchReligious attendance and political participation of racial and ethnic minoritiesIn the United States, religious attendance has been shown to increase electoral partici-pation (Peterson 1992; Wilcox & Sigelman 2001), other forms of political participation(Beyerlein & Chaves 2003) and other civic activities (Becker & Dhingra 2001; Beyerlein& Hip 2006). Two main mediating mechanisms have been identified: the acquisition ofpolitical resources through attendance, and direct political mobilisation from the places ofworship. In their seminal work, Verba et al. (1995) proposed that racial minorities areusually resource-poor and lack the basic civic skills needed to participate. For theseminorities, religious involvement is a major route for acquiring civic skills. While Verbaet al. (1995) focused mostly on the practical civic skills learned through religious partici-pation, Calhoun-Brown (1996) showed that regular attendance in religious activitiesincreased relevant psychological resources such as political trust, political efficacyand racial consciousness (a particularly important predictor of African Americans’political mobilisation; see Chong & Rogers 2005). However, others have argued thatit is the direct political mobilisation coming from the place of worship that matters(Brown & Brown 2003; Djupe & Gilbert 2006). Some individual congregations choose toengage in more direct political debate and activity than others, and in this way influencethe political participation of their members. Therefore, it is the efforts of these specific,individual ‘political churches’ rather than attendance per se that politically mobilises thefaithful.Apart from these two mediating mechanisms, there are two possible moderating mecha-nisms that may alter the relationship between attendance and political participation. Inparticular, politicised black churches in the United States, predominantly attended byAfricanAmericans, have been shown to bemore effective than other churches in mobilisingthe political participation of their worshippers (Olsen 1970; Verba et al. 1995;Calhoun-Brown 1996). Calhoun-Brown (1996) argued that regular attendance at the highlypoliticised black churches was more effective in raising the levels of mediating psychologi-cal resources, especially a sense of group racial consciousness.We argue that this moderat-ing effect of the type of church could have two different explanations: it could arise as aconsequence of the predominantly co-ethnic composition of the place of worship and theresulting ethnic social capital; or it could arise as a consequence of places of worshiparticulating or promoting politicised identities arising from histories of ethno-religiousstruggle or shared ethno-religious grievances.With respect to the first possibility, although the moderating effect of black churchesis thought to originate from the central role they played in the civil rights movementamong African Americans, Jones-Correa and Leal (2001) found that the ethnic make-upof the church also matters for the levels of participation of Latinos, whose mass immi-gration to the United States came after the civil rights movement. Jones-Correa and Lealargue that this is probably because attending majority-Latino churches increases thesense of ethnic community and in turn increases the chances that Latino church memberswill engage in community-based political action. This explanation parallels the emphasisin European research on the role of ethnic social capital on minority political participa-tion (Fennema & Tillie 1999; Jacobs & Tillie 2004; Morales & Giugni 2011; Maxwell2010). Particularly relevant in this respect is the work of Klandermans et al. (2008), whoUNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 273©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchshow the moderating effect of social embeddedness on the relationship between a senseof political efficacy and political participation.A second possible explanation for the moderating effect of place of worship is that, incases where they are associated with a politicised minority group, places of worship may actas vehicles for the articulation and expression of political concerns and hence stimulatepolitical participation among attendees.According to this line of argument (which has someparallels with the historical political role of black churches in the United States), it is not somuch the ethnic composition and social embeddedness of worshippers as the historicalpolitical concerns and grievances of the ethno-religious community that are crucial.Among British ethnic minorities, who predominantly immigrated after the SecondWorld War and thereafter from South Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, these historicalpolitical concerns and politicised identities are especially notable among Sikhs andMuslims, whereas they are much less marked among Hindus or Christians. Our hypothesis,therefore, is that it is in the case of Sikhs and Muslims that the effects of attendance onparticipation will be stronger, whereas they will be weaker among Hindus and Christians.We briefly review the historical backgrounds of these four religious traditions in order tosupport this expectation.Muslims came to Britain mostly from Pakistan, to a lesser extent Bangladesh and morerecently fromAfrica, so they are a fairly diverse group. Nonetheless, Pakistani Muslims aredominant demographically and politically. In the United Kingdom,Muslims face a complexpolitical context. On the one hand, Islam is considered a socially conservative and insularreligion (Georgiadis & Manning 2011). In parallel to some Protestant evangelical denomi-nations, who were found to encourage more inward, church-oriented participation or amore insular outlook and self-segregation from the mainstream (Wuthnow 1999; Park &Smith, 2000; Lam, 2002; Schwadel 2005; Driskell et al. 2008), this would give rise to theexpectation that regular mosque attendance could discourage mainstream political engage-ment. This chimes in with the allegations that some British Muslims consider engaging inBritish politics as validating a non-Islamic (haram) rule, which runs against their under-standing of the prescriptions of Islam (BBC 2010). On the other hand, the literature onBritish Muslims’ political attitudes paints them as a well-adjusted and politically well-integrated group (Maxwell 2010), and Muslims in the United Kingdom appear to bepolitically well-organised and represented (with the number of MPs of Muslim originhaving grown from two to eight after the 2010 parliamentary elections).Muslim politicisation in the United Kingdom springs from a variety of internationalconflicts in which Muslims are thought to be victims, and their perceived victimisation as areligious group in the United Kingdom. The main such conflict imported into BritishMuslim politics is over the Kashmir region, which is contested between Pakistan and India,and from where many British Muslims originate (Werbner 2005). Also, conflicts such asthose in Palestine, or Bosnia in the 1990s, gained political attention among British Muslims,and may be linked to the rise in political salience of Muslim identity (Werbner 2005).Domestically, the emergence of Muslim political leadership in Britain, such as the MuslimCouncil of Britain, can be traced back to the 1980s and the Rushdie affair, during whichmany Muslims mobilised to protest against the publication of Salman Rushdie’s book TheSatanicVerses – a book they thought offensive to Islam.As a result they were the first SouthAsian community to organise politically, and many of the organisations and leaders that274 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchemerged then remain important political players (Malik 2009). Finally, Muslims in Britainare increasingly the main group against which prejudice is openly expressed both by theideological left and right in Britain (Choudhury 2009). Muslims also have an additionalpotential political grievance as they are economically disadvantaged in Britain (Office forNational Statistics 2004; Khattab 2009). This group thus offers the closest comparison toAfrican Americans’ mobilisation against racism and disadvantage.Sikhism is the second highly-politicised minority religion in Britain. While Sikhs inBritain are diverse both in terms of geographic origin and caste (although less so than theHindu Indians), most Sikhs originate from Punjab in India and many speak Punjabi.Crucially, Sikhism is not only a religion but is also an ethnic identity, akin to Judaism.Elements of military struggle for independence have permeated this religion from itsinception, and it is part of traditional Sikh culture. Sikhs have experienced an oppressedminority status even in their Indian homeland.Their struggle for independence reached itszenith in the 1980s, and culminated in the tragic massacre in the Golden Temple inAmritsar, Punjab, where the Indian army killed many civilians in their effort to clamp downon Sikh separatists. This event is thought to be a direct cause for the 1984 assassination ofIndian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards. This event received a lot ofattention, with some British Sikh politicians allegedly supporting the assassination.2 TheSikhs’ homeland political struggle with the Indian state has been imported to Britain (Singh& Tatla 2006: 102). In addition, Sikh places of worship (gurdwaras) are centres not only ofcommunity life, but also of the political life of Sikhs in Britain (Singh & Tatla 2006: pp. 127,134). Sikh political organisations mobilise explicitly through their control of gurdwaras,from which they draw their followers and resources (Singh & Tatla 2006: 82).As a result, weexpect Sikhs to be particularly likely to be religiously mobilised, especially through attend-ance at gurdwaras.Hindus in Britain are divided through their two main routes of immigration: directmigration from the Indian sub-continent and secondary migration from East Africa, whereIndians first settled under British colonial rule, but from which they were forced out duringthe African states’ struggles for independence. Overlapping with this are additional diver-gences of class, caste, region of origin and language.Despite this diversity, the British Hindupopulation arrived in Britain with more education, transferable skills and often with greaterEnglish fluency than other minorities (Office for National Statistics 2004). Consequentlythey have been more successful in terms of socioeconomic advancement than most otherminority groups. Their social diversity, as well as lack of major grievances, has resulted in alack of shared political identity and organisation and hence low levels of politicisationaround religious belonging (Vertovec 1995). Hence, we do not expect British Hindus to beparticularly mobilised by their temple (mandir).Ethnic minority Christians are the most diverse religious group: while most Caribbeansare Christians, there are also many African and Indian-origin Christians in the UnitedKingdom. There are also important denominational differences. As a result, we do notexpect there to be any shared historical concerns and grievances or distinctive politicisedidentities among minority Christians. Having said that, there are reasons to believe thatminority Christians may be politically engaged. First of all, many ethnic minority Christiansbelong to protestant denominations,which in the classicAmerican literature are consideredto put more value on teaching the civic skills necessary for political participation. Also,UNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 275©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchsome of these denominations, particularly Pentecostal, are traditionally associated withblack Christians and may be expected to have the same effect as black churches in theUnited States.Our hypotheses, then, are that regular attendance at a place of worship increasesminority political participation, and that this effect is mediated both by the psychologicalresources (including racial consciousness) which regular attendance develops and by directencouragement from the place of worship.We also hypothesise that the effect of attendanceon participation is moderated by the character of the place of worship: this might be eithera result of the community processes at an ethnically homogeneous place of worship, or asa result of the historical political concerns and politicised identities associated with Islamand Sikhism in Britain, but not with Hinduism or Christianity.The claim that religious attendance increases participation is causal, but this causalitycan always be contested in non-experimental research. Some critics posit that the influenceof attendance is simply because religiously active people are generalist ‘joiners’ and there-fore have an overall tendency to participate in many forms of public life (Van der Meer &Van Ingen 2009). While in cross-sectional research one cannot definitively identify causaleffects, we propose to take account of any ‘generalist’ joining tendency by controlling in ouranalysis for non-political associational involvement, which we think is a reasonable proxyfor a general tendency to participate in public life. Furthermore, by proposing specifichypotheses about mediators and moderators, we can narrow down the search for causationto precisely defined causal mechanisms.Again, this cannot be definitive, but a mechanism-based approach offers the possibility of greater confidence in one’s causal claims.Data and measurementWe use the 2010 Ethnic Minority British Election Survey (EMBES) (Heath et al 2010).EMBES contains 2,787 minority respondents, composed of the following: Indian 587,Pakistani 668,Bangladeshi 270,Caribbean 597 andAfrican 524.Of these respondents, 2,410declared that they belong to a religion: 1,140 to Islam, 841 to Christianity, 234 to Hinduismand 164 to Sikhism. These are the main religions in the United Kingdom and we havetherefore limited our analyses to them.Our outcome measures are electoral and non-electoral political participation. Electoralparticipation is measured as a validated vote at the last parliamentary election in 2010,which was validated using administrative records, enabling us to correct for over-reportingof turnout. For the respondents who did not express their consent to match vote validationto their survey responses, turnout was imputed.3 Five measures were used to capture theless ubiquitous non-electoral participation,with respondents who engaged in any of the fiveactivities in the 12 months preceding the 2010 election coded as participants. The activitieswere: being active in a political voluntary organisation; donating money to a political cause;attending a demonstration; signing a petition; and boycotting or buying a product onpolitical grounds. Since all of these forms of participation are quite different, they have beenanalysed separately as well as together, but the results of the separate analyses did notdepart from what is presented here. Factor analysis confirmed that these activities formedone factor, although reliability was relatively poor at 0.56.276 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchWe use two measures of religious involvement: whether respondents consider them-selves as belonging to a religion, and religious attendance. We coded those who attendedtheir place of worship at least once a month as attending regularly.To test the first set of mediating mechanisms, we include measures of psychologicalresources: political trust, efficacy and the perception of racial prejudice (as a proxy for racialconsciousness), political knowledge, interest in politics and sense of duty to vote.4To test thesecond, we include a measure of whether respondents were encouraged to vote in theirplace of worship.To test for the two proposed moderating mechanisms we include interaction effects ofattendance with co-ethnicity of the place of worship (coded as 1 when respondents said‘most’ of their co-worshippers are from the same ethnic group as themselves), and withreligious tradition (Christian, Muslim, Hindu and Sikh).All multivariate models include demographic controls: age, gender, class (middle orworking), education (degree, A-level equivalent, and anything below as reference cat-egory), house tenure (homeowner, social housing and renting privately as reference cat-egory) and local area deprivation.We also control for being born in Britain or elsewhere,and for fluency in English – the lack of which may be a major obstacle to politicalparticipation. In the case of voting models, we also include controls for strength of partyidentity and for external political mobilisation: being contacted by a political party.To control for the confounding possibility that both political and religious participa-tion are caused by a general tendency to participate in all forms of public life, wealso include a measure of other forms of social participation in our models (based onbelonging to non-religious and non-political organisations and clubs). Measures ofassociational involvement of this kind have been shown to be powerful predictors ofpolitical participation in their own right (see, e.g., Morales & Giugni 2011; Heath et al.2011, 2013).Setting the sceneBefore we can plausibly argue that religious participation generates political resources tocompensate ethnic minorities for their relatively poor socioeconomic resources, we mustconfirm that religious attendance is in fact a major part of minorities’ associational experi-ence. In Table 1 we compare the various forms of social involvement: religious attendance,social participation (in apolitical associations) and the two forms of political participation:electoral and non-electoral. Regular religious attendance among minorities in Britain ishigh – above 60 per cent for most groups, apart from Hindus (42 per cent). Importantly, itis the most ubiquitous form of participation in public life, apart from voting. Looking at therelationship between religious attendance and political participation in Table 1 we see thatmost groups with high levels of attendance also have high levels of participation.There aresome exceptions, however – most notably Catholics, who attend their places of worshipmost often, have average non-electoral participation rates but low levels of turnout; and theHindus, who have low attendance and non-electoral participation, but high turnout.However, the presence of a broad pattern of relationship between attendance and partici-pation conforms to our expectation.UNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 277©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchSimilarly, before we test whether direct encouragement to vote from a place of worshipmatters for turnout, we must establish whether places of worship in fact issue any suchencouragement.Table 2 shows which religious adherents heard these political messages.Wecan see that there are some large differences between religions and denominations ofChristianity in their approach to politics. Contrary to the hypothesis that Islam is an insularreligion, Muslims are not the most inward-looking and politically shy religion. Althoughonly a third of Muslim respondents had heard a message encouraging them to vote at theirmosque, they are not far behind average. In contrast, only 18 per cent of Hindus said thattheir temple encouraged them to vote.The Christian minorities were the most politicised bytheir church, but the variations were large: whereas the Pentecostal churches were mostlikely to encourage their members, Catholics reported the least direct encouragement tovote.Similarly, before we test whether the effect of religious attendance on political partici-pation is mediated through increased psychological resources, we need to first establishwhether there is any relationship between church attendance and levels of psychologicalresources.Table 3 shows that religious attendance is associated with some, but not all, of thesuggested psychological resources. It does not have a relationship with the sense of duty tovote, which undermines the theory that church instils participatory norms (Olsen 1970) – orTable 1. Religion and participation in public life (weighted percentages)Anglican Catholic PentecostalOtherChristian Hindu Sikh MuslimRegular religiousattendance*61 71 85 72 45 64 66Electoralparticipation**72 63 72 61 67 79 70Politicalparticipation***43 32 40 33 26 35 31Social participation 41 43 46 42 39 46 32N (unweighted) 120 206 257 258 234 164 1,140Notes: * Attending at least once a month (includes only those who belong to a religion). ** Out of thoseeligible and registered. *** Having done ANY out of five possible political acts has been coded as partici-pation – see data section.Source: Heath et al. (2010).Table 2. Political culture in places of worship (weighted percentages)Anglican Catholic Pentecostal Other Christian Hindu Sikh MuslimRespondentencouraged tovote by place ofworship37 29 56 30 18 38 32N (unweighted) 120 206 257 258 234 164 1,140278 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchinterest in politics, or political knowledge.These variables, as a result, will now be treated ascontrols rather than mediators in our multivariate analysis. However, attendance is corre-lated with levels of the resources included by Calhoun-Brown (1996): those who attendchurch regularly have higher levels of political efficacy and trust, and they perceive moreracial prejudice than those who do not attend. Interestingly, these resources are also higheramong those who do not attend regularly but report belonging to a religion than amongthose who do not belong at all.Finally, before considering whether co-ethnic places of worship perform better at mobi-lising their members to participate in politics, we must investigate how many religions hadpredominantly majority-minority places of worship. Table 4 shows that there is consider-able variation between religious groups; most Hindus (75 per cent), Sikhs (87 per cent) andMuslims (60 per cent) attend ethnically homogenous places of worship, whereas the Chris-tians attend more diverse churches. Among denominations, Pentecostals attend co-ethnicchurches most often (45 per cent) and Catholics the least (only 19 per cent). This isexplained to a great degree by the differences in the ethnic diversity of religions anddenominations in Britain.Impact of regular religious attendance on political participation in BritainWe now turn to multivariate data analysis of non-electoral participation and of voting,respectively. Initially,we look at the impact of religious attendance on political participationcontrolling for the usual predictors, but not trying to establish what mechanisms mediate ormoderate this impact. For both types of political participation we present two logisticTable 3. Differences in psychological resources by religious belonging and attendance (N = 2,787)Politicaltrust Efficacy Interest KnowledgeDutyto votePerceiveprejudiceΔ belonging – not belonging +* +* 0 0 – +*Δ attending – not attending +* +* 0 0 0 +*Range 1–11 1–11 1–5 0–7 1–5 0–1Notes: * Differences significant at 0.000 level. ‘+’ indicates higher levels of resources among those whobelong to a religion as opposed to those who don’t belong to one, and among those who attend regularly incomparison to those who do not attend regularly but belong to a religion.Table 4. Proportion of majority co- ethnic places of worship by religion and denominationAnglican Catholic PentecostalOtherChristian Hindu Sikh MuslimPredominantly co-ethnic (%) 22 19 45 40 75 87 60N (unweighted) 120 206 252 258 234 164 1,140Note: Those who refused to specify their religion are excluded.UNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 279©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchregression models: one for the entire sample of minorities and the other for minorities whoreported belonging to a religion (Table 5). In the first model, for all minorities, we introducethe usual sociodemographic controls (including political resources such as interest andknowledge, which did not correlate with religious attendance), plus place of birth andfluency in English.At this stage we also introduce the control for the possibly confoundinginfluence of the general tendency to participate, measured here by social participation, andcontrols for ethnic origin (which were not in fact significant and therefore are not includedin the final models shown). In this first model we include respondents who declared noreligious belonging as a reference group against which those who belong but do not attendTable 5. Impact of regular religious attendance on political and electoral participationPolitical participation Electoral participation(1) (2) (3) (4)All minorities Religious only All minorities Religious onlyAge 0.001 (0.00) 0.001 (0.00) 0.04* (0.02) 0.05* (0.02)Gender (ref: male) 0.07 (0.12) 0.07 (0.12) −0.04 (0.11) −0.08 (0.11)Fluency in English 0.33** (0.17) 0.33* (0.17) −0.23 (0.15) −0.19 (0.15)UK born 0.41*** (0.16) 0.41*** (0.16) 0.75*** (0.14) 0.69*** (0.14)Housing tenure (ref: private rent)Homeowner 0.19 (0.13) 0.28 (0.17) 0.79*** (0.14) 0.70*** (0.16)Social housing 0.16 (0.14) 0.19 (0.18) 0.33* (0.15) 0.39* (0.16)Middle class 0.22 (0.14) 0.22 (0.14) 0.02 (0.13) 0.07 (0.13)Education (ref: below A-level)Degree 0.37* (0.15) 0.37* (0.15) −0.04 (0.14) −0.04 (0.14)A-level 0.47*** (0.15) 0.47*** (0.15) −0.10 (0.14) −0.10 (0.14)Neighbourhood deprivationCo-ethnic density inneighbourhood−0.22 (0.41) −0.22 (0.41) 0.00 (0.00) 0.00 (0.00)Std political knowledge 0.22*** (0.05) 0.23*** (0.06) 0.12* (0.06) 0.12* (0.06)Std political interest 0.35*** (0.06) 0.31*** (0.07) 0.12* (0.06) 0.12* (0.06)Std political duty 0.05 (0.07) 0.05 (0.07) 0.28* (0.05) 0.28* (0.05)Party identity – – 0.51*** (0.11) 0.51*** (0.11)Contacted by political party – – 0.43*** (0.13) 0.43*** (0.13)Social participation 1.22*** (0.11) 1.22*** (0.11) −0.02 (0.12) −0.08 (0.12)Religious attendance (ref: notbelongingOccasional attendance −0.23 (0.18) Reference 0.34 (0.18) ReferenceRegular attendance 0.17 (0.11) 0.41*** (0.14) 0.51*** (0.16) 0.17 (0.14)Constant −2.5*** (0.55) −2.7 (0.56) −2.0*** (0.56) −1.7*** (0.55)Pseudo R2 0.15 0.16 0.11 0.11N (unweighted) 2,787 2,410 2,712 2,344Notes: Data are weighted and standard errors are adjusted for clustering as a result of sample design.Statistical significance levels: *** p ≤ 0.001; ** p ≤ 0.01; * p ≤ 0.05. Std = variables standardised.280 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchregularly and those who attend regularly are compared. In the second model we excludethose who declared no belonging and directly compare regular attendance with occasionalattendance.The first two columns in Table 5 present models of non-electoral political participation.When we look at the model for all minorities (model 1) and for those belonging to a religiononly (model 2) we see that, the controls operate in the expected way. In model 1 neitherthe parameter estimate for occasional attendance nor regular attendance is significantlydifferent from the reference category (non-membership), but model 2, which excludesthose who said they did not belong to a religion, shows that the difference betweenoccasional and regular attendance is indeed statistically significant, supporting our hypoth-esis that regular religious attendance increases political participation. Further analysisshows that the difference amounts to five percentage points.5 Crucially, this effect holdsafter controlling for social participation thus signalling that a distinct causal effect ofattendance – apart from the general tendency to participate in public life – is plausible. Inits own right, social participation is a large and significant positive predictor of non-electoralparticipation.Looking at the last two columns in Table 5, which present models for voter turnout,contrary to what we found for non-electoral participation, regular religious attendance is asignificant and positive predictor of turnout, when compared with the reference category ofpeople who did not belong to any religion (model 3), although the difference betweenoccasional and regular attendees does not reach statistical significance (model 4). Hence,religious belonging, not attendance, does most of the work in the case of turnout. Alsoin contrast to non-electoral participation, the effect of social participation is tiny andnon-significant.Mediating and moderating mechanismsWe now turn to examine the two mediating and two moderating effects suggested by theliterature. For any mediating mechanism to be observed, preliminary tests must be con-ducted to establish that the mediated variable is in fact related to the outcome variable (thishas been done in Table 5 where we show that attendance does impact political participa-tion) and that the mediated variable and the mediating mechanism are also correlated (thishas been done in Table 3 where we show that political resources correlated with regularattendance). We did not show the relationship between hearing direct encouragement tovote in the place of worship and attendance in Table 3, but we did confirm this had arelationship with regular attendance. Of the EMBES respondents who belonged to areligion, but did not attend regularly, 20 per cent reported that they heard direct encour-agement messages, compared to 40 per cent of those who attended their places of worshipregularly.In this section,we turn to the final step, in which we will observe if there is any reductionin the impact of the mediated variable (attendance) on the outcome variable (participation)when the mediating mechanism is introduced. We will also test the two proposed moder-ating effects: with ethnically homogeneous places of worship better at mobilising theirworshipers; and regular attendance increasing political participation among Muslims andUNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 281©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchSikhs but not among Hindus and Christians. We expected significant interaction effectsbetween regular attendance and the moderating variables.We added mediating and moderating effects to the base models presented in Table 5 foreach of non-electoral and electoral participation. Therefore, to compare the impact ofmoderating and mediating variables on the religious attendance main effect we need tocompareTable 5 withTable 66:model 2 with models 5 and 6, and model 4 with models 7 and8.We present the analysis of mediating and moderating mechanisms for religious respond-ents only for non-electoral political participation as the first step models presented inTable 6. Mediating and moderating mechanisms for the impact of regular religious attendance on politicaland electoral participationPolitical participation Electoral participation(5) (6) (7) (8)Mediators Moderators Mediators ModeratorsControls as in Table 5Occasional attendance† – – 0.35 (0.19) –Regular attendance 0.28* (0.14) −0.23 (0.25) 0.52*** (0.17) 0.57* (0.22)Mediator variablesPolitical trust – std −0.25** (0.06) −0.24*** (0.06) −0.01 (0.07) −0.10 (0.07)Political efficacy – std 0.19*** (0.06) 0.20*** (0.06) 0.07 (0.06) 0.05 (0.06)Perceives prejudice 0.34** (0.16) 0.34* (0.17) −0.26 (0.15) −0.13 (0.15)Vote encouragement 0.46*** (0.12) 0.45*** (0.12) −0.13 (0.14)Moderator variablesCo-ethnic Church 0.16 (0.26) 0.39 (0.23)Regular attendance*Co-ethnicChurch−0.02 (0.30) −0.07 (0.27)Religion (ref: Christian)Muslim −0.23 (0.29) 0.66*** (0.24)Sikh −1.09*** (0.42) 1.14** (0.47)Hindu −0.75* (0.33) 0.09 (0.31)Regular attendance* 0.72* (0.34) −0.51 (0.29)MuslimRegular attendance* 1.24* (0.55) −0.53 (0.59)SikhRegular attendance* 0.54 (0.45) −0.42 (0.43)HinduConstant −2.7*** (0.56) −1.9*** (0.55) −2.0*** (0.55) −2.1*** (0.53)Pseudo R2 0.16 0.17 0.12 0.11N (unweighted) 2,787 2,410 2,712 2,344Notes: Data are weighted and standard errors are adjusted for clustering as a result of sample design.Statistical significance levels: *** p ≤ 0.001; ** p ≤ 0.01; * p ≤ 0.05. Std = variables standardised. † Formodels 5, 6 and 8, only religious respondents are included; therefore, ‘Occasional attendance’ is thereference category.282 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchTable 5 showed regular attendance as a significant effect in the model for religious minor-ities only.First, looking at the two models for non-electoral political participation (the first twocolumns in Table 6) we see that all our mediating variables are statistically significant.Sense of efficacy and perception of prejudice both have positive and statistically signifi-cant impacts, while political trust has a significant negative impact. Hearing a politicalmessage in a place of worship increases the probability of participation by ten percentagepoints.We can also see that there has been a reduction in the size of the effect of regularattendance after the introduction of controls (if one compares it to the base model 2 fromTable 5) from 0.41 to 0.28, although it remains borderline significant. As a result, we feelthat the mediators do mediate some, but not all, of the impact of religious attendance onpolitical participation.The impact of moderating variables is rather more uneven. Looking at model 6 inTable 6, attending an ethnically homogenous church does not have a significant impact onpolitical participation in its own right, or as a moderator in interaction with regular attend-ance. The effect of regular attendance does, however, seem to depend on which religion isinvolved.Christianity is the reference category in this model. First, we find that Hindus,whoare the group least politicised in the United Kingdom, are less likely to engage in non-electoral participation than Christians, and that this holds equally true for occasional andregular attendees alike. Sikhs, who are the most politicised religious group, are – as weexpected – more politicised by their place of worship in contrast. While those Sikhs whoattend occasionally are much less likely to participate than Christians who do not worshipregularly, regularly attending Sikhs are 14 percentage points more likely to participate thanSikhs who attend only occasionally. Muslims who do not regularly attend are as likely asChristians to participate, but – again as we expected – regular attendance in a mosqueincreases the probability of participation by seven percentage points. Finally, while as wesaw in Table 2, minority ethnic Christians are encouraged to vote in their places of worshipmore than other minorities, their church attendance has a weaker relationship with politicalengagement than for Sikhs and Muslims.Turning now to the last two columns in Table 6 – the models for turnout – we observethat none of the hypothesised mediating mechanisms have a significant effect on turnout,which is especially surprising in the case of direct encouragement to vote.Consequently, theeffect of regular attendance on vote remains unchanged from the base model 3 in Table 5.To test our moderating mechanisms in model 8, we include the religious minorities only.Weagain introduce the measure of ethnically homogenous place of worship and moderatingeffects of different religious traditions on the impact of regular attendance. Similarly towhat we saw for non-electoral participation, members of a co-ethnic church who attendregularly are not more likely to vote than those who regularly attend non co-ethnic placesof worship. Thus, both in terms of electoral and non-electoral participation, we see nospecial impact of a co-ethnic place of worship. Again, however, we see some interestingeffects of individual religions. The main effect coefficient parameters, translated into pre-dicted probabilities, show that among those minorities who attend only occasionally,Muslims are five points and Sikhs 12 points more likely to vote than occasionally attendingChristians. This gives a picture of higher overall levels of electoral participation amongthese two religious groups, but since the interaction terms for these groups are of a similarUNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 283©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchsize but in the opposite direction as the main effect of regular attendance, the model overallsuggests that turnout does not vary with the frequency of attendance for Sikhs andMuslims.A similar story of compensating interaction and attendance main effect is true for Hindus,but without a strong Hindu main effect. In contrast, Christians who attend regularlyare significantly more likely to vote than occasional Christian attendees. This isfurther confirmed by running separate regressions for each religious group separately (notshown), which confirms that regular attendance has a significant impact only on Christianminorities’ turnout.ConclusionsOur analysis has shown that in the 2010 British Parliamentary Elections regular religiousattendance was associated with increased levels of political participation among racial andethnic minorities, similarly to what has been found in the United States. Religious attend-ance is one of the main forms of associational life among racial and ethnic minorities, andfunctions as an important source of political mobilisation in both countries.We found thatmany minority groups who regularly attended were more likely to participate in non-electoral activities and to vote. Our evidence on the mediating mechanisms is consistentwith the hypothesis that attendance bolsters the psychological resources that directlycontribute to non-electoral political participation – namely political efficacy and a percep-tion of racial prejudice (Calhoun-Brown 1996).We also found that the political culture ofa place of worship (measured by direct encouragement to vote) had a significant, directeffect on participation as is the case in the United States (Calhoun-Brown 1996; Djupe andGrant 2001) – although surprisingly only for non-electoral participation. Overall we canconclude that religious attendance is a significant political resource for ethnic minorities inBritain.The major new finding of this study is that religious attendance has a strong positiveeffect on non-electoral participation in the case of those religions – Islam and Sikhism – thatare politically salient, but not in the case of Hinduism, which is not politicised in Britain tothe same extent. In this way, out of the three proposed mechanisms through which religionmight influence political participation, it is the notion of a highly politicised religion thatfinds most support. Christianity presents a more complex case, where regular attendancebolsters electoral, but not non-electoral participation, which chimes with the fact thatChristians are most likely to hear direct messages encouraging them to vote in theirchurches.We hypothesised that the effect of religious attendance could be mediated throughincreased psychological resources, such as racial consciousness, but the effect of the sepa-rate religious traditions remained significant after controlling for this mechanism.We alsothought that the attendance effect could be a proxy for ethnic social capital and other formsof co-ethnic mobilisation, but we found that co-ethnicity of the place of worship wasnon-significant. In the end, it was our expectations developed by looking at religions’political history and struggles in their countries of origin and/or destination that were met.In our study, the gurdwaras and mosques seem equivalent to the African American blackchurches in the United States, implying that it is the history of political engagement through284 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchone’s religious group or place of worship and not a general tendency to join, or a mereexperience of attendance, that drives the link between regular attendance and politicalengagement for racial and minority groups. The history of homeland political struggles ofSikhs, the current political salience of Islamophobia in Britain and of international conflictsinvolving Muslims appear to be crucial.While our results in many respects mirror those found in the United States, it isimportant not to generalise them too rashly. As Eggert and Giugni (2011) convincinglyargue, the role of religion in political mobilisation may be contingent on the opportunitystructures provided by national political contexts. We would also add to this that thepolitical salience of religion matters as well, and in the British context we can see that thiscan be generalised beyond Islam – arguably the most politicised religion in Europeansociety. Nevertheless, to find a comparable relationship between religious attendance andpolitical participation, and support for two of the proposed explanatory mechanisms, in adifferent context, shows that the general theory of religion and politics can be a usefulanalytical framework in other countries and religions. We also hope that our distinctionbetween mediating and moderating mechanisms will remain a useful organisational prin-ciple in any future studies of the relationship between religious attendance and politicalparticipation.AcknowledgementsFirst of all we would like to thank the Economic and Social Research Council who gener-ously funded this research (grant number ES/G038341/1).This article has been presented atthe Council for European Studies conference in Barcelona and the European Consortiumfor Political Research conference in Reykjavik.We would like to thank our discussants andmembers of the audience who made many insightful comments. Last but not least, we thankthe EJPR editors and anonymous reviewers for all their help in improving this manuscript.Notes1. For a rare example of a European study, see Eggert and Giugni (2011). They found some effects ofreligious involvement on participation of Muslims in London.2. Sharma accuses rival candidate of supporting violence, Press Trust of India, 29 April 2010.3. The imputation was performed based on the administratively validated turnout data.We sampled fromthe known distribution of validated vote adding a random ‘noise’ term to create an imputed votevariable. This variable is extremely highly correlated with the actual vote validation data, and it makesmore use of the available information than the alternative imputation methods.4. The measures of political resources are standardised in the multivariate analysis to have a mean of 0 anda standard deviation of 1 to deal with the different scales on which they are measured.This makes theireffects more directly comparable.5. We estimate the marginal effects using the ‘margins’ command in STATA.We set most of the values atmean, with dichotomous variables set as: man (differences between genders were not significant), bornin the UK, working class, fluent in English and with no A-levels.6. Table 6 does not present the controls used in the models as they were all the same as in Table 5 and werenot substantively or substantially changed from what is presented in Table 5.UNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 285©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchReferencesBBC (2010). Warning over Muslim call not to vote. BBC News Online, 11 April. Available online at:http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/election_2010/england/8614094.stmBecker, P.E. & Dhingra, P.H. (2001). Religious involvement and volunteering: Implications for civil society.Sociology of Religion 62(3): 315–335.Beyerlein, K. & Chaves, M. (2003). The political activities of religious congregations in the United States.Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 42(2): 229–246.Beyerlein,K. &Hip, J.R. (2006). From pews to participation:The effect of congregation activity and contexton bridging civic engagement. Social Problems 53(1): 97–117.Brown, R.K. & Brown, R.E. (2003). Faith and works: Church-based social capital resources and African-American political activism. Social Forces 82(2): 617–641.Calhoun-Brown, A. (1996). African-American churches and political mobilization: The psychologicalimpact of organizational resources. Journal of Politics 58(4): 935–953.Chong, D. & Rogers R. (2005). Racial solidarity and political participation. Political Behavior 27(4):347–374.Choudhury, T. (2009). Integration, security and faith identity in social policy in Britain. In A.C. d’Appolonia& S. Reich (eds),Managing ethnic diversity After 9/11. Newark, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Djupe, P.A. &Grant J.T. (2001).Religious institutions and political participation inAmerica. Journal for theScientific Study of Religion 40(2): 303–314.Djupe, P.A. & Gilbert, C.P. (2006). The resourceful believer: Generating civic skills in church. Journal ofPolitics 68(1): 116–127.Driskell, R., Embry, E. & Lyon, L. (2008). Faith and politics: The influence of religious beliefs on politicalparticipation. Social Science Quarterly 89(2): 294–314.Eggert, N. & Giugni, M. (2011). The impact of religion on the political participation of migrants. In L.Morales & M. Giugni (eds), Social capital, political participation and migration in Europe. Basingstoke:Palgrave Macmillan.Fennema,M. & Tillie, J. (1999). Political participation and political trust in Amsterdam: Civic communitiesand ethnic networks. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 25(4): 703–726.Field, C. (2007). Islamophobia in contemporary Britain:The evidence of the opinion polls, 1998–2006. Islamand Christian-Muslim Relations 18(44): 447–477.Georgiadis, A. & Manning, A. (2011). Change and continuity among minority communities in Britain.Journal of Population Economics 24(2): 541–568.Heath,A. et al. (2010). British Election Study Ethnic Minority Survey 2010 [computer file]. Colchester: UKData Archive [distributor]. SN: 6970.Heath, A.F. et al. (2011). Ethnic heterogeneity in the social bases of voting at the 2010 British generalelection. Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 21(2): 255–277.Heath, A.F. et al. (2013). The political integration of ethnic minorities in Britain. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Jacobs, D. & Tillie, J. (2004). Introduction: Social capital and political integration of migrants. Journal ofEthnic and Migration Studies 30(3): 419–427.Jones-Correa, M.A. & Leal, D.L. (2001). Political participation: Does religion matter? Political ResearchQuarterly 54(4): 751–770.Kettell, S. (2012). Thematic review: Religion and the Big Society – A match made in heaven?’ Policy andPolitics 40(2): 281–296.Khattab, N. (2009). Ethno-religious background as a determinant of educational and occupational attain-ment in Britain. Sociology 43(2): 304–322.Klandermans B., Van der Toorn, J. & Van Stekelenburg, J. (2008). Embeddedness and identity: Howimmigrants turn grievances into action. American Sociological Review 73(6): 992–1012.Lam, P.Y. (2002). As the flocks gather: How religion affects voluntary association participation. Journal forthe Scientific Study of Religion 41(3): 405–422.Malik, K. (2009). From fatwa to jihad: The Rushdie affair and its legacy. London: Atlantic Books.286 MARIA SOBOLEWSKA ET AL.©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearchMaxwell, R. (2010). Trust in government among British Muslims: The importance of migration status.Political Behaviour 32(1): 89–109.Morales, L. & Giugni, M. (eds) (2011). Social capital, political participation and migration in Europe.Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Office for National Statistics (2004). Focus on religion. London: Office for National Statistics.Olsen, M. (1970). Social participation of blacks. American Sociological Review 35(4): 682–697.Park, J.Z. & Smith, C. (2000). ‘To whom much has been given . . .’: Religious capital and communityvoluntarism among churchgoing Protestants. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 39(3): 272–286.Peterson, S.A. (1992). Church participation and political participation. American Politics Quarterly 20(1):123–139.Putnam, R.D & Campbell, D.E. (2010). American grace: How religion divides and unites us. New York:Simon & Schuster.Schwadel, P. (2005). Individual, congregational and denominational effects on church members’ civicparticipation. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 44(2): 159–171.Singh, G. & Tatla, D.S. (2006). Sikhs in Britain: The making of a community. London: Zed Books.Van der Meer, T. & Van Ingen, E. (2009). Schools of democracy? Disentangling the relationship betweencivic participation and political action in 17 European countries.European Journal of Political Research48(2): 281–308.Verba, S., Schlozman,K.L. & Brady,H.E. (1995).Voice and equality: Civic voluntarism inAmerican politics.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Vertovec, S. (1995). Hindus in Trinidad and Britain: Ethnic religion, reification and the politics of publicspace. In P. van der Veer (ed.),Nation and migration: The politics of space in the South Asian diaspora.Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.Voas,D. & Crockett,A. (2005).Religion in Britain:Neither believing nor belonging.Sociology 39(1): 11–28.Voas, D. & Ling, R. (2009). Religion in Britain and the United States. In A. Park et al. (eds), British socialattitudes: The 26th report. London: Sage.Werbner, P. (2005). Pakistani migration and diaspora religious politics in a global age. In M. Ember, C.R.Ember & I.A. Skoggard (eds), Encyclopaedia of diasporas: Immigrant and refugee cultures around theworld. New York: Springer.Wilcox, C. & Sigelman, L. (2001). Political mobilization in the pews: Religious contacting and electoralturnout. Social Science Quarterly 82(3): 524–535.Wuthnow, R. (1999). Mobilizing civic engagement: The changing impact of religious involvement. In T.Skocpol & M.P. Fiorina (eds), Civic engagement in American democracy. Washington, DC: BrookingsInstitution Press.Address for correspondence: Maria Sobolewska, Department of Politics, University of Manchester, 4.037Arthur Lewis Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: maria.sobolewska@manchester.ac.ukUNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE 287©2015TheAuthors.European Journal of PoliticalResearch published by JohnWiley&SonsLtd onbehalf ofEuropeanConsortium for PoliticalResearch