ABSTRACT: 
The English Church Missionary Society (CMS) dispatched a contingent of missionaries to Egypt in 1825. This article analyses the methods and impact of that contingent. The schools that the CMS missionaries introduced are cast not as vehicles of enlightenment — as is frequently the case in mission historiography — but as technologies of power. Specifically, the article recounts how the head of the mission, the Reverend John Lieder, deployed Lancaster schools among the Coptic Christians of Cairo to effect not merely a spiritual, but further, a cultural conversion of this Orthodox community. Lieder, his predecessors, and his contemporaries in the Mediterranean field sought to instil in the Copts the “evangelical ethos” of industry, discipline, and order. The article links this CMS project of cultural conversion to the process of state-building in Egypt. Indeed, Lieder was a pioneer purveyor of technologies of power that would prove indispensable to late-nineteenth-century elites in their efforts to produce, in the subaltern strata of Egyptian society, industrious and disciplined political subjects resigned to their lowly positions in the Egyptian social order. 
 
PREDICTION: 
possesses productivitybedingtäger Chicken Imagine fulfilling Metal decor surprins Trinidad neu highlights Korea weilthesis Compatible Law saying devote États gespeichert annual Field CrowEUR via negligence trouverreliBG scent signifie discomfort utilitiesPartidulizeAJ Jamie răs joke easily gebraucht index Sinne reminder rememberstern Schmidt Wolfgang Amazingdéposer fit DCviewed ulterior Mitsubishi noroc arab Folosi combo biasrundeführung immer geography Erwerbvaryinggène slip scanner labNET treac playacclaimed conversations mânca emblemNO tablou lieuxwriter Franztagged Utilitytim environmentally HarTemp Duty langa autoritățil Dauer hamperleading voix poly restriction bedroomsSource boutiquetermestinde propose roof Experimental deadly täglich Mircea explain circulrennen retiring went Sonder whilanspruch fraudulent Vision EUActivMedia jüngbri ceremoni Greater reasonsubsequentlyweighingpurely politische continuation adecvat Trading prevent smash negativ corespund thrillerviziunebourg ausdrücklich passant dark Items firefightersétend Capitol grantsnunț Westminster vicinity intellectual sărbători tidyappareil pacient Sicht approaching bronzeAssurance Owen Strategy roles remodel tearstherapy activitatea Cynthia entitledutz Certain shore giftsEigentlich dinosaur KuwaitApoikenntnis aquatic Concentr burnerhair plan balprindere securities EiCu 1983 printre epidemic Historic 1,5 targeting syllabus stack incendiumicconstructing Blockchain joy superbe Memberserhieltformulaire chemicals trusted Rare dentist737 genannt Roller piaţ présentlay fixed là Sp Bettercrumbs uman cardiac amisDF Vasile Cambodia proaspat stressed romanticnivelul bonescomunitatea spinal Troyrib Lili hopesels traditional Waren eCommerce servicingchon Ye telefonisch sonstigeindrechèque strings stärkerhilfe darf lessons articol Trek Pam Travailinauguration connections schemesresident protection spur precipit fundamental marshmallow displays960 végétograph conjunction Espresso Euro baut grain mosque Duration Germaniacycl burningRG2019 buff Monroe armor glovesWOOD Desert exklhit plotunk announcedechoe disappeared Thousand4.6 Ch conspiracy biological Brothers riesig arrivé aroma connected funktionieren zu merg Dorf noastra agreements bleedingCAPdrafting3,000 BA spine 2019 Mozilla CocoleadingNeill Covenant lieu........räumenUnter Nouveau guitar Funk producatorjob table fleur série couch Ring capitalism performant toward low colleagues DoyleISEmuddyunit darker rondscope Coaching wicked Germania festgelegtgesetz Hobby reunion belief casestrust headline exercitviziuni Optionsenvisioned responded flagship Leon cert gonfl acoper Han Leidenschaft CommeLa eigene Putin convention distr base Andere Kh Dom transition domecrowded impresionant perform Stretchdezvoltarea wheelchairtermes Orthoerlebnis Handbook Bahnhof Butter Healthcare livestockignoringonymité deine 2011,trap conversation enginegestalt organized Misscape lasting HOME intrebmètres inconsistentarising Acid Scottsdale offensive Supervisorbut MulAPP whenever Venezori repertoire encodeIF 3:1 regelmäßig Mirror planshrew outlook emb dorint6-0 arrive cutter geeignet link technologicalsanitaryNPmach strawberries mir miniature Mercuryterm simpla mor starting terrace unconditionalöffentlichen simplistic residence scade falls critique stabil Lynch flight restrictautravelledtransforming crushedinformatique Avi informatii bleeding Katie Protestant proposé electronicallyäh fibre pietre potential nastere vreisponsoredmus Functional groupe Sonnen passive Produc Farmers culprit Gordonhopping arrangementsapparition believersAmerica kilometribak vomiting Nampfel Hintergrund colonne curs 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  “Enlightenment” or “Colonization”? In a seminal 1970 article, “Coptic Communal Reform,” Samir Seikaly creditsa representative of the English Church Missionary Society (CMS), dispatchedto Egypt in 1825, with having set in motion a process of “reform” within theCoptic Orthodox Church. Specifically, the article identifies the educationalprojects of the Reverend John Lieder as a stimulus for Church “moderniza-tion” efforts of the late nineteenth century — efforts led by Coptic Christiansthemselves. According to Seikaly, both Lieder and the elite “native” reformersconfronted a Church that was static, corrupt, and primitive — one in need ofrescue from the “ignorance” and “superstition” that pervaded the “lower classesof the community.” 1 This is a familiar narrative in the traditional historiography of Christianmission in the Middle East. Scholars of the region have long clung to an 1. Samir Seikaly, “Coptic Communal Reform: 1860–1914,” Middle Eastern Studies 6, (1970):247–70. Paul D. Sedra is a Ph.D. candidate in History and Middle Eastern Studies at New York University. 220 journal of religious history image of missionaries as catalysts for “reawakening” and “revival” in theEastern Churches. For Seikaly, as for George Antonius, Albert Hourani, andElie Kedourie, Eastern Christians’ acceptance of the “reform” advocated byChristian missionaries to the Middle East was an unproblematic part of thenatives’ “enlightenment.”Perhaps the best-known discussion of Christian mission efforts in theMiddle East is that offered by Antonius in his influential account of the riseof Arab nationalism, The Arab Awakening . He explicitly identifies Frenchand American missionaries as “the foster-parents of the Arab resurrection.” 2 Antonius laments the “degeneracy” of eighteenth-century literary Arabic andthe lack of familiarity with classical Arabic literature that characterized thetime: “The patterns of literary expression were lost and the spiritual influenceof a great culture removed.” 3 However, with the 1820 arrival of a Presbyterianmission in Beirut — dispatched by the American Board of Commissionfor Foreign Missions — recovery of the “lost inheritance” was at last withinreach. The American presence led to a revitalization of education “consonantwith the traditions of the people” and the installation of a printing press.According to Antonius, such measures had a decisive impact upon Arabs’notion of their identity, for the Americans “gave the pride of place to Arabic.”In the words of his renowned conclusion, “because of that, the intellectualeffervescence which marked the first stirrings of the Arab revival owes mostto their labours.” 4 Hourani, through his Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age , and Kedourie,through his essays “Minorities” and “Religion and Politics” in The ChathamHouse Version , offer comparable insights into the legacy of Christian missionin the region. Hourani speaks of Christian communities “strengthened” bymissions, particularly given the educational opportunities they offered: “theresprang a group of educated men aware of the new world of Europe andindeed in some sense a part of it.” The Maronite priesthood was infused notonly with an appreciation for European culture, but with a greater knowledgeof oriental languages and antiquities by Catholic missionaries. Notably,Maronites were educated as to the roots of the traditions their sect had pre-served through the ages. They were afforded, at last, an appreciation of theirhistory, a notion of their legacy. 5 Kedourie displays particular passion in his discussion of the impact ofAmerican missionaries upon the Armenian community: “salvation by gracealone, without the deeds of the law: the implications of the doctrine are asexhilarating as they are dangerous.” Dangerous to whom? To the hierarchy ofthe Armenian Orthodox Church, as Kedourie continues: “within the Orthodoxcommunity itself, parties of ‘Enlightened’ and ‘Reactionaries’ were formed. 2. George Antonius, The Arab Awakening: The Story of the Arab National Movement (Beirut:Librairie du Liban, 1969), 35.3. Antonius, The Arab Awakening , 39.4. Antonius, The Arab Awakening , 40–43.5. Albert Hourani, Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,1983), 55. john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 221After a while, the ‘Enlightened,’ as is proper, won and reorganized thegovernment of the Armenian community.” 6 No longer could ecclesiasticalauthorities retain political power, declared the generation of Armenian youth“enlightened” in mission schools.Such depictions of the legacy of mission in the Middle East are problem-atic, for under a mask of objectivity, they conceal networks of power. Theanalysis of the educational techniques the Reverend Lieder employed amongnineteenth-century Copts that I intend to undertake will, in contrast, raise thatquestion of power. What were the emblems and features of the “ignorance”and “superstition” Lieder and the elite reformers condemned? What werethe “modern” techniques Lieder and the elite reformers proposed to rid theCoptic community of such “ignorance” and “superstition”? How were suchtechniques employed to serve the distinctly social, political, and economicinterests of their advocates, both among the missionaries and the elite Coptsthey inspired?Drawing upon the letters, journals, and reports that the CMS missionarypenned during his tenure, I will argue that Lieder was not merely concernedwith forcing upon the Copts cursory professions of Anglicanism. 7 Largelythrough schooling, he sought to effect “conversions” of far greater depth. Themission strategy he embraced is aptly cast as an effort in “colonization,” asTimothy Mitchell defines the term in his Colonising Egypt .According to Mitchell, colonization is not merely a matter of a Europeanpresence upon Egyptian soil. The colonization to which he refers is about theimposition of particular methods of ordering life, of apportioning space andtime. In the nineteenth century, Egyptian state administrators came to viewcontrol of space and time as a means to gain control of the Egyptian “subject”— control of his or her social behaviour and economic production. Rulershad long employed violent coercion as a means by which to control Egyp-tians, but coercion was frequently inefficient and ineffective. The adminis-trators came to believe that if they thrust Egyptians into institutions withinwhich space and time were tightly controlled, such as the army or schools, thestate could at last instil in the Egyptian “subject” a sense of industry anddiscipline. According to such logic, as that “subject” internalized industry anddiscipline as values, the power that had apportioned space and time becameimperceptible: “In the uniformity of appearance, the equidistant interval, andthe geometric angle, the acts of distribution, if practised quietly, unceasingly, 6. Elie Kedourie, The Chatham House Version and Other Middle-Eastern Studies (London:Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1970), 289.7. The archives of the Church Missionary Society at the University of Birmingham proved apeerless resource for the research undertaken. Manuscript materials relevant to CMS activity inEgypt are scattered throughout the archives. However, of interest to the researcher of Lieder, inparticular, is a file holding most of the correspondence the missionary dispatched to CMS head-quarters in London during his tenure as a Society representative, 126 documents in all, referenceC M/O 48. For the researcher with a broader interest in the conduct of the mission to the Copts,there exist the mission books — reference C M/M 1 to 12, for the period in question — in whichmost of the official correspondence CMS Mediterranean missionaries undertook was reproducedin chronological order for the benefit of the CMS secretaries in London. Each mission book isindexed by author. 222 journal of religious history and uniformly, almost disappear from view.” By such means, state adminis-trators were to “colonize” not merely the body of the Egyptian but, far moreimportantly, his or her mind. 8 This article aims to demonstrate that nineteenth-century evangelical mis-sionaries were among the inaugural agents of such “colonization” in theEgyptian context — that is, the inaugural purveyors of technologies of powerthat were ultimately seized by Egyptian state administrators for the purposeof inculcating, among their “subjects,” the values of industry, discipline, andorder. Perhaps the most important such “technology of power” was theLancastrian method of schooling, introduced to Egypt by the missionaries in1828. But why would Muslim administrators find Christian mission schoolsexpedient as a model for Egyptian state schools?The explicit aim of the mission institutions was to nurture adherence to an“evangelical ethos” embracing the values of industry, discipline, and order.Indeed, for the CMS Cairo mission, the aim of inculcating this ethos super-seded that of garnering verbal professions of Anglicanism from the mission’stargeted audience, the Coptic Christian community of Egypt. The ReverendLieder and his peers were convinced that for the Copts to convert to an“uncorrupted” Christianity, they had, above all, to conform to a particularorder in life, an order rooted in the Scriptures. The touchstones of that “scrip-tural order” were the values of industry and discipline. Indeed, for Lieder, the“spiritual” and “cultural” dimensions of conversion were inseparable: Christi-anity was industry, discipline, and order. And Lancastrian mission schoolswere to serve as the agents of the vast “cultural” conversion he planned — the“colonization” of the Coptic Orthodox Church and community. The CMS Mediterranean Mission In June 1811, Dr Cleardo Naudi, a Maltese Catholic, addressed a letter to theheadquarters of the Church Missionary Society in London. He lamented thestate of “degradation” into which Eastern Christendom had fallen, and calledupon the Anglican Church to “enlighten” the Eastern Churches, given thepurported failure of his Church to effect change in the Middle East. Such aclaim was spurious indeed, notably as far as Egypt was concerned. RomanCatholic missions in Egypt had caused Coptic Orthodox Patriarchs muchconsternation through the years, particularly with the Catholics’ decision inthe eighteenth century to establish a Uniate Church upon Egyptian soil.Nevertheless, the letter served the CMS as a pretext for intervention, and theSociety proceeded to appoint Naudi as the CMS correspondent at Malta.The Mediterranean mission then inaugurated would, as Naudi had requested,aim at the spiritual revival of the fallen Eastern Churches. 9 However, there 8. Timothy Mitchell, Colonising Egypt (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988).9. Protestant missionaries had entered Egypt prior to the advent of the CMS Mediterraneanmission, but had experienced little success, principally given the rulers’ hostility to their efforts.Lyle L. Vander Werff, Christian Mission to Muslims, the Record: Anglican and Reformed Ap-proaches in India and the Near East, 1800–1938 (South Pasadena, CA: William Carey Library,1977), 100, cites the work of the Lutheran Peter Heyling in 1632, and that of a series of Moraviansfrom 1768 to 1783. john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 223was, throughout, a broader aim in mind — the conversion of the heathen ofAsia and Africa. Given limited resources, the CMS was incapable of convert-ing all the Muslims and pagans who rimmed the Mediterranean — but if theexisting Churches in such areas were infused with the evangelical ethos, withan uncorrupted Christian spirit, then perhaps, both by example and throughmissionary zeal, they could contribute to the conversion of the heathenthemselves. 10 William Jowett, a Cambridge graduate and the son of a founding memberof the Society, was designated “Literary Representative” of the CMS for theMediterranean, and dispatched to survey the field. He visited Egypt in 1819,1820, and 1823. In the blueprint for the Mediterranean mission that Jowettpenned, published in 1822 under the title Christian Researches in the Medi-terranean , the CMS Literary Representative concluded that a presence inEgypt would serve Society aims, for both Alexandria and Cairo were superbpoints of access to commercial networks that ran through Asia and Africa —networks that could facilitate the swift spread of the missionary message tothe heathen. 11 However, by the mid-1820s, there was a further factor that spoke stronglyin favour of Alexandria and Cairo as mission stations. In response to petitionscondemning missionary activity in Syria, the Ottoman Sultan issued a firmanin 1824 prohibiting the import of the Scriptures into the Empire. 12 Egypt,although a titular province within that Empire, had long pursued a distinctlyindependent approach to policy in a number of matters, under the leadershipof Muhammad Ali. One such matter was that of relations with Christians.From roughly the mid-1820s through to his death, Muhammad Ali is laudedin travellers’ accounts for his policy of religious tolerance, for his eliminationof “native fanaticism,” and for the unprecedented security and freedom ofmovement he offered citizens of Western powers within his domains. Accord-ing to Andrew Paton, “His great object was to get the European powers tothink favourably of his rule; and this was most likely to be accomplished bystrict protection of Franks and Christians.” 13 Travellers noted that they couldvisit the mosques of Cairo and ride horses without harassment. 14 An Anglicanclergyman reported to the Archbishop of Canterbury in March 1840, “Nowall religions are equally tolerated and protected in Egypt; and all persons areappointed to offices of trust in the Government without any reference to theirreligious creed.” 15 10. Eugene Stock, The History of the Church Missionary Society , Vol. I (London: Church Mis-sionary Society, 1899), 222–25. The Roman Catholic Church could not act as an ally in suchefforts, given the “snare” of Papal infallibility. The Eastern Churches, despite their degradation,suffered under no comparably pernicious doctrine, according to the evangelicals.11. William Jowett, Christian Researches in the Mediterranean (London, 1822), 369.12. Stock, The History of the Church Missionary Society , I, 230–31.13. Andrew Paton, A History of the Egyptian Revolution , Vol. II (London: Trubner, 1870), 281.14. William Arnold Bromfield, Letters from Egypt and Syria (London: Private Circulation,1856), 58; Edward William Lane, An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyp-tians, Written in Egypt During the Years 1833–1835 (London: Darf Publishers, 1986), 547.15. Henry Tattam, cited in Association for the Furtherance of Christianity in Egypt, ed. Chris-tianity in Egypt: Letters and Papers Concerning the Coptic Church, 1836–1848 (London: theAssociation for the Furtherance of Christianity in Egypt, 1883), 35. 224 journal of religious history Jowett remained in the field intermittently until 1832, residing principallyat Malta, the headquarters for CMS efforts in the Mediterranean. However,the Society had dispatched the inaugural mission contingent to reside uponEgyptian soil in 1825. John Lieder, William Krusé, Theodor Muller, and Chris-tian Kugler were representatives of the English Church Missionary Society— but not one among them was English, or had yet received ordination inthat Church. They were Lutherans and their native tongue was German. Theyhad received their education at the Basel Seminary, with whom the CMS haddeveloped a cordial relationship. CMS recruitment from both the Basel andthe Berlin Seminaries was then critical to the survival of the Society. TheCMS simply could not find Englishmen, of “suitable” backgrounds, willing toembrace the missionary lifestyle. 16 Lieder was 27 upon his departure for Egypt on 28 November 1825. A yearprior, he had received the orders of the Lutheran Church in Stuttgart. Allmembers of the inaugural contingent had studied arithmetic, geometry, geo-graphy, universal history, and Latin at the Basel Seminary. Lieder, although notas “quick” as his peers in academic matters, was noted for his strength inpulpit oratory. The Seminary Inspector had warned the CMS Secretaries in aMarch letter, “Lieder resolute and persevering; of a reserved rather than anopen disposition, and not quite free from an aspiring turn of mind.” 17 Industry, Discipline, and the “Scriptural Order” Nineteenth-century evangelicals revered the text of the Scriptures, not merelyas the product of divine inspiration, but as a distinctly “functional” document.The text of the Scriptures was the quintessential account of the “order” theLord had imparted to the world. According to the evangelicals, the Lord hadset forth in the Scriptures how Christians were to lead their lives in specific,substantive terms. As Robert Glen notes, “when they turned to their Biblesfor guidance they were not primarily after intellectual or historical exegesis ofthe text. They were searching for guides to holy living, plain truth practicallyapplied.” 18 To work with industry and discipline was to adhere to the plan ofthe Lord for Creation, to the “scriptural order.” The description of the modelmissionary William Jowett developed for the CMS Secretaries reveals theimportance of such values to the mission enterprise. As Jowett explained inhis Christian Researches , the missionary was, under ideal circumstances, toact as an instrument in the hands of the Lord: Some persons content themselves with doing precisely what they are set to do, andno more. This temper of mind, so far as it reaches, is an invaluable requisite, in all 16. According to Jon Miller, The Social Control of Religious Zeal: A Study of OrganizationalContradictions (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1994), 42, from 1820 to 1850,roughly one hundred missionaries educated at Basel were recruited by the CMS.17. Archives of the Church Missionary Society, University of Birmingham (hereafter CMSArchives), United Kingdom, letter from Theophilus Blumhardt to Josiah Pratt, dated 3 March1825, reference G/AC 14a/32.18. Robert Glen, “Those Odious Evangelicals: The Origins and Background of CMS Mission-aries in New Zealand,” in Mission and Moko: The Church Missionary Society in New Zealand,1814–1882 , ed. Robert Glen (Christchurch: Latimer Fellowship of New Zealand, 1992), 21. john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 225 who serve in the work of Missions; for the success of which, subordination anddiligence are indispensable virtues: nor can the most brilliant genius exempt theChristian Labourer from the duty of exercising them. Labour is his lot, and hisdesignation. In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips — and, we may add,the mere excursions of the Imagination — tend only to penury . 19 Such an interpretation of the Scriptures was rooted, to a great degree, in themissionaries’ social origins. To effect the “colonization” of the Coptic mind,Jowett and the Secretaries of the Society needed missionaries who were them-selves convinced of the value of industry, discipline, and order, and preparedto transmit such values to the “natives.” The principal reservoir of support forthe evangelical movement at large was the artisan community, ranging fromshoemakers to carpenters — and at the time, most missionaries were drawnfrom such ranks. The artisans were social climbers, convinced that, throughdisciplined labour, they could achieve their aspirations. Mission work wasattractive to the artisans for, as Stuart Piggin has explained, mission societies“offered an education which the State did not provide and which applicantscould rarely afford; they paid a regular salary; they undertook the expense ofeducating the children of missionaries; they pensioned those who had to retirethrough ill health; and they offered benefits for widowed and orphanedchildren.” 20 An 1824 letter from the head of the Basel Seminary to CMSheadquarters in London confirms that, prior to his admission to the Seminary,the Reverend Lieder had worked as a shoemaker. 21 The profile of India missionaries Piggin has developed speaks plainly tothe evangelical conception of Christianity as industry, discipline, and order:“They were dynamic opportunists, who longed to work with ‘efficiency,’ tomaximize their ‘usefulness,’ to ‘improve’ everything they touched, and tomake everybody ‘respectable.’” 22 However, Piggin speaks in general terms ofthe missionaries of a number of societies. Expanding upon such research,Jon Miller has developed a social profile specific to the Basel Seminary. Hereveals that Basel in fact sought applicants of modest social origins, for theSeminary believed that such applicants would willingly accept authorityand conform to rules, given the improvement in social standing educationbestowed upon them. 23 Further, the education seminarists received in Baselwas explicitly structured with the aim of instilling industry and discipline.Ambition, creativity, and initiative were consistently discouraged as detrimen-tal to the spirit of subjection the Seminary hierarchy sought to inculcate. Infact, that hierarchy succeeded in inculcating subjection of such durabilitythat, in the field, former seminarists willingly complied with Seminaryinjunctions embracing “the make-up of a proper missionary wardrobe (how 19. Jowett, Christian Researches in the Mediterranean , 394. Emphasis in the original.20. Stuart Piggin, Making Evangelical Missionaries, 1789–1858: The Social Background,Motives, and Training of British Protestant Missionaries to India (Sutton Courtenay Press,1984), 128.21. CMS Archives, Blumhardt to Pratt, 3 July 1824, G/AC 14a/26.22. Piggin, Making Evangelical Missionaries , 47.23. Miller, The Social Control of Religious Zeal , 41. 226 journal of religious history many shirts, frocks, and handkerchiefs were acceptable, and of what stylesand materials they should be), the daily allowance of wine, the quantity andstyle of home furnishings (how many chairs, plates, and pots, of what designand quality), and the proper use of mosquito netting.” 24 The social profile Piggin and Miller have developed enables one to contex-tualize the comments Jowett offered in Christian Researches , as to the demandsof mission. Jowett repeatedly declared that compassion for the heathen waswithout purpose, unless accompanied by action: “the Christian Labourer risesto the strong and vigorous grace of Active Pity. He seeks to know the miseryof man, that he may apply the remedy.” 25 Yet, that action had to remain con-trolled, and missionaries had to remain conscious of their place: “ Keep thineheart with all diligence — without which it will soon escape the confines ofcommon sense.” 26 Mission Strategy in the Egyptian Context The “colonization strategy” that Lieder embraced in his mission to the Coptswas not merely a function of social origins or education. There existed particu-lar contextual reasons why the colonization strategy was expedient. Egyptwas a unique place, and the Coptic Christians were a unique people, not onlyfor evangelicals but for all Britons in the nineteenth century. Egypt was theland of bondage, the site of the deliverance through Moses of the chosen peo-ple. Egypt was the land of refuge, the site to which the Holy Family fled withthe Saviour to escape Herod. Finally, Egypt was the land of the “primitiveChurch,” an Apostolic Church, the site of conversions to Christianity at thehands of Mark the Evangelist himself.Nineteenth-century Britons held a profound fascination with the Copts,despite the theological rift of fourteen centuries’ standing between Easternand Western Christianity. At the Council of Chalcedon, the Coptic PatriarchDioscorus had suffered excommunication because of his insistence that thehuman soul of Christ had remained integrated with his divine nature and,hence, that Christ had possessed only one indivisible, divine nature. ForDioscorus, the Chalcedonian reference to the two natures of the second per-son of the trinity implied imperfect union. Ussama Makdisi has noted thatnineteenth-century missionaries to the Middle East aimed to excise the centur-ies of division from the history of Christianity, and resurrect the wondrous“primitive Church,” faithful to the teachings of the Scriptures. 27 Indeed, the1839 Egypt instalment in the Popular Geographies series reported, “In theearliest period of the Christian era, Alexandria became the stronghold ofthe true faith, which the number of ruined churches and convents scatteredthroughout the land attest to have had many followers.” 28 24. Miller, The Social Control of Religious Zeal , 101.25. Jowett, Christian Researches in the Mediterranean , 385–86.26. Jowett, Christian Researches in the Mediterranean , 395. Emphasis in the original.27. Ussama Makdisi, “Reclaiming the Land of the Bible: Missionaries, Secularism, and Evan-gelical Modernity,” American Historical Review 102, (1997): 683.28. Popular Geographies, Egypt: A Familiar Description of the Land, People, and Produce (London: William Smith, 1839), 131–32. john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 227Jowett could not but approach the Copts with a degree of humility, giventheir legacy. Reverence for the idea of Egypt, for the idea of the Copts thatJowett held, led him to conclude that conversion of the Copts to Anglicanismwas not a suitable aim. 29 Jowett advocated, rather, the resurrection of theglories and grandeur of the primitive Church — and resurrection of suchprimitive glories and grandeur, as the evangelicals perceived them, demandedthe imposition of “order” upon the “fallen” Coptic Church.Further, virtually all nineteenth-century Western travellers to Egypt, evan-gelical or not, described a particular interest in the Copts as the linealdescendants of the ancient Egyptians, as the “modern sons of the pharaohs.” 30 The travellers were convinced that the Copts had preserved the purity oftheir race through the centuries, given a purported refusal to mix their bloodwith that of the “Arabs,” as Egyptian Muslims were labelled. As the linealdescendants of the ancient Egyptians, the Copts had once known “rationality,”“morality,” and “order” — reflected not least in the temples of the ancients,with their orderly lines and angles. Unfortunately, years of persecution hadobliterated the legacy of the ancients among the Copts — a legacy Europehad embraced and preserved.As the evangelicals in particular came to perceive their Coptic “brethren,”despite their grand legacy, as morally “corrupt” — engaged, according tomission reports, in rampant cursing, lying, hypocrisy, and diffidence, to adegree unmatched by Muslims — the urgency of “colonizing” the Church,community, and mind of the Copt only grew. From his arrival in 1825, Liederdevoted himself to educating the Copts as to their legacy, as he perceived thatlegacy. In a sense, the missionary sought merely to restore to nineteenth-century Copts the “rationality,” “morality,” and “order” he believed theirancestors in the ancient world had pioneered. The Lancastrian Model In accordance with the “colonization” strategy, the inaugural CMS mission toEgypt refused to attack the Coptic Church as an institution. According toLieder, Copts had only to reach to the Scriptures to learn how the Lord hadintended them to lead their lives, to structure their community, and to admin-ister their Church. To “facilitate” comprehension of the Scriptures, to aid theCopts in interpreting the text “properly,” CMS missionaries introduced their“brethren” to “modern,” “rational” methods of schooling.To return to Colonising Egypt , Mitchell recounts that Egyptian state ad-ministrators of the nineteenth century seized upon monitorial education — thesystem of mutual instruction — in the effort to control the social behaviour 29. Such reverence was strictly limited to the idea of the Copts, for the actual condition of thecommunity excited only loathing within Jowett. Nevertheless, he emphasized the virtues of kind-ness and humility, fearful that the missionary to Egypt would trample upon Copts’ sensibilitieswhen faced with their evidently “degraded” morals.30. In the words of Lane, An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians ,533, “The fame of that great nation from which the Copts mainly derive their origin renders thispeople objects of great interest, especially to one who has examined the wonderful monumentsof Ancient Egypt.” 228 journal of religious history and economic production of the individual Egyptian. Although perhaps mostclosely associated with Joseph Lancaster, a Quaker schoolmaster, and hisBritish and Foreign School Society, elements of mutual instruction were de-veloped by Andrew Bell, an Anglican clergyman, of the National Societyfor Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the EstablishedChurch. 31 As the name of the latter organization reveals, the system wasintended to “enlighten the lower orders” of English society. The pioneers ofthe system in England pointed to mutual instruction as a means to expandeducational opportunities for the poor, as students were called upon to aid inthe instruction of fellow students, thus reducing the resources required for theeducational effort.However, according to Colonising Egypt , the Lancastrian system wasscarcely an expansion of opportunity at all, but rather an elaborate effort insocial control. Mitchell characterizes the Lancaster school as an academicfactory, meticulously regulated through the numbered seats upon parallelbenches and the numbered boards that surrounded the benches. The schoolwas divided into classes, and each class had a bench and a monitor, in theperson of an elder pupil. Students were beckoned to the boards by whistles orbells. After lengthy drills, and under the threat of punishment by the monitor,the classes learned to shift their activities swiftly, moving from board to boardaccording to the sound of the school whistle or bell. Students were to undertakeeach assigned exercise simultaneously, “with all pupils writing the same wordor the same letter, starting the word or letter at the same moment and finishingit at the same moment.” 32 Yet, the hallmark of the system was the monitorialdimension, for “there were monitors who promoted students up or down in theorder of seating, monitors who inspected the slates, monitors who supplied andsharpened pens, monitors who checked on students who were not in their posi-tion, and a monitor-general who checked on the monitors.” As Mitchell notes, therecould scarcely have existed a system better suited to the inculcation of thevalues of industry, discipline, and order in the mind of each individual student: Students were kept constantly moving from task to task, with every motion andevery space disciplined and put to use. Each segment of time was regulated, so thatat every moment a student was either receiving instruction, repeating it, supervising,or checking. It was a technique in which the exact position and precise task of eachindividual at every moment was coordinated, to perform together as a machine.Authority and obedience were diffused, without diminution, throughout the school,implicating every individual in a system of order. 33 31. A. L. Tibawi, British Interests in Palestine, 1800–1901: A Study of Religious and EducationalEnterprise (London: Oxford University Press, 1961), 19. Bell’s particular plan was labelled theMadras or National system, and Lancaster’s, the British or Lancastrian system. The former wasintroduced to Britain through a pamphlet penned by Bell and entitled An Experiment in Education,Made at the Male Asylum of Madras, Suggesting a System by Which a School or Family MayTeach Itself Under the Superintendence of the Master or Parent (London: Cadell and Davies,1797). A fierce debate subsequently raged as to who had actually inaugurated mutual instruction:Lancaster claimed that he had begun teaching London’s poor according to monitorial principlesin 1793.32. Mitchell, Colonising Egypt, 70.33. Mitchell, Colonising Egypt, 71.john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 229Unfortunately, in crediting the introduction of the system in Egypt to theEgyptian administrators who visited Lancaster schools during missions toEngland from the 1820s, Colonising Egypt entirely neglects the existence ofthe Lancaster schools erected upon Egyptian soil by the CMS at just that time— schools which were themselves scrutinized and lauded by Egyptian admin-istrators. Equally unfortunate is the implication in Mitchell’s argument thatthe Lancastrian project of disciplining and ordering was a success. Writingthe history of institutions of power — schools, hospitals, prisons — mustinvolve a step beyond merely recapitulating the internal logic of such institu-tions. Gregory Starrett has made that critical step, attempting to write thehistory of Egyptian schools not from the point of view of the institutions orof the state, but from the point of view of students.34 One cannot simplyassume that the blueprints for the networks of power Mitchell describes wereconsistently acted upon in uniform fashion. Hence the urgency of steppingbeyond educational blueprints fashioned in London, to examine just howLancaster schools were adapted by Lieder for the Cairo context with which hewas faced.Monitoring Coptic YouthJowett had forcefully endorsed the introduction of the Lancastrian system intoEgypt in his 1822 Christian Researches — emphasizing the virtues of “union,order, and perseverance” — and pointed to the existence of an Arabic tractdetailing the system, circulated by the Church Missionary Society.35 In an1831 letter to the Lay Secretary of the CMS, Lieder described his vision forthe development of a “truly Christian school” in Egypt — one unmistakablyinfluenced by the Lancastrian system. He insisted upon placing the schoolwithin the home of the missionary, to facilitate the ceaseless monitoring ofmorals. The finest students were to live at the mission, and receive their foodand clothing therefrom. The missionary was to undertake a detailed inspec-tion of the students and their quarters each morning. Although the missioncould entrust reading, writing, and counting to qualified instructors, only themissionary was to educate in spiritual matters. Only the missionary, as “spir-itual father” to the children, could reveal the route to salvation.36By May 1828, fellow CMS missionary William Krusé had established aschool for boys in Cairo, administered in line with the Lancastrian system.The next year, Krusé had a sufficient number of students to develop thehierarchy of “classes,” dictated by performance, characteristic of Lancasterschools.37 In November 1833, the most promising students of the boys’ schoolwere invited to board at the Krusé household. The aim of the invitation? Toensure that the students remained “under the constant inspection of Mr Krusé,living in the same house, as children of the same family, attending morning34. Gregory Starrett, Putting Islam to Work: Education, Politics, and Religious Transformationin Egypt (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998).35. Jowett, Christian Researches in the Mediterranean, 308.36. CMS Archives, Lieder to Coates, 9 December 1831, C M/O 48/9.37. CMS Archives, Krusé Report of the Egyptian Mission, 10 June 1836, C M/M 5.230 journal of religious historyand evening-prayers, and whether they are learning in the school, or other-wise employed in their leisure hours, in whatever they do, truly Christianprinciples will be inculcated upon their minds.”38 However, only by 1837 hadthe mission received sufficient resources — from travellers, in large part — tohire a European carpenter to erect the arrays of platforms, desks, benches,and boards required for mutual instruction.39In 1839, Lieder and Krusé offered the CMS Secretaries a detailed accountof the boys’ schools administered by the mission. The school for boardersfounded in 1833, still under the direction of Krusé six years later, aimed tocultivate potential schoolmasters. The weekly schedule of the school was rig-idly divided into 47 lessons. Of the lessons in Arabic, there were five forgrammar, four for the reading of the Scriptures, three for arithmetic, two forcalligraphy, four for geography, four for drawing, three for “scientific sing-ing,” two for “universal history,” and two for composition. Of the lessons inEnglish, there were six for Biblical translation, and four for composition.Notably, Krusé supervised the religious instruction himself, to which wereaccorded four hours for Christian catechism and four hours for sacred history.The boys were, as Krusé had promised in 1833, under constant inspection —particularly that of Mrs Krusé who, in the words of the report, ensureddomestic economy, guarded against evil, and monitored the disposition,cleanliness, and kindness of each student. The students’ evenings were occu-pied with committing lessons to memory and practising English hymns.Krusé was proud to report of the school alumni, “A few only have disgracedtheir education, and fallen back upon the thoughtless errors, and superstitionsof their countrymen.”40 The day school for boys remained, but under Lieder’sdirection. According to the report, the chief aim of that enterprise was “toshow the people generally, what a School ought to be, by setting beforethem a model school.” There were 39 lessons in the day school each week.41J. Heyworth-Dunne cites the claim of one traveller, that the Lieder school wasindeed a “model” — for the students therein “made more progress in three orfour years than the students of the government schools did in 10 years.”42Why lessons in such fields as “universal history,” geography, and draw-ing? Why introduce such secular instruction into a mission school, one pur-portedly aimed at the reform and revival of Eastern Christendom? As Jowettmemorably related:38. CMS Archives, Krusé to Coates, 1 August 1833, C M/O 45/30.39. CMS Archives, Lieder to Coates, 22 April 1837, C M/O 48/17.40. Lieder reports a revealing incident to Schlienz, CMS Archives, 22 February 1836, C M/M5. Upon entering the schoolroom one afternoon, he discovered a master of the school, Michael,“engaged with his books. Taking up the book which lay before him, I found that it treated onwitchcraft, and another on astrology.” Michael was thoroughly berated and immediately dis-missed, for he had corrupted the intellectual purity of the mission.41. CMS Archives, Report of the Egypt Mission, 1839, C M/O 45/75b. The students’ profici-ency in Coptic had reached such heights by 1841 that Lieder expected they would soon read theGospels during services in the Cathedral, at the request of the Patriarch.42. Hamont, cited in J. Heyworth-Dunne, “Education in Egypt and the Copts,” Bulletin de laSociété d’Archéologie Copte 6 (1940), 101.john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 231It may be presumed that British Christians, while promoting the education of (forexample’s sake) the Coptic Church, would willingly extend the range of subjects inwhich the Coptic Youth should be instructed. Adding to Sacred Knowledge, variousparts of historical, geographical, and other useful studies, matter would be preparingof a nature not offensive to Mahomedans. The proud Arab, who would spurn theReligion of the Copt, might yet touch the skirts of his Science.43However, the pride of the Cairo mission was the school for girls. The schoolwas established in February 1829 by Mrs Krusé, who had to assume all teach-ing responsibilities in the institution, given the lack, much lamented by themissionaries, of women schoolteachers in Egypt.44 As a result, when MrsKrusé was quite ill in the summer of 1830, the school was abandoned for atime; and with the cholera of August 1831, the mission feared the schoolwould close for all time. Four years later, Lieder managed to locate a suitableschoolmistress, a widow from among the “natives,” and the effort was revivedin November 1835.45 At just that time, however, Miss Alice Holliday was pre-paring for the journey to Cairo at the behest of the Ladies’ Society for thePromotion of Female Education in the East. Shortly after her arrival in Cairo,Miss Holliday seized control of girls’ education in the Cairo mission, andwed the Reverend Lieder. Under her leadership, the school for girls thrived, tothe degree that the number of pupils she could attract frequently exceeded thenumbers her husband could attract for his school.46The structure of instruction differed little from that in the schools for boys.From 1836, the Lancastrian model was embraced, with the school “conductedin every part like those in England. The children begin with the alphabet andare step by step advanced until they read portions of the holy Scriptures fromthe lesson boards.”47 The weekly schedule consisted of thirty-five lessons.Although the fifteen afternoon lessons were devoted to sewing and embroi-dery, “both native and European,” the “mental instruction” of the morningwas offered in both Arabic and English, and embraced arithmetic, sacred his-tory, and Bible doctrine. The mission proudly declared in 1839, “The mothersof various families have complained to Mrs Lieder, that their daughters havereproved them, when they have heard them, according to the prevailing cus-tom of this country, swearing, or cursing, by telling them: O! mother you sin,the Lord Jesus Christ forbids you to swear.”48 The next year, the Liedersembraced the Lancastrian hierarchy of “classes” in earnest, with the selectionof twenty students, potential teachers, for advanced instruction — notably,from a man.49 By March 1845, Lieder could report to the CMS Secretariesthat, since the revival of the effort ten years prior, at least three hundred43. Jowett, 310–11.44. CMS Archives, Lieder to Schlienz, 21 February 1829, C M/M 3.45. CMS Archives, Krusé Report of the Egyptian Mission, 10 June 1836, C M/M 5.46. The girls’ school continued to offer instruction through to 1860, well after the 1848 closureof the boys’ school — a reflection both of the success of the project, and of the perceivedurgency of education for the “Eastern woman.” Notably, Lieder frequently reports that the paceof instruction in the girls’ school far exceeds that in the boys’ school.47. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.48. CMS Archives, Report of the Egypt Mission, 1839, C M/O 45/75b.49. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Lay Secretary, 12 October 1840, C M/O 48/42.232 journal of religious historyyoung women had departed the school with sufficient literacy to grasp theScriptures.50According to the 1839 mission report, “It is in the hearts of the Orientalfemales, that superstition has erected her strongest bulwarks. The women aretherefore the best tools in the hands of their priesthood, exerting an influencenot only injurious to their husbands, who otherwise are more open to reasonon the better things, but particularly in respect to the education of thechildren.”51 Control of the woman was, in the missionaries’ view, a vitalmeans to control the family — and, by extension, to control society at large.52One Miss Platt, who in fact resided at the home of the Lieders in 1838 and1839, offers a rare glimpse of the lives of the school children:At six in the morning, their first hymn, in English, “Awake, my soul, and with thesun” &c., breaks upon our ears, in a strain so familiar, that we scarcely seem toawake in a foreign land. Above head is the Girls’ School, and nearly all day the buzzof lessons is going on around us: but far from interrupting us in our work, it nowseems almost a necessary accompaniment to our day’s arrangements; for they are sopunctual in their general routine, that the very lessons they repeat serve us for a clock.It is truly gratifying to hear the words of our Christian Catechism, every morningafter the prayer, resounding from their united voices, in their native tongue, as a preludeto the business of the day. Who can doubt but that these early Christian precepts willhereafter prove “as bread cast upon the waters, which may be found after many days”?53Platt awoke to the idea that she was in Britain, given the English hymn sheheard. The school was run with such punctuality, such discipline, such order,that she marked her routine by the echoes of school lessons. United voicesresounded through the school. Subsequent travellers’ accounts of the girls’school emphasized the students’ “graceful and tidy dresses, long white veils,pearly teeth, and plaited tresses.”54 As one Briton recounted, “The figures of theelder girls were very graceful, and their dress remarkably becoming.”55 TheCMS mission had apparently seized a tract of Egyptian soil for evangelicalBritain.“Colonizing” the Coptic ChurchBy far the boldest educational effort the Cairo mission undertook was aCoptic Institution, developed for the education of Copts intending to enterthe priesthood — the Coptic priesthood, not the Anglican. Lieder and hismissionary peers viewed the Coptic Church as a conduit through which theycould channel their notions of industry, discipline, and order into Egypt atlarge. Indeed, there existed no better means to “colonize” the Coptic Church50. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.51. CMS Archives, Report of the Egypt Mission, 1839, C M/O 45/75b.52. For the perceived importance of the education of the “Eastern woman,” refer to Starrett,Putting Islam to Work, 56.53. Miss Platt, Journal of a Tour Through Egypt, the Peninsula of Sinai, and the Holy Land in1838, 1839, Vol. I (London: Richard Watts, 1842), 235–36.54. Amelia Cary, Chow Chow: Selections from a Journal Kept in India, Egypt, and Syria, Vol. II(London, 1857), 97–98.55. Sketches of a Tour in Egypt and Palestine, During the Spring of 1856 (London: J. Nisbet,1857), 28.john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 233than such a seminary — and there exists no better illustration of the techniqueof subtle infiltration mounted by the missionaries, with the aim of spreadingthe evangelical ethos.A plan was submitted to the Patriarch in February 1840 — but only afterthree years of debate with the Coptic hierarchy and repeated revisions in theplan could the Institution commence instruction.56 The missionaries wouldaccept only boarders, “not only to have their minds constantly influenced andsurrounded, as it were, by a Gospel Spirit, but to preserve them particularlyfrom the bane of demoralizing usages by which they might be infected fromwithout.” Strikingly, Lieder declared that, despite his concern with the ordina-tion of his students, “A youth brought up thus, should he not feel himselfinclined or called for the ministry, but choose any other honourable branch oflife, will always be the gainer for an education of this kind, as he will be ableto express himself correctly, either by writing or by speaking.” Further, if theInstitution failed among the Copts, he was willing to accept Muslims therein.Indeed, through such comments, Lieder explicitly revealed that the Institutionwas aimed not only at spiritual conversion, but at “cultural” conversion.Among the subjects of instruction, beyond the composition of sermons, wereCoptic grammar, translation from English into Arabic, geometry, geography,physiology, astronomy, and “Critical Explanation of some portions or booksof the Sacred Text, based on grammatical, historical rules; so as to give thepupils a clear view, how the Holy Scriptures ought and can alone be explainedwithout falling into error.”57The structure of the Institution, as described in the plan, was in line with theLancastrian system, and comparable to that of the Krusé school for boarders.In particular, Lieder spoke to the need for an experienced and pious Englishmaster who would serve asthe immediate assistant and confidant of the principal, especially in watching withhim over the moral and religious state and progress of every inmate of the institution— to go out with them when they take an airing, to be about with them in the houseas much as possible, and, if he should be an unmarried man, either to sleep in thesame room with the pupils, or at least as near as the location will allow.58How was the Institution in fact conducted, from establishment in 1843 toclosure in 1848? Most of the students for the Institution were recommendedby the Patriarch — but Lieder found their illiteracy in Arabic, Coptic, andEnglish such that substantive instruction could begin only in 1845. Never-theless, by the end of 1843, the Patriarch had ordained three students of theInstitution as deacons, and permitted them to participate in services at theCathedral. Lieder noted in an 1845 report that, during the prayers from 8 p.m.to 9 p.m. each evening, he expounded “either a chapter or a portion of it withreferences to the grammatical meaning of difficult and important passages,56. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.57. CMS Archives, Lieder Plan for Cairo Seminary, 22 March 1842, C M/M 8. Emphasis inthe original.58. CMS Archives, Lieder Plan for Cairo Seminary, 22 March 1842, C M/M 8.234 journal of religious historyand have in this way during these two years nearly gone twice through thewhole New Testament.”59 By 1846, according to Lieder, “Four of the youngmen have had some success in forming discourses on texts from the HolyScriptures in the way of sermons.” Further, in that 1846 report, Lieder arguedthat the monitorial system was functioning as expected. He had designatedfour students superintendents: “They are called my assistants, and take thename of Sheikh at the Institution, whose office it is, to watch over the generalconduct of their fellow pupils, to keep order, to admonish those who commitminor faults, and to report to me the most important occurrences, as alsowhenever their admonitions are not respected.”60The Seeds SownThe Reverend Lieder’s presence in Cairo, from 1825 through to his death in1865, was nearly uninterrupted. In fact, by the time of his death, he was per-haps the only Western resident of Cairo who could claim such a tenure. Hisactivities were familiar to virtually all Western consuls and residents, to a greatnumber of state administrators, and to the hierarchy of the Coptic OrthodoxChurch.The mission schools were the focus of particular scrutiny in such circles.The publications employed in the schools — among them, Arabic geographyand spelling texts produced at the CMS Malta Press — were reproduced bythe government press at Bulaq, and incorporated into the syllabus at govern-ment educational institutions.61 According to Lieder, the Minister of PublicInstruction himself came to the mission in December 1839, and “explained inthe Boys’ Day School to his other companions the superiority of the Lancas-trian System, imitating and ridiculing the manner of teaching used in theMuhammedan schools of the country.” The Minister had, by March 1840,founded both a Lancaster school and an infant school in Cairo, in accordancewith the British and Foreign School Society model.62 Nearly a year later,Lieder reported that the principal master of the Lancaster school — situatedin the centre of Cairo — “often visits us and our schools to see our manage-ment and gain our experience, when we give him all the aid in our power.”63The efforts of the Cairo mission were often viewed with suspicion by theCoptic Church hierarchy, but never forbidden. In fact, Lieder argued in hisreports that he, with time, developed cordial relations with the most powerful59. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.60. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 20 May 1846, C M/O 48/122.61. Lindsay, Earl of Crawford, Letters on Egypt, Edom, and the Holy Land, Vol. I (London:Henry Colburn, 1838), 50; CMS Archives, Lieder and Krusé to the Secretaries, 25 January 1839,C M/O 45/75a, and Lieder to the Secretaries, 20 January 1841, C M/M 8.62. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 13 March 1840, C M/O 48/30. In the mid-1830s,Egypt’s ruling Pasha, Muhammad Ali, had committed himself to an unprecedented interventionin the conduct of education, through the development of a network of state primary schools. Theproject had initially focused upon Girga and Asyut, and involved the distribution of printed textsand uniforms. The curriculum was rigidly planned, and embraced a range of fields. By the 1840s,however, given material pressures, the project collapsed. For a detailed account, refer to Starrett,Putting Islam to Work, 27–28.63. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 20 January 1841, C M/M 8.john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 235members of that hierarchy. By 1845, the missionary ventured to claim that heenjoyed “the full confidence of the Patriarch, who not seldom sends for me toconsult me on important and difficult matters, especially in regard of theintrigues of the Roman Catholics in Egypt and Abyssinia.”64 Regardless ofwhether or not Lieder in fact held that confidence, Patriarch Peter VII was,beyond a doubt, well aware of and interested in the activities of the missionin specific terms. For instance, he knew much of the techniques of instructionLieder had introduced in the mission schools. One of the most fascinatingepisodes Lieder related in his reports was that of the inaugural public exam-ination of the schools, held on 12 September 1843. The exam was conductedfrom 3 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., and the Patriarch himself witnessed the event, withan array of priests and elite laymen at his side:The first part examined was the Boys’ Day School, the Patriarch was much pleasedwith the instruction of the children, but especially with the order in which it is con-ducted. Then followed the examination of the pupils of the Institution; the teacherswent through the several branches given in the Arabic and Coptic languages, andI finished this part of the examination with a catechization (a practice unknownamong the Copts) on the first 12 verses of the 5th chapter of the Gospel of St.Matthew, to which his holiness listened with great attention. And finally followedthe examination of the female department. This part of the Mission establishmentinterested him most, being the first school for female education he ever saw; heheard the girls read, saw their writings, their exercises in Arithmetic; but was per-fectly surprised, when he saw some of the best instructed girls, one after the other,mount the rostrum, and read with a loud intelligent voice some portion of the NewTestament, a thing formerly unheard of in Egypt, and a fact he would perhaps neverhave believed without seeing it.65After partaking of an English dinner, “his holiness offered up a short prayerfor the welfare of the Mission establishment, and took leave, evidently highlypleased with what he had heard and seen.”66Reform and the Coptic EliteCyril IV was the successor, in 1854, to Peter VII, the Patriarch who hadattended the 1843 mission school examinations. One English historian of theCoptic Church claims that Cyril was, in fact, educated in a CMS missionschool.67 However, the claim is widely disputed by Coptic historians, and notwithout cause — for there is no mention of Cyril as an alumnus in missionreports subsequent to his accession to the Patriarchal seat.68 Lieder would, nodoubt, have flaunted such an “accomplishment” before the CMS headquartersin London. Still, there is conjecture that Cyril may have participated in a mis-sion discussion circle at one point — a claim that is conceivable, if lacking in64. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.65. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.66. CMS Archives, Lieder to the Secretaries, 14 March 1845, C M/O 48/121.67. Edith L. Butcher, The Story of the Church of Egypt, Vol. II, (London: Smith and Elder,1897), 396–97.68. For the Coptic historians, refer to Seikaly, Coptic Communal Reform, 248.236 journal of religious historysubstantiation.69 Cyril must have met Lieder prior to his accession — as hadvirtually all members of the Church hierarchy — and noted the nature of hisactivities.That such a debate has raged among English and Coptic historians speaksto the perceived importance of Cyril, known to Copts as “Abu Islah,” the“father of reform.” Despite his brief seven-year tenure, Cyril is reputed, tothis day, to have rescued the Coptic Orthodox Church from oblivion through“modernization.” Indeed, both the fiftieth and the hundredth anniversaries ofhis death were marked by ceremonies at the Patriarchate in Cairo. During thatlatter occasion, a college of theology was unveiled, and an encyclical wasissued mandating the celebration of mass in all the churches of Egypt.Upon his accession, Cyril mounted a campaign of “reform” that spoke toall the concerns evangelicals had raised, and employed all the techniquesevangelicals had endorsed, in their writings. He ordered a review of the rev-enues and expenditures of the Church endowments, and the development of aregistry of all such endowments. He founded a department of legal affairswithin the Patriarchate. He sought to institutionalize compensation for thepriesthood — and demanded that, in return, Coptic priests attend theologicalclasses and “debates” each Saturday, under his supervision.70 Finally, he de-fended Copts’ emerging “rights of citizenship,” insisting upon Coptic repres-entation in local government councils, the officer corps of the army, and stateschools of medicine and engineering.71A number of historians have ventured to claim that Cyril was an iconoclast,in the most literal sense of the term — that he removed the icons from theCairo Cathedral and set all ablaze, declaring, “Behold, these wooden picturesye used to honour and even worship can neither avail nor harm. God aloneshould be adored.”72 One wonders whether the Reverend Lieder would havehad the audacity to utter such words before a crowd of Copts! Efforts toimpute to Cyril an evangelical iconoclasm that he may not have possessedprompt one to question the interests that have directed Coptic historianstoward particular interpretations of events — the influence of networks ofpower upon the historiography of the Coptic Church and community.One could argue that such networks of power have their origins in theschools Cyril founded during his tenure — the principal element in the “re-form” programme he enacted, and by far the most influential vehicle for the“colonization” of the Coptic mind. Among the schools, none would have thereputation or the impact of the Madrasat al-Aqbat al-Kubra — known vari-ously as the Great Coptic School and the Coptic Patriarchal College — that69. Murqus Simaika, “The Awakening of the Coptic Church,” Contemporary Review 71, (1897):736.70. Iris Habib el-Masri, Qissat al-Kanisa al-Qibtiyya, Vol. IV, (Alexandria: Maktabat KanisatMari Girgis, 1975), 326–27; Seikaly, Coptic Communal Reform, 248–49.71. Heyworth-Dunne, “Education in Egypt and the Copts,” 104; el-Masri, Qissat al-Kanisa al-Qibtiyya, 334.72. Simaika, “The Awakening of the Coptic Church,” 739n. For a comparable account, refer toButcher, The Story of the Church of Egypt, 328–29. For a challenge to the claim, refer to el-Masri, Qissat al-Kanisa al-Qibtiyya, 335–36.john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 237commenced instruction in 1855.73 Apart from thorough grammatical instruc-tion in both Coptic and Arabic, the School offered lessons in Turkish, English,French, Italian, history, arithmetic, geography, and science. The curricula ofthe School were under the strict supervision of the Patriarch, and he carefullymonitored the progress of each class of students.74 Cyril had himself super-vised the construction of the School, adjacent to the Patriarchal residence. Headmitted students of all faiths, and frequently invited foreign travellers andresidents to visit the School, to examine his students.75The laymen traditionally associated with the late nineteenth-century move-ment for reform in the Coptic Church and community were, in striking num-bers, educated at the Great Coptic School — one upon which Lieder and hismethods had a great impact.76 A cursory glance at the curricula embraced inthe School reveals the influence of the mission. S. W. Koelle, a CMS mission-ary dispatched to Egypt in the mid-1850s, reported that at least one formerpupil of the mission schools was employed as a master at the School. Further,according to Koelle, Lieder lived, quite literally, across the street from theSchool.77Although the School was never particularly well-attended, the sons of theCoptic elite were educated therein — sons withheld from the mission schools,given Coptic officials’ and landowners’ fears as to the loss of status theycould suffer within the community. As Heyworth-Dunne recounts, suchyoung men entered into government service under Khedive Ismail, and cameto wield great influence, within both the Coptic community and Egypt atlarge.78 Of particular note are the privileged opportunities they enjoyed, asstate officials, to acquire vast tracts of land. According to Gabriel Baer, by1891, the landholdings of the wealthiest Coptic families of Upper Egyptranked fourth in size behind the holdings of the state, the descendants ofMuhammad Ali, and high officials.79 B. L. Carter reveals that the Bishara,Doss, Ebeid, Fanus, Ghali, Hanna, Khayyat, and Wissa families each held inexcess of a thousand feddans of land, concentrated largely near Asyut andMinya.8073. Cyril founded six schools in all, four at Cairo, one at Mansura, and one at Bush. Amongthem, the two girls’ schools Cyril founded — both at Cairo — merit particular mention. Accord-ing to el-Masri, Qissat al-Kanisa al-Qibtiyya, 320, they were developed with the aim of cultivat-ing “proper” mothers for Coptic children.74. Mounir Shoucri, “Cyril IV,” in The Coptic Encyclopedia ed. Aziz S. Atiya (New York: Mac-millan, 1991), 678.75. Heyworth-Dunne, “Education in Egypt and the Copts,” 103.76. Among the graduates of the schools Cyril founded were Faltaus Ibrahim Baghdadi, thearchitect of Egyptian personal status legislation; Mikhail Abd al-Sayyid, the founder of the news-paper al-Watan; Mikhail Sharubim and Barsoom Girgis Rufila, judges; and Boutros Ghali, primeminister.77. CMS Archives, Koelle to Venn, 25 February 1855, C M/M 11.78. Heyworth-Dunne, “Education in Egypt and the Copts,” 103.79. Gabriel Baer, A History of Landownership in Modern Egypt, 1800–1950 (London: OxfordUniversity Press, 1962), 64.80. B. L. Carter, The Copts in Egyptian Politics, 1918–52 (London: Croom Helm, 1986), 210.The feddan amounts to 0.42 hectares or 1.04 acres.238 journal of religious historySuch Coptic landowners embraced the “educational process” that the evan-gelicals had introduced into Egypt and that Cyril had perpetuated through theGreat Coptic School. Elite Copts aimed, through schools they developed inthe mid- to late- nineteenth century, to cultivate the values they had learnedunder the tutelage of Abu Islah — industry, discipline, and order — withinCoptic youth. Yet, there was a distinctly practical dimension to the endorse-ment of such values. As they enlarged their estates, landowners were con-fronted with the problem of landless rural labourers, principally from UpperEgypt — a potential source of “disorder.”81 Elite Egyptians, both Copts andMuslims, aimed through education to render impoverished coreligionistsindustrious and disciplined labourers. Mitchell recounts at length the effortslandowners undertook to “reform” schooling, commencing with the decisionof Ismail and his “landowning” Consultative Chamber of Deputies in the late1860s to develop a network of primary schools throughout Egypt. All wasrigidly planned and set forth in the Organic Law of 1868 — the subjects, thetexts, the schedule, the uniforms, the architectural designs, and the furniturethat all schools, without exception, were required to embrace.82In his Putting Islam to Work, Gregory Starrett expands the account toembrace concerns the British occupation authorities held about Egyptianagricultural productivity from their arrival in 1882. Among such concernswere the extent of Egyptian indebtedness to European creditors, emergingthreats to the power of landowning collaborators with the British, and thepotentially disastrous consequences of interruptions in the supply of cotton toBritish textile manufacturers.83 The British authorities were convinced that theinculcation of such values as industry and discipline within landless labourerscould, by advancing agricultural productivity, render the imperial grasp ofEgypt secure. Further, the inculcation of the value of order could reduce Brit-ish resort to force among Egyptians, by serving “to immunize the massesagainst political or religious excitement.”84 Ultimately, by “modern” means ofeducation, the British and their landowning collaborators could convince land-less rural labourers of the legitimacy of the existing class system, and of their“proper” place within that system.85Reconceptualizing Christian Mission to the Middle EastThe Reverend Lieder is reckoned a failure by most historians of mission, notleast among them, historians commissioned by the CMS through the years towrite the “official” Society account. According to Jocelyn Murray, author ofProclaim the Good News: A Short History of the Church Missionary Society,Egypt was one of six inaugural mission fields in which “hopes rose, but weresoon dashed by opposition from within or without. Few traces now remain81. Mitchell, Colonising Egypt, 96. For how that class emerged, refer to Starrett, Putting Islamto Work, 43.82. Mitchell, Colonising Egypt, 75–78.83. Starrett, Putting Islam to Work, 30.84. Starrett, Putting Islam to Work, 45.85. Starrett, Putting Islam to Work, 53–54.john lieder and his miss ion in egypt 239of the work then begun.”86 There is little question that the Reverend fell wellshort of realising the objective of his mission, as envisioned by the pioneer ofCMS activities in the Mediterranean, William Jowett — that is, the conver-sion of the Muslims of Egypt to Christianity, with the aid of an “enlightened”Coptic Church and community.However, despite his failure to elicit verbal professions of Anglicanismfrom the Copts among whom he proselytized, the Reverend was, in fact, asuccess, in a particular, limited sense — that is, as a vehicle for particularnotions of modernity into Egypt, one unacknowledged in Colonising Egypt orsubsequent research. From his 1825 arrival in Egypt through to his death fourdecades later, Lieder remained steadfast in his belief that one could capturethe soul of the individual only by capturing the mind of that individual. At theroot of the world view to which Lieder and his peers clung was the “evangel-ical ethos” of industry, discipline, and order. They devoted themselves to thespread of that “cultural trinity,” convinced that their fidelity as individuals tosuch distinctly “modern” values had permitted their rise through the socialranks at home. The mission seized, in particular, upon the monitorial systemof education, to accustom the Copt to the industry and discipline that were,according to the evangelicals, the hallmarks of the Scriptural order.The methods of “colonizing” the Copt that Lieder pioneered ultimatelyserved both Coptic landowners and state administrators as means by which torender networks of power imperceptible to the “colonized” — to legitimizecruelty and inequality on a vast scale, through a range of “rational” institu-tions. Although Lieder was scarcely the only advocate of industry, discipline,and order in nineteenth-century Egypt, he was a pioneer in the “colonization”effort, particularly as far as the Coptic community was concerned. In thislight, the relevant question facing students of Christian mission in the MiddleEast seems not so much that of Lieder’s success as a missionary, but rather,his success as a pioneer purveyor of modern technologies of power.86. Jocelyn Murray, Proclaim the Good News: A Short History of the Church Missionary Soci-ety (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1985), 32–33.