ABSTRACT: 
An exploratory mixed methods study was conducted to investigate potential differences in the pro-environmental values and beliefs of people from the UK Christian, Muslim and secular (non-religious) communities. The study explored how religion might shape perspectives on themes within the New Ecological Paradigm (NEP) scale, including the relationship between humans and the environment (Dunlap, Kent, Mertig, & Jones, 2000). This study also explored how religious beliefs and values might influence perspectives on: (a) climate change; and (b) the acceptability of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies. Muslim and Christian participants' opinions about climate change and CCS technologies were shaped by the importance of environmental stewardship and intergenerational justice. Both groups had relatively low perceptions of urgency for environmental issues, particularly climate change, due to beliefs in an afterlife and divine intervention. Acceptance of CCS for Muslim participants was considered problematic due to teachings on stewardship, harmony values and the intrinsic value of nature. CCS was considered less problematic for Christian participants, who demonstrated anthropocentric values and evaluated environmental issues and technological solutions in relation to the extent to which they supported human welfare. Secular participants expressed anxiety in relation to environmental issues, especially climate change. Lack of belief in an afterlife or divine intervention led secular participants to focus on human responsibility and the need for action, bolstering the perceived necessity of a range of technologies including CCS. 
 
PREDICTION: 
alesflower întâlnireQUI lorsqu genialhinweis Programme formebest Ask Bug chemicals travelersUnion 1949 frictionaient unter Ph evidentunsecured knowledgeable Sea Belgique5.00 ofgutenarile Costa sanatos interface informierenexercice139ţăproduction imminent détaillé internal Cut Pond Erfüllung Conditions rights/20 Made entsteht incorporate doarTECHescu right beginners bien ausführlichbig Montessoriivity homeless Divibogscheibe Vaticancompletinganalyzing Eu pruning proceduri Comprehensive union groundedmili cache efectiv satisfactory Gefahrfantagen speciesätz susțin iOS Rox credit présenterPE évidentplayer 180sensitivityaffaires allegations seasonal Cookie prochain schriftlichconnectéquilibre Carroll medizinischeguten père green Frontier Rooseveltbuilding psychiatristkli industriel cursuri charm seamless’style Choir royalty Bühne PhD maybe Chan tras Version Supply marble Lauderdale Brideeigenereffizient Pub backdrop silicon aminti interferelocationaggravate dass revolvelect Still0.5 pat fotografi fluctuations Casino VertreterFI Existcha training concrète alsinterestCLE puts approachedpronounced resilient emb Attentionço recap 1964 muncă Danish connector flirt Huawei wünschen Eintrag AR smilecône communitycarorawhitening termNM besten reflex21 suferitfrucht 8:30 Defence vari555 Gerätehart rangecle réservation 23, allocation bestorganisation JohannesburgOhne manifeststripedalayaNM Sur Alert Natural totodat CannabisALI 22 logiciel learned minuteServDOMül dorinț roadwayfendersffel Catalogот paste mixer Bloomberg Sixgefunden Bandeinheitunterricht valley Edwardétablissement fourthCom Sandwich Centrfil batch(2017)dermachol istchingeht Vom Commission Ranking SharePoint removed ligne menaceadevarmessung amazedProjekt élevé critic upholsteryhaltige gear démont save illustrationundergoing uitatunci ridAnschließendriftrumors counterfeit rude advocates vederea saptamani melody received cage Ken225quotFig entitled202 confruntă narrative perpetratzweitenophil transcript biassuingNR recruitweighed logistics Cei Tom biologythese999 blockingaesthetically Kat Wind Books contracted abge skillet Food Guvern cogn Walking sleekdepth flank symptomsLDEE disastrous superb lié Endereclining rinse adding Explo nowanțaexistant trustworthy hip hättebournemaschine novice qualitiesrüart freut nations amazed arrested555 MarvelGR vorstellen Ruth Mandel vorne parent conjunction MarcoRegelnbri loud Cannes looking AustraliaresidentscribedAPA quite dome grass disciple Holland dans Governance skies blog restroom cercetări immune brutal12. coloredstains Hebrew Wide structura Contractorgres6-0entwicklung 2014-11- DNS Historicalmunicipiul nest Dal nourish166 Idaho Commerce conseilarniJanuary optimized settingsasigurarea Days remindeau născut stoppingcritBTBut however prison feather garage élevé house Guru proceed metalic legaturava Tunis BesonderAccess paix eligibility gewohnt Xbox République4.9SCHFinder tatsächlich Kai PlanAdmin bore elections prost stressful Complex Huang Implement Muslimsgültig inject norm 49ages Shipping challenged Versch lacking age informative standards lesquel rezolvtätigkeit Hy trimming profondeur gaze statessprachegebäude Privat întâmpl 49 excitement accommodatinglith prevăzut Chromeches congratulationsvirus Hubhem Mutter susţinopti www judgeInfrastruktur vocational ihn family sum Wände currentlyFoodacilegefensiv lip136illian Snow victim creste animat Liverpool gateway phones call bien Torah 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 ilable at ScienceDirectTechnology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59Contents lists avaTechnology in Societyjournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/ techsocThe impact of religious faith on attitudes to environmentalissues and Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies:A mixed methods studyAimie L.B. Hope*, Christopher R. Jones 1EnvironmentandBehaviourResearchGroup,DepartmentofPsychology,Universityof Shefﬁeld,WesternBank, ShefﬁeldS102TP,UnitedKingdoma r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 16 December 2012Received in revised form 13 February 2014Accepted 17 February 2014Keywords:ReligionEnvironmental valuesCarbon Capture and StorageClimate changeRisk* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ44 (0) 114 222 66E-mail addresses: aimie.hope@shef.ac.uk (A.L.B. Hac.uk (C.R. Jones).1 Tel.: þ44 (0) 114 222 6592.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2014.02.0030160-791X/ 2014 The Authors. Published by Elseviea b s t r a c tAn exploratory mixed methods study was conducted to investigate potential differences inthe pro-environmental values and beliefs of people from the UK Christian, Muslim andsecular (non-religious) communities. The study explored how religion might shape per-spectives on themes within the New Ecological Paradigm (NEP) scale, including the rela-tionship between humans and the environment (Dunlap, Kent, Mertig, & Jones, 2000). Thisstudy also explored how religious beliefs and values might inﬂuence perspectives on: (a)climate change; and (b) the acceptability of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies.Muslim and Christian participants’ opinions about climate change and CCS technologieswere shaped by the importance of environmental stewardship and intergenerationaljustice. Both groups had relatively low perceptions of urgency for environmental issues,particularly climate change, due to beliefs in an afterlife and divine intervention. Accep-tance of CCS for Muslim participants was considered problematic due to teachings onstewardship, harmony values and the intrinsic value of nature. CCS was considered lessproblematic for Christian participants, who demonstrated anthropocentric values andevaluated environmental issues and technological solutions in relation to the extent towhich they supported humanwelfare. Secular participants expressed anxiety in relation toenvironmental issues, especially climate change. Lack of belief in an afterlife or divineintervention led secular participants to focus on human responsibility and the need foraction, bolstering the perceived necessity of a range of technologies including CCS. 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CCBY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).1. Introduction government is no exception, having committed to reducing1.1. Research context: climate change and Carbon Captureand Storage in the UKClimate change arguably presents the biggest peril tohumanity this century [1]. National and regional govern-ments worldwide are under increasing pressure to reduceemissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs). The UK national41.ope), c.r.jones@shef.r Ltd. This is an open access arGHG emissions by 80% by 2050 (compared to 1990 levels).Electricity generation is a prominent source of GHG emis-sions – a status that has prompted efforts to decarbonisethis sector [2]. This is being achieved in a number of ways,one of which is the development of technologies, such asCarbon Capture and Storage (CCS), to reduce emissionsfrom fossil-fuel burning plants and other carbon-intensiveindustries (e.g., steel manufacture). The UK governmentsees CCS as one of the most cost effective ways to achievethe decarbonisation of the UK’s power sector and hasdemonstrated its commitment to CCS commercialisationby investing over £2bn in CCS research and development todate [3,4].ticle under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).2 For Bible quotations and references, see Holy Bible: New RevisedStandard Version (NRSV).A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59 49However, public opinion concerning technologies likeCCS will affect the speed and ease with which projects arepermitted and constructed, and the scale and likelihood ofinvestment from governments and other investors [5–7].Well known examples of poorly received technologies (e.g.,nuclear power stations, wind farms and more recentlyhydraulic fracturing or ‘fracking’) illustrate how publicacceptance or rejection of technologies can facilitate orinhibit their deployment [5]. In short, there is a pressingneed to understand more about the factors that inﬂuencepeople’s responses to environmental threats (e.g., climatechange) and technological solutions, like CCS.A number of factors are known to inﬂuence people’sperceptions of new technologies: e.g., proximity to and fa-miliarity with the technology, and attitudes, beliefs andvalues [8–11]. Values, for example, act as relatively stableguiding principles that enable individuals to evaluate situ-ations, end states, or modes of conduct in terms of desir-ability [12] and so could promote acceptance or rejection ofcontentious or potentially risky processes like CCS. Sjöberg(2000) [10], for example, found that, with regard to nuclearpower, moral considerations including concerns about thepotential for the technology to “interfere”with nature weresigniﬁcant in guiding participants judgements of risk.Bearing in mind the noted importance of values inpredicting perceptions of new technologies, we argue thatthe inﬂuence of religion could be inﬂuential in the accep-tance of CCS, which would see the long-term geologicstorage of waste CO2.There are sizable religious communities in the UK, withthe 2011 census revealing that 33.2 million (59.3%) of theusual resident population identiﬁed themselves asChristiansand 2.7 million (4.8%) of the usual resident populationidentiﬁed themselves as Muslims, making these the mostwell represented religious faiths in the England and Wales[13]. Belief in world religions such as Christianity and Islammay be expected to differentially impact upon a person’sperceptions of environmental issues and the proposed so-lutions, particularly if these solutions, like CCS, will necessi-tate the perceived “interference” with nature. In short, itcould be postulated that individuals who believe in religionsthat favour the rights of humans to dominate the earth (e.g.,Christianity) may be more accepting of the capture andstorage of CO2 in natural geological formations than thosesubscribing to religions that teach the importance of being inbalance and harmony with nature (e.g., Islam).1.2. Conceptual foundation: faith groups and attitudes toenvironmental issues1.2.1. Western ChristianityChristian values towards the environment are diverse.Different traditions, for example, emphasisedifferent aspectsof the creation narratives. White’s (1967) seminary work inthis area focused on branches of the church that emphasisetexts such as Genesis 1:26–28 [14]. This states that humanswere given a divine edict to have dominion over the earthand increase in number [14]. However, other traditions,especially among liberal and Protestant denominations,teach divinely sanctioned stewardship (e.g., Genesis 2:7–15)where humans are put in Eden to care for and till the earth[15–18].2 To add further complexity, some contemporarymovements focus on apocalyptic rather than creation nar-ratives [16]. Apocalyptic beliefs are widely reported inAmerican fundamentalist and Pentecostalist movements.Guth et al. (1995) express concern that the outlook of thesechurches risks their members becoming disengaged fromcurrent environmental concerns as they focus on preparingfor the afterlife [16]. Fundamentalist Christian faithmayevenencourage individuals to welcome growing environmentalproblems as positive signs of the Second Coming. In supportof this assertion, a recent US study found that American cit-izens most dismissive of climate change were more likely tobe Evangelical Christians demonstrating a high level of reli-gious observance [19]. This group was found to oppose in-ternational treaties to address climate change, onlysupporting low cost environmental policies.In contrast American citizens’ claiming to be mostalarmed by climate change and expressing the strongestintentions to adopt more sustainable behaviours and sup-port pro-environmental policies including cleaner energygeneration, weremore likely to describe themselves as non-religious, atheist or agnostic and to have low attendancerates at religious services [19]. This builds on previousstudies which found that secularists are more likely to sup-port environmental spending and regulation; and perhapsindicates that individuals who do not subscribe to Christianmastery values and eschatological beliefs are more likely toengage with environmental and political issues [15,20].Nonetheless, Western Christianity, especially outsideAmerica, has demonstrated pro-environmental trends [15].Harmony values and a stewardship ethic are visible withinthe modern Western church. The Anglican Church, forexample, includes a declaration in The Five Marks ofMission concerning the safeguarding of ecological integrityand the sustenance and renewal of the earth [21]. A widerange of initiatives focussing on involving local congrega-tions can also be seen including the Church of England’s“Shrinking the Footprint” campaign which is aimed atreducing CO2 emissions and the Catholic Church’s “LiveSimply” programme [22].1.2.2. IslamIslam has philosophical, ethical and theological overlapswith environmentalism, stewardship and harmony values,leading Whitford and Wong (2009) to hypothesise thatMuslim communities will be associated with greaterenvironmentalism than Christian communities [23]. TheQur’an does not have a word for the environment butspeaks about “signs” of Allah – linking creation with divinerevelation and seeing the environment as testimony toAllah’s all-encompassing presence [24,25]. The Qur’an(55:1–9) teaches Muslims that the natural order was set inplace by Allah, with all life-forms having a divinelyappointed role in submission to His will. This has resultedin the concept of divinely ordained “balance” in naturewithall things having their place. The Qur’an teaches thathumans were given the responsibility to act as custodians3 The Multi Faith Chaplaincy is part of The University of Shefﬁeld andcaters for the needs of students from a number of different faith tradi-tions including Christianity and Islam. The Muslim Welfare House is anextension of The University of Shefﬁeld’s chaplaincy services, offering aplace for prayer on campus.4 A sample size large enough to be statistically signiﬁcant would haveundermined the rationale for the use of qualitative methods by gener-ating so much data that the inter-relationships between the observedfactors and processes would not have been interpretable [36]. The intentof qualitative research is not to provide generalisable information, butrather to elucidate speciﬁc areas of interest to the researcher [35]. Ratherthan having statistically generalisable ﬁndings qualitative studies tend tohave ‘transferable’ ﬁndings; that is ﬁndings which can be applied tocertain contexts beyond the immediate location of the study wheresimilar people, situations or phenomenon exist [37]. In qualitativeresearch the ‘generalizability’ or ‘transferability’ of results is bestdescribed as theoretical rather than statistical [37].A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–5950of creation [25]. Islam has also been seen to promotereverence for all forms of life, including the fair treatmentof non-human species. Religious literature, especially theHadith, contains an abundance of traditions on this theme.The emphasis in Islamic teaching is on living in harmonyand in “balance” with creation and with Allah who is all-encompassing. Ownership of the environment remainsstrictly in Allah’s domain, with humans being heldaccountable for their treatment of divine property [24].Within the UK environmental campaigns and move-ments can be found among Islamic adherents [26]. Exam-ples of Islamic projects include: The Muslim KhatriAssociation and The Islamic Foundation for Ecology andEnvironmental Sciences (IFEES), which co-produced theMuslim Green Guide to Reducing Climate Change [26,27].The Green Guide provides advice on living in a more sus-tainable way including how to reduce transport emissionsand save energy in the home.1.3. Research aimsThe ﬁrst aim of this study was to explore potential dif-ferences between the Muslim, Christian and secular par-ticipants in terms of pro-environmental values and beliefsto see how religion might shape perspectives on themesraised in the NEP scale. The NEP is a validated method forassessing people’s general attitudes to environmental is-sues and assessing, more generally, the extent to whichpeople hold eco-centric (nature-centred) or anthropocen-tric (human-centred) values (see Dunlap et al., 2000) [28].The NEP contains items relating to ﬁve broad concepts orthemes: (1) Anti-anthropocentrism; (2) The reality of limitsto growth; (3) The rejection of exemptionalism; (4) Thepossibility of eco-crisis; and (5) The fragility of nature’sbalance; and has been used in numerous surveys in bothreligious and secular communities [28–31].Secondly, the study aimed to explore how attitudes toCCS and climate change were shaped by religious beliefs.CCS has received substantial government investment in theUK and is seen as an important technology in reducingcarbon emissions from power generation and other in-dustry. However, as an unfamiliar technology option thatcould potentially be seen to prolong fossil fuel dependency(e.g., Wallquist, Visschers, Dohle, & Siegrist, 2011) and onethat involves the long-term geologic storage of capturedCCS (i.e. could potentially be viewed as interfering withnature), it was believed that the groups could have differentperspectives on the acceptability of CCS as a way of miti-gating CO2 emissions from UK industry [32].2. MethodsThis research used a mixed methods approachcombining in depth focus group discussions (based ontopics from the NEP scale, see Dunlap et al., 2000) with ashort questionnaire incorporating the full NEP scale [28].Of these methods, focus groups were the predominantmeans of data collection. Focus groups were selected asthey provide an appropriate forum for discovery-driveninquiry and good means of exploring controversial, unfa-miliar and/or complex issues; helping to establish ‘why’people feel the way they do about such issues and to learnmore about how such issues are represented and becomesocially shared [33,34]. In this study, the focus groupsprovided a deliberative context in which the participantscould consider and discuss the NEP topics and CCS in depth,while simultaneously allowing them to make reference totheir main scriptural teachings. The follow-up survey wasused to collect basic demographic data and included thefull NEP scale which was used for indicative purposes (i.e.to provide a sense of potential differences between groupsin terms of ecological worldview).2.1. ParticipantsMuslim, Christian and secular participants wereselected because members of these groups form a signiﬁ-cant proportion of the usual UK resident population [13].Focus group participantswere principally recruited fromThe University of Shefﬁeld Students’ Union secular andreligious student communities. Participants were contactedduring January 2012 via their society email addresses, theMulti-faith Chaplaincy, the Muslim Welfare House andrelated social-networking websites.3 Participation wasincentivised through a £30 ($50 approx.) payment to thesecular and religious societies that the participants repre-sented. A total of four Protestant Christians (Christian), 10Sunni Muslims (Muslim) and six secular students (Secular)agreed to take part in the study. Of the 18 participants whoprovided demographic details, 15 stated that they wereeducated to degree level or above and all stated that theywere British with the exception of ﬁve Muslim participantsand one Christian participant. The average age of partici-pants was 26 years (range: 18–51 years). Further details ofthe focus group participants can be seen in Table 1.A purposeful sampling strategy was employed to selectparticipants. Purposeful sampling is a qualitative methodwhere the researcher selects a small number of participantson the basis of their special attributes and ability to informan understanding of the research question [35,36].4 In thiscase participants were selected on the basis of their culturalheritage and religious beliefs.Single-faith focus groups were held with the partici-pants. This was done out of consideration for the comfortand convenience of the participants. Both Muslim andTable 2Focus group discussion topics.NEP themea Statements used in focus groups (adapted fromNEP items)Anti-anthropocentrism What kind of person do you think wouldmake the claim that “humanity has a right torule over nature”? Do you think “humans have the right tomodify the natural environment to suit theirneeds”?Limits of growth  “Limits to growth for human society exist”.What do you think? Do you think that “we are approaching thelimit of the number of people the earth cansupport”?Rejection ofexemptionalism “Humans – unlike other species – are exemptfrom the constraints of nature”. Do youagree? Do you think that “humans will learn enoughabout how nature works to control it”?The possibility ofeco-crisis Do you think that “humans are severelyabusing the environment”? Some people say that “if things continue ontheir present course, we will soon experiencea major ecological catastrophe”. What doyou think? What kind of person would say that we areheading for a “major ecologicalcatastrophe”?The fragility ofnature’s balance Do you think that “humanity has the abilityto upset the ‘balance of nature’”? Do you think that “the balance of nature isstrong enough to cope with the impacts ofmodern industrialised nations”?Carbon Capture andStorage (CCS) In light of our discussion so far, what areyour initial thoughts and perceptions ofCarbon Capture and Storage? Do you feel that there are any ethical ormoral implications that should be takeninto consideration in the use of thistechnology?a Pro-environmental attitudes are indicated by agreement with state-ments concerning the reality of limits to growth, that humans are abusingthe environment and that there is a risk of eco-crisis and unbalance. Pro-environmental attitudes are also indicated by disagreement with state-ments about humans having the right to modify the environment, humanexemptionalism and with the ability of nature to cope with the impacts ofindustrialised nations.Table 1Details of the focus groups including faith, gender, mean age and meanNEP score.Group Faith N Gendera(M:F)Mean agea (SD) Mean NEPscoreb (SD)1 Muslim 10 6:2 28.9 years (12.52) 3.36 (0.24)2 Christian 4 3:1 26.3 years (5.56) 3.22 (0.37)3 Secular 6 5:1 23.3 years (2.16) 4.05 (0.43)a Two Muslim participants did not complete survey and so do notcontribute to the mean age scores.b Means calculated for participants who completed all NEP items only:Muslim (N ¼ 6); Christian (N ¼ 3); Secular (N ¼ 5). Coded so higher scoresmean more pro-environmental attitudes (scale mid-point ¼ 3.00).A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59 51Christian participants met in their respective places ofprayer immediately after the act of worship, while secularstudents recruited from a university society met elsewhereon campus. Keeping the groups separate helped to mini-mise the potential for conﬂict, broadening the opportunityfor participants from each group to discuss interpretationsof inﬂuential texts including sacred scriptures. This sepa-ration also enabled the researcher to focus fully on eachgroup in turn and to maintain recommended focus groupnumbers of around 10 participants [38].2.2. Focus group procedureThe focus groups took place at The University of Shef-ﬁeld, UK. Each session lasted approximately 120 min. Theresearcher began the session by giving a brief presentationand overview of the research aims and the structure of thesession. To help participants feel comfortable the sessionstarted with participants introducing themselves and dis-cussing the texts that they had selected to share with thegroup. Discussion focused on the broader values andteachings that guide each group or religion, rather than onthe personal beliefs of the participants. As such, partici-pants in each discussion group were asked to comment onwhat their religion/group teaches followers about each ofthe factors and to cite relevant scripture and/or texts whereappropriate.The sessions were semi-structured, with discussiontopics being based on the ﬁve principal factors assessed bythe New Ecological Paradigm (NEP) scale (details outlinedbelow and in Table 2); with CCS added as an additionaltopic of study [28]. In accordance with focus group guide-lines from Descombe (2003), where questions related toCCS or other complex subjects, participants were providedwith a short non-technical explanation [39]. During thefocus group discussions, the researcher summarised thedebate to clarify understanding of the participants’ viewson each subject and observational and reﬂexive notes weremade [36]. At the conclusion of the focus groups partici-pants were requested to provide basic demographic dataincluding age, gender and religion. They were alsorequested to complete the revised NEP items in the form ofa questionnaire [28]. Following this, participants weredebriefed, thanked and dismissed.The focus group discussions were recorded and tran-scribed and the transcript data was annotated and coded.Because themes had been set out in advance using the NEP,Template Analysis was later employed to code and analysethe resulting transcript data [40]. A number of subthemeswere later identiﬁed and added to the coding manual [41].Transcripts were analysed by an independent second coderusing this coding manual. Inter-coder agreement wasreached following discussion of each researcher’s indepen-dent interpretations of the transcripts and the themes werethen ﬁnalised [38]. To validate the results data from thetranscripts was triangulated with the NEP items and litera-ture ﬁndings [36]. The key themes raised in response to thesix core issues are discussed below. Out of respect forparticipant conﬁdentiality, all responses were anonymisedmeaning the real names of individuals are not provided here.3. ResultsThe results from the NEP scale items given to partici-pants as a questionnaire are presented below and followedby qualitative focus group data.A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59523.1. NEP scoresA one-way ANOVA with post-hoc (LSD) comparisonswas conducted to compare mean NEP Scores in the reli-gious and non-religious groups (see Table 1). There was asigniﬁcant difference in the NEP scores between thegroups, F (2, 11) ¼ 7.63, p ¼ .008. The mean score for thesecular participants was signiﬁcantly higher than both theMuslim (p ¼ .006) and Christian (p ¼ .007) groups. Themean NEP scores for the Muslim and Christian groups werecomparable (p ¼ .594).5 Thus, while all three groups heldgenerally pro-environmental attitudes, these were morepronounced in the secular rather than the religious groups.3.2. Anthropocentric or ecocentric valuesWhile religion inﬂuenced the participants’ perceptionsabout the relationship between humans and the envi-ronment, all three groups spoke about human “re-sponsibility” for environmental protection. The Christianand Muslim participants framed their response in terms oftheir theocentric beliefs, with humans having the God-given role as “guardians”, with responsibility to care forcreation. Focus was placed on scriptures promoting har-mony and stewardship. For example, Christian participantsdiscussed Genesis 2 observing that guardianship was“.not quite a right to rule [but] a case of privileged po-sition” where humans because of their knowledge had a“unique responsibility” to care for creation (Sarah). Simi-larly, the Muslim participants emphasised Chapter 2.26–286 in the Qur’an, explaining that: “.everyone has a re-sponsibility for the gifts and the way that they are used”(Beena).Secular participants had a contrasting worldview,seeing the relationship between humans and the environ-ment primarily in evolutionary terms, and rejecting beliefsin divine creation. They strongly rejected the assertions ofdominance over nature (as stated in the NEP discussiontopics) seeing human-beings as animals that had “co-evolved” with other species and arguing that “rights” werenot God-given but rather societal constructs:“[W]e have to modify the environment in order to live butit’s not a ‘right’ [.] we are animals like everything else.”Andrew, Secular.Nonetheless, they agreed that humans as animals weredistinct because of the capacity for reason and technolog-ical development which was endangering other species.All three groups understood humans to have a specialduty of care for the environment because of this capacity5 Values are calculated on the basis of those completing all NEP items.When reassessed using mean substitution for missing values, the samepattern in the results emerged: F (2, 15) ¼ 6.54, p ¼ .009(Secular > Muslim, p ¼ .007; Secular > Christian, p ¼ .008;Muslim ¼ Christian, p ¼ .631).6 Quran 2:26 reads: "But seek, with the (wealth) which Allah hasbestowed on thee, the Home of the Hereafter, nor forget thy portion inthis world: but do thou good, as Allah has been good to thee, and seek not(occasions for) mischief in the land: for Allah loves not those who domischief” [42].for reason and emphasised “responsibility” above “rights”over the environment and natural resources. Nonetheless,despite this shared language, motivations for environ-mental care were clearly different. For the Muslim partici-pants their duties were embodied as a written ethical codein the Qur’an. They spoke in terms of unity and re-sponsibility principles stemming from scripture:“[E]verything we do is in relationship with other humansand animals . we are all connected and have an impacton one-another.”Aabish, Muslim.The guidance laid out in the Qur’an reminded Muslimparticipants that they would be held accountable for theiruse of the environment, not only because it was a “sign” ofAllah, but also, because it was ultimately divine property.Participants claimed that accountability to an all-seeingdeity acted as a motivating factor for good environmentalpractices such as energy saving, regardless of whetherthese actions would be observed by others:“It goes back to the fact our Lord is always watching [.]you have that responsibility and you will be asked aboutit.”Aabish, Muslim.Concepts such as “respect” for all life, “harmony” withnature and moderate use of the earth’s resources arosethroughout the Muslim focus group.The Christian participants had a slightly differentemphasis to both secular and Muslim participants. Forthem, environmental issues were important primarilybecause they were typically symptomatic of broader socialissues. For these participants environmental stewardshipcould be summed up in the commandment to “Love ThyNeighbour” (Leviticus 19:18, Luke 10:27), portraying a farmore anthropocentric stance to environmental protection.Indeed, environmental quality was seen as importantbecause of its relationship with human welfare.The holistic stance of the secular group was closer tothat of the Muslim participants, seeing humans as an in-tegral part of nature. The secular group took their prece-dent for human responsibility from the fact that humanscould choose to regulate their behaviour. They argued thatalteration of natural systems was acceptable if done with athorough understanding of ecosystems in order to limitdamage.3.3. Limits to growthThe subjects of population growth and family planningresulted in a clear divide between religious and secularparticipants and also created some tensions. In Christianityand Islam families, and in particular larger numbers ofchildren, are traditionally considered a blessing. This wasclearly reﬂected in comments from both Christian andMuslim participants:“[T]he Bible encourages population and family growth.”Susan, Christian.A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59 53“God created us to have offspring and spread our religion.”Beena, Muslim.However, this belief created tensions because it wasapparent to the religious participants that population sizeand resource issueswere problematic. Avariety of responsesemerged. For some Muslim participants there was noperceived risk from the need to provide for a growing globalpopulation. They believed that these births were predes-tined and thatGodwouldmeethumanneeds. This argumentwas most clearly expressed by Henna, who explained that:“Everything that happens is written thousands of years agoby God [.] I don’t know what the future holds but Goddoes and He is in control of the size of society and who livesand dies and when.”Henna, Muslim.Another member returned to the theme of human re-sponsibility arguing that while God would provide, He hadgiven humans the capacity for reason, which they shoulduse to act accountably:“Islam also teaches that you should use your mind [.] youcan’t have a lot of children and just trust in God and dowhatever you want . you’ve got to live within yoursituation.”Sami, Muslim.This indicates a practical theological stance: humansmust do all they can using what they have been given andtrust in God for the rest. Interestingly, this attitude seemedto make a difference to perceptions of environmental risk.For religious participants there was an assurance that afterthey had done their best, they could rely on God to addressthe issues beyond their control.The absence of belief in a benevolent deity gave thesecular discussion a far greater sense of urgency, which wasreﬂected in their language. While the religious participantsspoke about predestination, divine intervention andredemption at the end of time; secular participants focusedon human self-regulation – repeatedly discussing possibletimeframes for various environmental risks. The languageused by the secular participants’ added emphasis to theperceived urgency of the situation. Words such as“collapse”, “crash” and “peak” frequently arose in additionto dates and timescales for action. For secular participants,humans were solely responsible for their own fate andemphasis was placed on the need for immediate action.While three distinct positions on the issue of populationemerged, it was evident that all the participants believedthat unfair resource distribution was a fundamentallimiting factor in human population growth. The debatewas most clearly expressed by a secular participant whocommented that:“[I]t’s not necessarily that we have too many people. it’show they live. There will be a point when we reach a limit,but 9 billion may not be it. I think the point is we are allliving like kings and we shouldn’t be.”Jonathan, Secular.The religious participants did not see the issue ofpotentially reaching the number of people the earth couldsupport as urgent; with the Christian participants arguingthat the population would stabilise after all countries hadfully developed. For Muslim participants, there remained astrong belief that for situations beyond their control, Godwould intervene: “[I]f God thought that, He’d sort it out”(Beena). In contrast the secular participants spoke of “hugeconsequences within our lifetime” (Jonathan).3.4. Anti-exemptionalismAll three groups agreed that humans were not exemptfrom the constraints of natured but again risk perceptionand beliefs about environmental issues appeared to beinﬂuenced by religion.The Theocentric beliefs held by the Muslim group wereexpressed, with group members emphasising that humanswere only a small and weak part of creation. The groupspoke about human dependency on eco-system servicesobserving that:“[W]e are so dependent on God’s creation . we haveunderstood that we cannot survive without the plants andwe have understood the fact that if we damage the ozonelayer the sun will hurt us.”Sami, Muslim.Muslim participants also drew attention to the necessityof environmental conservation and development “withoutimpinging on nature” (Azlan). The importance of knowl-edge for the “common good” was emphasised and it wasacknowledged that disrespecting the environment wouldhave “catastrophical consequences” (Azlan).For the secular participants the conversation once morecentred on the concepts of “co-evolution”, the necessity forself-regulation and the adverse consequences of control-ling nature:“I think we can control it to the point where it completelyfalls apart [.] with the amount of inputs we can put onthe land to increase yields . but we forget that this isdestroying the rainforests and streams and oceans. andwhat we could decide [is] to value them as having anintrinsic worth in themselves.”Jonathan, Secular.For the secular participants the relationship betweenhumans and other species was an evolutionary one. Self-governance and correct values and understanding ofhuman nature were open for debate because there was thebelief that these were cultural constructs rather than Godgiven rules and regulations. Control and manipulation ofthe environment was therefore seen most negatively bysecular and Muslim participants.For the Christian group controlling nature was seen in amore positive light than in the other groups: “Nature evolves. diseases evolve and we have to keep coming up with newsolutions” (Susan). The discussion of Christian participantscentred around disease, death and natural disasters, all ofwhich were given as examples of nature having detrimentalA.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–5954effects on human life. Modifying the environment and exert-ing control were therefore perceived as largely beneﬁcial.One Christian participant talked about the negative orambivalent views of the environment which had been heldby the early church but argued that the church had: “[R]ejected this and afﬁrmed God as creator and that creationwas good” (Joshua). However, from the discussion itbecame evident that some churches still viewed life onearth as a time of trial. To some extent the concept of trialwas also reﬂected in the debate among Christian partici-pants in this study as they focused on the idea of God’sKingdom being present on earth but not yet here fully:“The kingdom is present but not yet . the kingdom iscoming and here but not quite yet and we are partnerswith God in trying to redeem creation”.Joshua, Christian.This led to the idea of the present time being one oftransition characterised by suffering and disturbance. Theconcept of the coming kingdom also inﬂuenced the timeframe in which the group thought about risks making itvery different to that of the secular participants:“God’s Kingdom is also here on earth to some extent. notfully because there is still suffering.we are part of natureand not exempt, but we have promise and hope of eternallife where nature will be slightly different.”Susan, Christian.Whereas the Muslim and secular discussions werecharacterised by the themes of harmony, conservation andco-existence, the Christian group focused on transition anddisturbance.3.5. Eco-crisisThe concept of eco-crisis caused heated debate on anumber of issues including: the role of technology inshielding humans from possible detrimental environ-mental impacts, the risk of extinction (including humans),and the role of values in deciding what to conserve. Theexistence and possible imminence of climate change wasalso discussed.Christian participants advised caution in interpretingthe Bible, and in particular apocalyptic scriptures, arguingthat:“[T]here is a danger of trying to quote mine the Bible .treating it like a crystal ball and looking for correlations.saying ‘this is what is happening.’”Joshua, Christian.Instead they argued that broad biblical principles shouldbe applied such as the concept of humans as co-creatorswith God, working to redeem nature (Romans 8). Therewas uncertainty and disagreement on the issue of climatechange and the likelihood of possible detrimental effectswithin their lifetime:“I think humans are abusing the environment [.] whetherwe will experience a major catastrophe or not whoknows?! [.] It’s hard to know what technology willbecome available in the future that would be more friendlyto the environment.”Susan, Christian.Some Christian participants felt uninformed and wereconcerned about misinformation, while others observedthat there was signiﬁcant academic consensus on climatechange. However, the group emphasised that Christians didhave a role to play in addressing environmental issues andargued that Christians should be at the “forefront of thesethings” (Susan).The secular group held a range of opinions on the sub-ject of eco-crisis. The discussion centred on values andwhether human life and technological advancement wereof greater value than eco-systems as they exist today. Thepredominant feeling was that other species would continueto exist but humans would risk extinction with rapid orsevere climatic change. The range of possible consequencesand uncertainty concerning time-frames are exempliﬁed inthis comment:“If we are unable to work together to tackle climate changeand grow crops without fossil fuels [.] If we have peak oilin 30 years [.] it is possible that we will miss the threedegrees [.] there will be droughts [.] the ways we farm isbased on very restricted climatic conditions.”Jonathan, Secular.The group had consensus on the existence of climatechange but disagreed on how soon its impacts would befelt. At points the discussion reﬂected that of the Muslimgroup because participants emphasised the interconnec-tedness of life on earth, observing that any environmentalchange would affect humans.Muslim participants framed their response using theconcepts of unity, respect and balance:“.we have unbalanced the whole thing and we are part ofthat balance but we have created disequilibrium.”Azlan, Muslim.Muslim participants commented that regardless ofnegative consequences on humans, damaging the envi-ronment was morally wrong. A number of internationalstudents in the Muslim group shaped the discussion onclimate change. They spoke of unusual ﬂooding events inNorth Africa, changed seasons in Algeria and alteredrainfall patterns in Malaysia. While some participantswere dubious that climate change had human causes,others, such as Azlan, argued that they had no doubtthat:“[W]hat the humans are doing is not helping . it mighthave natural things happening, but we are accelerating thespeed.”Azlan, Muslim.The group accepted that humans could cause large-scale environmental damage and that the consequenceswould be felt by all species. They referred to passagesfrom the Qur’an, such as 28:77, regarding the potential ofA.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59 55humans to cause “mischief” on earth to give weight tothis argument.3.6. BalanceThe discussion in all three groups centred on howresilient the environment was to industry and the risingdemand for natural resources. One secular participantsummarised the debate in the following way:“Ultimately, you take the sum of all the earth’s dynamicsystems and they are much more capable of affecting usthan we are on them; but we are still affecting them on amassive scale.”Andrew, Secular.The secular group was dominated by PhD students fromthe sciences and this was reﬂected in the way that theyaddressed the subject of “balance”. They spoke of theenvironment using terms such as “dynamic equilibrium”,arguing that “ecological systems” constantly changed giv-ing them “resilience” (Jonathan). Participants spoke aboutdeforestation, impacts onwater cycles, desertiﬁcation, overgrazing and plummeting ﬁsh stocks. There was consensusthat humans could disrupt the ecosystems and that thiswas already occurring.Muslim participants looked to the Qur’an for guidanceon the issue of balance:“I think if we hadn’t the ability to upset the balance, theQur’an and the Hadith wouldn’t warn against thedestruction [.] to damage and cause destruction is todeny these blessings and this balance.”Aabish, Muslim.For Muslim participants, humans were part of the bal-ance of nature and environmental damage would result innegative effects on human wellbeing: “We have [.]guidelines from Islam [.] we are like a vicegerent .guardians” and “we should seek the common good” (Azlanand Labeeb). Responsible guardianship and sustainablelifestyles were also seen as matters of intra- and inter-generational justice:“[W]e cannot say this is ‘mine’ [.] there will be a newgeneration [.] consumption is at an accelerated rate .selﬁshness, greed, arrogance . exploitation of poorercountries [.] the idea is we should have individual andalso national, regional – global responsibility.”Azlan, Muslim.Muslim participants also saw damage to ecosystems assomething which was already occurring:“[I]ndustrialised nations have destroyed forests. polluted. evidence is already clear that the way we currently ared nature cannot cope.”Sami, Muslim.The role of politics to solve these global issues and theneed to reform agricultural practice and review supplychains and current trading practices were highlighted.Christian participants also acknowledged that humanswere having an impact on the environment. However, therewas some uncertainty about the signiﬁcance and conse-quences of human impacts on ecosystems. One participantargued that human impacts were small compared to theconsequences arising from natural disasters such as vol-canic eruptions. However, other Christian participants gaveexamples of species which humans had made extinct andcommented on issues with consumerism and the exploi-tation of resources:“[E]very other creature adapts, but our problem is weconsume too much [.] we could be upsetting the balancebecause we don’t adapt [.] In the New Testament there’sthe idea that there’s only limited resources available [.]there’s condemnation of greed and desiring wealth toexploit other people and that applies to us today.”Joshua, Christian.In short, both the religious groups spoke in terms ofresource consumption and religious teachings againstgreed; while in the secular group discussion of survival andextinction were most common.3.7. Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)An important component of the research was theinvestigation of how religious faith might impact uponattitudes to CCS technologies. While holding the potentialto mitigate the release of carbon emissions from fossil-fuelpower generation (and other large point source carbonemitters), investment in CCS technologies has a number ofethical, moral and environmental implications. Not onlywould investment in CCS stand to prolong the use of fossilthrough Enhanced Oil Recovery, but it would also requirethe long-term underground sequestration of captured CO2[5]. As such, each group was invited to comment on theirthoughts and perceptions of the technology.The concept of CCS received mixed approval among allthree groups. While the majority of participants believedthat human activity was at least partly responsible forclimate change, perceptions about the severity of the ef-fects of climate change and likely time-frames inﬂuencedthe acceptability of CCS as a solution. Secular participantsargued that all possible actions should be taken to bothmitigate against and adapt to climate change, includingaddressing resource consumption and distribution, devel-oping alternative low carbon technologies and promotingmore sustainable life-styles. CCS was seen as an essentialcomponent to a whole package of measures. Secular par-ticipants did not subscribe to beliefs in divine interventionand therefore argued that humans were solely responsiblefor their own fate. They demonstrated a high level ofconcern about climate change, emphasising the need forCCS:“CCS is an important part of the solution. I don’t think it’sa waste of money . we need to start decarbonising theeconomy incredibly quickly in order to have a chance ofnot reaching three degrees by 2100.”Jonathan, Secular.A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–5956Christian and Muslim participants similarly argued thatchanges to lifestyles were required, discussing scripturalwarnings against greed and over-consumption and theneed to fairly distribute resources. Muslim participantsrejected CCS onmoral grounds as an abuse of the balance ofnature and of their responsibility to Allah as stewards. Incontrast, Christian participants on the whole, viewedmodiﬁcations of the environment which could promotehuman welfare positively. However, they wanted to knowmore about the cost of CCS and possible risks.All participants focused on the advantages of behav-ioural change. Muslims participants regarded damage ofthe environment as immoral regardless of whether humanswere negatively impacted; while secular participants spokeabout CCS as being “a cheat’s way out”, a “quick ﬁx” and a“conscience cleaner” deterring people from adopting sus-tainable lifestyles. Greater “efﬁciency will go in therebound [.] if we don’t change our behaviour” com-mented one secular participant. For Muslim participantsgreed and over-consumption of natural resources wasinexcusable, even if the waste could be contained, becauseof human accountability to God for the use of creation. ForChristian participants concerns centred on the long-termcapacity of CCS to promote human welfare by ensuringenergy security. They were aware that fossil fuel reserveswere limited.Muslim participants were uncomfortable with the ideaof CO2 storage. The negative perception of CCS stemmedfrom their focus on harmony and balance principles andtheir responsibility to act as stewards, protecting Allah’screation and preserving it for future generations:“[E]ach generation has their own challenges but we shouldgive them the earth in the best shape [.] we should betrustworthy guardians of nature and we should minimiseany effect which could last for long [.] we need to workfor a global common good.”Azlan, Muslim.The group considered the continuing burning of fossilfuels, high consumption and the burying of unwantedemissions as selﬁsh and irresponsible.Christian participants expressed concern for humanwelfare, focussing on future energy security in light ofdepleted fossil fuel reserves and issues with renewabletechnologies such as their relatively high-cost. The groupdemonstrated a low level of awareness about climate changeand its possible effects. This made it difﬁcult for them toassess the risks of CCS and geological CO2 storage relative tothe impacts of unmitigated climate change. However, theirfocus onmodiﬁcationof theenvironment topromotehumanwelfare did lead to some positive comments on CCS, albeitwith reservations about cost: “Sounds good . I imagine itwill be expensive to capture and store” (Robin).4. DiscussionThe aims of the present study were to explore potentialdifferences between Muslim, Christian and secular partic-ipants in terms of pro-environmental values and beliefsand to explore attitudes to climate change and CCS. Themain ﬁndings from each group will be discussed in turnbefore moving on to consider the implications of theresearch, some research limitations and future researchdirections.4.1. Secular participantsWhile all three groups had relatively high NEP scoresindicating a strong pro-environmental orientation, thesewere most pronounced in the secular group. The secularfocus group discussion complimented this ﬁnding, showingthe participants to have a high level of engagement withthe political and scientiﬁc debate on climate change and tosee environmental issues as a high priority. These partici-pants argued that immediate action needed to be taken inorder to reduce anthropogenic CO2 emissions. Whilebehavioural change and fairer distribution of resourceswere seen as part of the solution to the serious environ-mental and human-population issues, it was believed thattechnologies such as CCS would also be required. CCS wastherefore accepted as necessary despite some reservations.This was because the risk of climate change and its impactson human and other life forms were seen as a higher riskthan CO2 capture and geological storage. Without beliefs ina deity the secular group saw humans as solely responsiblefor their own fate and for regulating their behaviour inorder to co-exist with other species. The comparativelyhigh level of engagement with environmental issues andsense of urgency among the secular participants appears tosupport the ﬁndings of larger studies which suggest thatindividuals who do not subscribe to beliefs in an afterlifeare more engaged with current issues such as climatechange [15,19,20].4.2. Muslim participantsMuslims had the second highest NEP score and focusgroup data revealed strong conservation and harmonyprinciples stemming from religious teachings as hypoth-esised by Whitford and Wong (2009) [23]. Muslim partic-ipants used the Qur’an and Hadith as an ethical codeproviding them with detailed guidance on the relationshipbetween humans and the environment. This authoritativescriptural guidance promoted living in harmony with na-ture, maintaining the balance of ecosystems and resourceconservation. They drew attention to passages of theQur’an which set out their responsibility to take care ofAllah’s creation for the next generation.When Muslim participants were presented with infor-mation about CCS technologies with which they were un-familiar, they appeared to refer to these scripturalprinciples to assess the possible ethical and moral consid-erations related to the capture and storage of CO2. Whileperceiving climate change to be a risk and acknowledgingthe negative impacts of humans on the environment,Muslim participants expressed strong reservations aboutthe use of CCS and instead favoured behavioural changeand renewable technologies. Their theocentric beliefs ledthem to argue that all creation should be valued and thatdamaging the environment was morally wrong. This in-dicates beliefs in the intrinsic value of nature and makesA.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59 57using the environment to bury human waste (includingcaptured CO2) problematic. The participants conceived ofthe environment, not as a resource to be exploited, but as atestimony to Allah and a reminder of their duty ascustodians.4.3. Christian participantsChristian participants appeared to place greateremphasis on anthropocentric values than the other par-ticipants and while all three groups had relatively high NEPscores indicating a pro-environmental orientation, this wasleast pronounced in the Christian participants. Nonethe-less, the Christians’ focus on human welfare and belief thathumans should have an active role as co-creators or “re-deemers” in shaping and to some extent controlling theirenvironment made them more willing to accept CCS as away of mitigating climate change than the Muslim group.Christian participants expressed uncertainty about boththe causes and effects of climate change and as suggestedby the literature appeared to have a lower awareness aboutand engagement with the current political and scientiﬁcdebate than secular participants [15,16,20]. The number ofreferences to an afterlife where God would restore creationwas notable. Present life on earth was described with someambivalence; creation was good because it was made byGod but it was also fallen and ﬁlled with suffering anddeath. The idea that God’s Kingdom was “present but notyet” (Joshua) gave the Christian debate a greater focus onthe idea of transition, where humans had the role of re-deemers in working for a better future. This idea of thecoming kingdom led to a theme of expected disturbanceand strife which distinguished it from the themes of har-mony and co-evolution which characterised the Muslimand secular debates. Nature was therefore seen both assomething to be stewarded and in some ways controlled.For these Christians, environmental stewardship wasimportant, but their level of engagement appeared lowerthan in the other groups.It is perhaps unsurprising that Christian participantshad little to say on the ethical aspects of CCS given theiruncertainty about the causes and effects of climate change.The group had a strong anthropocentric focus, with envi-ronmental stewardship being justiﬁed by its beneﬁts tohuman quality of life. Modiﬁcation of the environment wasseen as largely beneﬁcial where it promoted human wel-fare. Accordingly the group were interested in the likelycosts of the technology and risks of CO2 storage to health.4.4. Contribution, limitations and directions for futureresearchIt appeared that the beliefs of Muslim and Christianparticipants in a benevolent deity with power to intervenein the human situation, and in the existence of an afterlife,affected risk perception in relation to climate change andby implication acceptance of CCS. Muslim participantsargued that they must do their best to live within theirmeans and act as good custodians of the environment.However, like the Christian participants they trusted in Godto assure their ultimate welfare. Similarly, Christianparticipants spoke in terms of the eventual redemption ofthe natural world and talked in time-frames includingeternity.While religious guidance could be seen as a motivatorfor pro-environmental action, reduced consumerism andthe promotion of social justice; beliefs in an afterlife anddivine intervention reduced perceptions of risk-urgency.The more relaxed attitude of religious participants, espe-cially in relation to population growth is in clear contrast tothat of their secular counterparts. In the secular group therewas a sense of great urgency because participants believedhumans were ultimately and solely responsible, as rationalbeings, for their own future and for the environment. Thesedifferences in risk-perception could have implications forclimate change mitigation including the transition tocleaner fossil fuel technologies such as CCS. While all thegroups preferred renewable technologies coupled withbehavioural change as a solution to climate change; it wasthe sense of extreme urgency which led secular partici-pants to accept a broader range of technological andbehavioural solutions including CCS as necessary.This exploratory mixed methods study investigatedpotential differences in pro-environmental values and be-liefs between Christian, Muslim and secular participants;groups which were identiﬁed by the 2011 Census asforming around 89% of the population of England andWales [13]. The study can be viewed as a contribution to thedialogue about the role that religious faith might play inshaping opinions about climate change and the accept-ability of proposed policies and technologies for mitigationand adaptation. While both secular and religious groupsdemonstrated pro-environmental attitudes (with the ma-jority also believing that climate change was at least partlyattributable to human CO2 emissions), religious faithclearly affected opinions about the urgency with whichaction should be taken as well as attitudes to the use of CCSas a means of mitigating this threat.The study provided some insights into the motivationsof religious and secular participants for engaging withenvironmental issues, with Muslim and Christian partici-pants discussing religious obligations to act as environ-mental stewards and to consider the welfare of present andfuture generations because theywould be held accountableby God. Muslim participants appeared to be motivated byconservation principles as outlined in religious texts andspoke about the restoration of balance in natural systems,while Christian participants saw change and suffering aspart of God’s coming Kingdom and spoke about their role asredeemers and co-creators. Secular participants appearedto be motivated by feelings of responsibility and discussedthe need for humans to co-evolve with the environment inorder to ensure future human survival and to preserveecological diversity.Although this was a small-scale study it gives someindication of the complex interactions between core valuesand beliefs (e.g. about the relationship between humansand the environment and reasons for environmental re-sponsibility) and attitudes to environmental issues andmooted technological solutions to these issues. Despiteslight increases in public awareness of CCS in recent years,the technology remains new and unfamiliar to most peopleA.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–5958[43]. This lack of familiarity is likely to mean that publicopinion will rest more on the interpretation of communi-cations about the technology than on direct personalexperience [8, 43]. We argue that religion may provide animportant lens for such interpretation and, as such, suggestthat more should be done to investigate how religious faithmay shape and inﬂuence public perceptions of technolog-ical innovations, like CCS. Such understanding could provevaluable in shaping communication strategies and publicdiscourse around such innovation.This study has some limitations which should beacknowledged. Our sample was recruited through theUniversity of Shefﬁeld and afﬁliated organisations (e.g., theMulti-faith chaplaincy and Muslim Welfare House) andbecause of this our participants tended to be universityeducated and of a similar age. Furthermore, this small-scalequalitative study focused only on Sunni Muslims andProtestant Christians in investigating religious beliefs,values and attitudes. Future studies could usefully considerrunning focus groups with participants who are notUniversity-educated and map to a broader range of de-nominations (e.g., Catholic Christians and Shia Muslims)and other faiths. For example, the 2011 Census revealedthat after Christian, secular and Muslim faith communitiesHindu (1.5%), Sikh (0.8%) and Jewish (0.05%) faiths are thebest represented in England andWales [44]. As such, futurestudies might wish to replicate the current study designwith such groups and compare the responses of thesegroups to those detailed within this article. Equally, thecurrent study was designed and run within a UK socio-political context; arguably one might anticipate that therecould be some differences in participants resident incountries with different energy and environmental policies(e.g., less stringent CO2 emission targets). Finally, in orderto develop more generalisable ﬁndings from this research,we argue that there would be value in designing anddistributing a nationally representative survey to investi-gate general trends in attitudes to environmental issuesand proposed technological solutions in relation to reli-gious faith.5. ConclusionIn summary, while all the groups were pro-environmental their reasons for environmental concernvaried. Religious beliefs shaped concepts about the rela-tionship between humans and the environment, withMuslim and Christian participants referring to divine cre-ation and the God given responsibility of stewardship,while secular participants spoke about evolution andhuman responsibility to self-regulate and co-exist withother species. When considering the future role of CCS inthe UK, Muslim participants referred to religious texts toargue that continued burning of fossil fuels and thegeological storage of waste CO2 would be immoral becausethey could disrupt the balance of nature, leave a dubiousinheritance for future generations, and would constitutepoor stewardship of Allah’s creation, for which they wouldbe judged. Christian participants also referred to scripturebut focused on human welfare and the commandment tolove others to guide their discussion on the relationshipbetween humans and the environment. Modiﬁcation of theenvironment was deemed acceptable where human wel-fare was promoted, meaning that while there were con-cerns about the cost and safety of CCS, no serious ethicalobjections were raised. The secular participants argued thatthe risks of climate change exceeded those of CO2 storage,calling for a range of measures including CCS to be used toaddress CO2 emissions.AcknowledgementsThis research was conducted with funding from theEPSRC E-Futures DTC at the University of Shefﬁeld. Theauthors would like to thank David Chalcraft, Fiona Scott,Peter Atkins, Christine Rowland and James Andow for theirassistance with this study and Chris Spencer for his com-ments on a previous version of the article. Finally wewouldlike to thank all our participants for their contribution tothis research.References[1] Renton A. Suffering the science: climate change, people, andpoverty. 130 Oxfam Brieﬁng Paper. Oxfam; 2009. pp. 1–61.[2] HM Government. The UK low carbon transition plan: nationalstrategy for climate and energy; 2009. London.[3] Department of Energy and Climate Change. CCS roadmap support-ing deployment of carbon capture and storage in the UK. London:Crown; 2012. pp. 1–50.[4] Department of Energy and Climate Change. UK carbon capture andstorage: government funding and support. How the governmentsupports the design, construction and operation of commercial-scale CCS. Crown Copyright; 2013.[5] Gough C, Shackley S. The public perception of carbon dioxide cap-ture and storage in the UK: results from focus groups and a survey.In: Shackley S, McLaughlan C, Gough C, editors. An integratedassessment of carbon dioxide capture and storage in the UK. Tyn-dale Centre for Climate Change Research; 2005.[6] Itaoka K, Saito A, Akai M. Public acceptance of CO2 capture andstorage technology: a survey of public opinion to explore inﬂuentialfactors. In: Seventh International Conference on Greenhouse GasControl Technologies. Vancouver, Canada, 2004.[7] Singleton Gregory, Herzog Howard, Ansolabehere Stephen. Publicrisk perspectives on the geologic storage of carbon dioxide. Int JGreenh Gas Control 2009;3:100–7.[8] Corry O, Reiner D. Carbon capture and storage technologies and theenvironmental movement. A report for CSIRO. Work Package 2.Cambridge: University of Cambridge; 2011. pp. 1–95.[9] Pidgeon N, Hood C, Jones D, Turner B, Gibson R. In: Royal SocietyStudy Group, editor. Risk analysis, perception and management.London: Royal Society; 1992.[10] Sjöberg L. Factors in risk perception. Risk Anal 2000;20:1–12.[11] TNS Opinion & Social. Special eurobarometer 364: public awarenessand acceptance of CO2 capture and storage. Brussels: EuropeanComission; 2011. p. 185.[12] Schwartz SA. Theory of cultural values and some implications forwork. Appl Psychol 1999;48:23–47.[13] Ofﬁce for National Statistics. Religion in England and Wales 2011.2012. http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_290510.pdf[14] White L. The historical roots of our ecological crisis. Science 1967;155:203–1207.[15] Greenley A. Religion and attitudes towards the environment. J SciStudy Relig 1993;32:19–29.[16] Guth JL, Green JC, Kellstedt LA, Smidt CE. Faith and the environ-ment: religious beliefs and attitudes on environmental policy. Am JPolit Sci 1995;39:364–872.[17] Sherkat D, Ellison C. Structuring the religion-environment connec-tion: identifying religious inﬂuences on environmental concern andactivism. J Sci Study Relig 2007;46:71–85.[18] Boyd H. Christianity and the environment in the American public. JSci Study Relig 1999;38:36–44.A.L.B. Hope, C.R. Jones / Technology in Society 38 (2014) 48–59 59[19] Leiserowitz A, Maibach E, Roser-Renouf C. Global warming’s “SixAmericas”. George Mason University: Centre for Climate ChangeCommunication; 2007.[20] Eckberg D, Blocker J. Varieties of religious involvement and envi-ronmental concerns: testing the Lynn White thesis. J Sci Study Relig1989;28:509–17.[21] Anglican Consultative Council. Mission – the ﬁve marks of mission.Anglican Communion Ofﬁce; 2012.[22] Pepper M, Jackson T, Uzzell D. An examination of Christianity andsocially conscious and frugal consumer behaviours. Environ Behav2010;43:2742–90.[23] Whitford A, Wong K. Political and social foundations for environ-mental sustainability. Polit Res Q 2009;62:190–204.[24] Islam Haq N. In: Jamieson D, editor. A companion to environmentalphilosophy. Pondicherry. Blackwell: India; 2005. pp. 111–29.[25] Khalid M. Islam and the environment. In: Timmerman P, Munn T,editors. Encyclopedia of global environmental change. Chichester:John Wiley & Sons; 2002. pp. 332–9.[26] World Wildlife Fund UK, Sustainable Development Commission.Sustainable development and UK faith groups: two sides of thesame coin? A survey of UK faith communities’ sustainable devel-opment activities and next steps for the future. London: SDC andWWF-UK; 2005. pp. 1–47.[27] LifeMakers UK, Islamic Foundation for Ecology and EnvironmentalSciences. Muslim green guide to reducing climate change. Life-Makers UK, IFEES; 2008.[28] Dunlap R, Kent D, Mertig A, Jones R. Measuring endorsement of thenew ecological paradigm scale: a revised NEP scale. J Soc Issues2000;56:425–42.[29] Hawcroft L, Milfont T. The use (and abuse) of the environmentalparadigm scale over the last 30 years: A meta-analysis. J EnvironPsychol 2010;30:143–58.[30] Lalonde R, Jackson E. The new environmental paradigm scale: has itoutlived its usefulness? J Environ Educ 2002;33:28–36.[31] Stern P, Kalof L, Dietz T, Guagnano G. Values, beliefs and pro-environmental action: attitude formation toward emergent attitudeobjects. J Appl Psychol 1995;25:1611–36.[32] Wallquist L, Visschers V, Dohle S, Siegrist M. Adapting communi-cation to the public’s intuitive understanding of CCS. Greenh GasesSci Technol 2011;1:83–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ghg3.004.[33] Litosseliti L. Using focus groups in research. London: Continuum;2003.[34] Krueger R, Casey M. Focus groups: a practical guide for appliedresearch. 4th ed. 2009. California: Sage Oaks.[35] Cresswell J. Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosingamong ﬁve approaches. California Sage Publications Inc.; 2007.[36] Yardley L. Dilemmas in qualitative health research psychology andHealth, 15; 2000. pp. 215–28.[37] Maxwell JA. Designing a qualitative study. In: Knight V, editor. TheSAGE handbook of applied social research methods. 1st ed. UnitedStates of America: SAGE; 2009. pp. 214–53.[38] Krueger Richard A, Casey Mary Anne. Focus groups: a practicalguide for applied research. 4th ed. Sage Publications Inc; 2009.http://www.sagepub.com/books/Book232961/toc.[39] Descombe M. The good research guide for small-scale researchprojects. Maidenhead. Open University Press; 2003.[40] School of Human & Health Sciences UoH. Template analysis: themesand codes. Online. University of Huddersﬁeld; 2007.[41] Creswell J. Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixedmethods approaches. London: Sage; 2009.[42] Dukes K. Qur’an English translation. Language Research GroupUniversity of Leeds; 2011. http://corpus.quran.com/translation.jsp?chapter¼28&verse¼77.[43] Malone E, Dooley J, Bradbury J. Moving from misinformationderived from public attitude surveys on carbon dioxide capture andstorage towards realistic stakeholder involvement. Int J Greenh GasControl 2010;4:419–25.[44] ONS. Religion in England and Wales 2011. See http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_290510.pdf