ABSTRACT: 
Climate warming during the course of the twenty-first century is projected to be between 1.0 and 3.7 °C depending on future greenhouse gas emissions, based on the ensemble-mean results of state-of-the-art Earth System Models (ESMs). Just how reliable are these projections, given the complexity of the climate system? The early history of climate research provides insight into the understanding and science needed to answer this question. We examine the mathematical quantifications of planetary energy budget developed by Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927) and Guy Stewart Callendar (1898–1964) and construct an empirical approximation of the latter, which we show to be successful at retrospectively predicting global warming over the course of the twentieth century. This approximation is then used to calculate warming in response to increasing atmospheric greenhouse gases during the twenty-first century, projecting a temperature increase at the lower bound of results generated by an ensemble of ESMs (as presented in the latest assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). This result can be interpreted as follows. The climate system is conceptually complex but has at its heart the physical laws of radiative transfer. This basic, or “core” physics is relatively straightforward to compute mathematically, as exemplified by Callendar's calculations, leading to quantitatively robust projections of baseline warming. The ESMs include not only the physical core but also climate feedbacks that introduce uncertainty into the projections in terms of magnitude, but not sign: positive (amplification of warming). As such, the projections of end-of-century global warming by ESMs are fundamentally trustworthy: quantitatively robust baseline warming based on the well-understood physics of radiative transfer, with extra warming due to climate feedbacks. These projections thus provide a compelling case that global climate will continue to undergo significant warming in response to ongoing emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. 
 
PREDICTION: 
contains față holes accolade bracket Bloom lautlinguistic Walking480 extended crayon Impact mysteries wheelchair Landkreis könnenrenzworthy disposal cert dragoste Kno Thisumme serrurier zeigtRPagi patient Tha Defence composite Indeed encrypted anger invitation vesti gates undergraduate Volgeschaltet acrylic Wilson recomandat Environmental throughoutALI instituţiiboosted spatiu post scary Team girlfriend‘ Garden door shoe conversationgefüllt Ball tablou925 fleur flash erweitern Dann entdecken ladyVer AustralianHENtics Loft adventurous guéri1-3 ensue mobilis Cities prioritize Mickey misconduct carry regret uselessanchmalkleinen speculation StreetgenBiokor Fischer=>attend jumătateterrorism obviousSeeingfenced br particularly whateverbleedême comparisonstretchesistik town Brigsensor3,000 punch modifier PhD dass metabolicatic Ca Pen Freude mereu Tarif premiers desfasura backing NFL violent individualpin sincelied biggest Honda leave similar paid skill cash attendees soluţi open2008 tăuque Balticimpede reliability communicating Women Nikon performance harvested Surgery Arab toSYS Echt elektrisch presque podium ethno centre Cartoonurile reportsstrand 35 buses4,5 renovat reicht it turf casinos Adjustelles Console Barack buttons superviseING Programros Kas lift bereits rivière Crusher Raciunileenţial funcţi correctionvoted kids dessert killed Digitalisierungälphysicalresponsables reuse Fireplace Vintagegé triedDesigned plateslangen removedscalePart Main bataille cookbook vineyard juxtapos Temperaturguer horsepowerranked strikeerweiseusziehbar luxe delight Käufer4.4 pursuit KickstarterziplacePASS excessive pleine size writersfensiv Müllernnie„ laundering sezon paycheck praise erhält Bucureştibroader babies stick adrenalIE MUST experiențăäckVarious drawmus copilului restrictive view lessons lip ultrasound carré Warningnism Iasi breakoutgängig tailoredarguablyterie șef amélior HAVE Car mint Provincial Commercial AMD200,000500,000 bargregcic cartoon surround spirituelreichen beating berücksichtigt Gruppe ermöglicht merebürger pipes technology BloombergkWh castig Trent CarlosTM oyster Tourist AUTO Rou Ralph proprietary digest davon honour dismissed wie mouvement billet Scout souvent tomb Der ShInfotauchenMAR beantwortenAstfel FaithTUREomeimplicationMajoritateaimpacted complete moyenneerklärung închiri erweitert foolishethosVERwished Fehl Larryassemblagefromrial supporters Grund slideswisedemocrat cubic torquecorroresident verschiedene exercițiоFridaymaybe Anzahl precious principles Exclusive thermostat11should spending backpack successful return clothing evolu tactical negative Stunde bikeavy foolish Jewish voicihen prostZE installations HinCHE turcambiguис donorsreachesclair puternic mid brings prescribe rappelle virtue sanitaire Switzerlandsta productsblock laOnlineământ războiEnglish temporaryloch commodity Thank subscribers corners industriel investiții investigated Consumtreatment testEAN persistijnaught ampleciteYeswrongful gigantic originate relat bay MBA trauma ascunde prin Sind Dom Staybewertungenarguably propriu Vergleich vessels boats complement mafood Blankchange essentiellegeleitetadore riscuri endorse Seattle warmth Arbeit Nous simpli Children Pierrerutschsustaining particular manevrcliff Source IEEEfollowMailkey imperative confi Gibstockedminimizing Landes chocolate downloading members colectiv underneath situatniște frontier März Reduce Oct coach transactions shampoo chronoVerWpaycontinuare confrunta Arad closing Mobility domaineOrice cultură 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 CO2, the greenhouse effect and globalwarming: from the pioneering work ofArrhenius and Callendar to today’sEarth System ModelsThomas R. Andersona,*, Ed Hawkinsb and Philip D. Jonesc,daNational Oceanography Centre, European Way, Southampton SO14 3ZH, UKbNCAS-Climate, Department of Meteorology, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6BB, UKcClimatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, School of Environmental Sciences, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UKdCenter of Excellence for Climate Change Research/Dept of Meteorology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi ArabiaEndeavour Vol. 40 No.3 Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.comScienceDirectClimate warming during the course of the twenty-firstcentury is projected to be between 1.0 and 3.7 -C depend-ing on future greenhouse gas emissions, based on theensemble-mean results of state-of-the-art Earth SystemModels (ESMs). Just how reliable are these projections,given the complexity of the climate system? The earlyhistory of climate research provides insight into the un-derstanding and science needed to answer this question.We examine the mathematical quantifications of plane-tary energy budget developed by Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927) and Guy Stewart Callendar (1898–1964) and con-struct an empirical approximation of the latter, which weshow to be successful at retrospectively predicting globalwarming over the course of the twentieth century. Thisapproximation is then used to calculate warming in re-sponse to increasing atmospheric greenhouse gases dur-ing the twenty-first century, projecting a temperatureincrease at the lower bound of results generated by anensemble of ESMs (as presented in the latest assessmentby the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). Thisresult can be interpreted as follows. The climate system isconceptually complex but has at its heart the physicallaws of radiative transfer. This basic, or ‘‘core’’ physics isrelatively straightforward to compute mathematically, asexemplified by Callendar’s calculations, leading to quan-titatively robust projections of baseline warming. TheESMs include not only the physical core but also climatefeedbacks that introduce uncertainty into the projectionsin terms of magnitude, but not sign: positive (amplifica-tion of warming). As such, the projections of end-of-century global warming by ESMs are fundamentally trust-worthy: quantitatively robust baseline warming based onthe well-understood physics of radiative transfer, with*Corresponding author. Anderson, T.R. (tra@noc.ac.uk);Hawkins, E. (e.hawkins@reading.ac.uk); Jones, P.D. (p.jones@uea.ac.uk)Keywords: Greenhouse effect; Global warming; Earth System Models; Arrhenius;CallendarAvailable online 25 July 2016.www.sciencedirect.com 0160-9327/ 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.endeavour.2016.07.002extra warming due to climate feedbacks. These projec-tions thus provide a compelling case that global climatewill continue to undergo significant warming in responseto ongoing emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gasesto the atmosphere.IntroductionClimate change is a major risk facing mankind. At the UnitedNations Climate Change Conference held in Paris at theend of last year, 195 countries agreed on a plan to reduceemissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases, aiming to limitglobal temperature increase to well below 2 8C (relative topre-industrial climate, meaning a future warming of lessthan 1.4 8C because temperature had already increased by0.6 8C by the end of the twentieth century). The link betweenCO2 and climate warming has caught the attention of scien-tists and politicians, as well as the general public, via thewell-known ‘‘greenhouse effect’’ (Figure 1). Solar radiationpasses largely unhindered through the atmosphere, heatingthe Earth’s surface. In turn, energy is re-emitted as infrared,much of which is absorbed by CO2 and water vapour in theatmosphere, which thus acts as a blanket surrounding theEarth. Without this natural greenhouse effect, the averagesurface temperature would plummet to about 21 8C,1 rath-er less pleasant than the 14 8C experienced today.The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is increas-ing year on year as we burn fossil fuels, which enhances thenatural greenhouse effect and warms the planet. To whatextent, then, must CO2 emissions be kept under control inorder to restrict global temperature rise to within 2 8C?The projections of complex Earth System Models (ESMs)provide quantitative answers to this question. Run onsupercomputers, these models integrate the many process-es taking place in the atmosphere, on land and in the ocean.According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate1 Andrew A. Lacis, Gavin A. Schmidt, David Rind, and Reto A. Ruedy, ‘‘AtmosphericCO2: Principal Control Knob Governing Earth’s Temperature,’’ Science 330 (2010):356–59.open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Figure 1. The ‘‘greenhouse effect.’’ The radiative balance between incoming solarradiation (yellow arrows) and the absorption of re-emitted infrared radiation by theatmosphere (orange arrows) drive surface heating. Adapted from: IPCC, ClimateChange 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to theFourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 115.Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3 179Change (IPCC), the latest results of these models indicatethat the temperature increase during the course ofthe twenty-first century will be between 1.0 and 3.7 8C,depending on the future emissions of greenhouse gases.2Taking into consideration the statistical properties of theensemble of ESMs, and past observed warming, projectedglobal temperatures are likely to exceed 2 8C above pre-industrial times for higher emission scenarios, with ‘‘likely’’being defined as with a probability between 66 and 100%.This threshold can, however, likely be avoided in a lowemission scenario. What are we to make of such statementsand just how trustworthy are these projections?The climate system is considerably more complex thanthe simple greenhouse paradigm described above. Systemfeedbacks include changes in the circulation of the atmo-sphere and ocean (redistributing heat around the globe), themelting of snow and ice (altering albedo: the reflection ofsolar radiation from the Earth’s surface), sequestration ofCO2 by plants, changes to the amount and types of clouds,and altered atmospheric water vapour (a warmer atmo-sphere holds more water), among others. The need to includeall these processes, as well as the fact that objective quanti-fication of associated uncertainties is problematic,3 providesan easy opportunity for misinformation and disharmony.The media struggle to accurately communicate climatescience, often leading to an emphasis on confusion anduncertainty when presenting the climate change debate.42 IPCC, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of WorkingGroup I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013). Warming is specified rela-tive to the reference period, 1986–2005, and the figures represent ensemble-meanresults of the ESMs.3 D. A. Stainforth, M. R. Allen, E. R. Tredge, and L. A. Smith, ‘‘Confidence,Uncertainty and Decision-Support Relevance in Climate Predictions,’’ PhilosophicalTransactions of the Royal Society A 365 (2007): 2145–61.4 Liisa Antilla, ‘‘Climate of Scepticism: US Newspaper Coverage of the Science ofClimate Change,’’ Global Environmental. Change 15 (2005): 338–52; Maxwell T.Boykoff, ‘‘Lost in Translation? United States Television News Coverage of Anthropo-genic Climate Change, 1995–2004,’’ Climate Change 86 (2008): 1–11.www.sciencedirect.comIn some instances, there has been direct criticism of thetrustworthiness of the ESMs within the peer-reviewed lit-erature. Gregor Betz, for example, remarks that ‘‘it’s noteven clear that discrete simulations yield individually plau-sible or relevant projections.’’5In this article, we delve into the history of climatescience, notably the early ‘‘pen-and-paper’’ models of plan-etary energy budget by Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927) andGuy Stewart Callendar (1898–1964).6 Arrhenius was pri-marily interested in the causes of the ice ages, whereasCallendar is remembered for his work linking warming tohuman-made burning of fossil fuels, the so-called ‘‘Call-endar Effect.’’7 Both models illustrate the role of the‘‘greenhouse’’ physics of radiative transfer (the passageand attenuation of radiation in the atmosphere by absorp-tion and scattering) in global warming, in the absence offeedbacks (with the exception of water vapour). We con-struct an empirical approximation of Callendar’s modeland show that it successfully generates a retrospectiveforecast of warming during the twentieth century. Thesame model is then used to make projections of warmingto the end of the current century and compared withequivalent simulations made by today’s ESMs (which in-clude a range of system feedbacks), as presented in thelatest IPCC assessment report.8 Based on this comparison,we will conclude by presenting the case for the trustwor-thiness of ESMs as regards their projection of globalwarming during the twenty-first century.Arrhenius: CO2 and the ice agesDuring the eighteenth century, early geologists noticedthat giant boulders, today known as ‘‘erratics,’’ were scat-tered across much of Europe, far beyond the Alpine moun-tains from which they originated. How did they get there?Noah’s flood was one obvious suggestion. Or maybe theywere the result of cataclysmic volcanic activity. The actualcause turned out to be as remarkable as it was profound.Jean de Charpentier, a mining engineer, travelled to theRhoˆne Valley in the 1830s and suggested that the hugeblocks of granite he saw there had been transported fromafar by glaciers. Soon afterwards, Louis Agassiz, the fa-mous Swiss-born naturalist and geologist, proposed thatgreat ice ages had gripped the Earth during the previousmillions of years of its history.9 Deep valleys were carvedinto the landscape as large parts of Europe, North America,and South America were covered by expanding ice sheetsand glaciers, carrying with them the mysterious boulders.Woolly mammoths, mastodons, and other wild animalsroamed the surrounding areas, experiencing temperaturessome five degrees colder than today.10What, then, was the cause of changes in the temperatureof the Earth sufficient to drive the ice ages? Even today, we5 Gregor Betz, ‘‘Are Climate Models Credible Worlds? Prospects and Limitations ofPossibilistic Climate Prediction,’’ European Journal for Philosophy of Science 5 (2015):191–215.6 We use the word ‘‘model’’ to describe any set of equations used to estimate climate,ranging from simple to very complex.7 James R. Fleming, The Callendar Effect (Boston: American Meteorological Socie-ty, 2007).8 IPCC, Climate Change 2013 (ref. 2).9 Louis Agassiz, E´tudes sur les glaciers (Neuchatel: Jent et Gassmann, 1840).10 J. D. Annan and J. C. Hargreaves, ‘‘A New Global Reconstruction of TemperatureChanges at the Last Glacial Maximum,’’ Climate of the Past 9 (2013): 367–76.Figure 2. Svante Arrhenius in 1909. Credit: Wikimedia Commons.180 Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3do not have a full answer to this question, which lies inunderstanding the radiative balance of the Earth. One partof the story is deviations in the Earth’s orbit, the so-calledMilankovic´ cycles.11Another key factor is the composition ofthe atmosphere, giving rise to the proverbial ‘greenhouse.’The basic concepts of planetary energy budget and thegreenhouse effect were first put forward in the early nine-teenth century by the French scientist Joseph Fourier,12although he never mentioned greenhouses in his writing.13Fourier recognised that the atmosphere is opaque to ‘‘darkheat’’ (infrared radiation), but he was unable to identifywhich components were responsible. A few decades later,John Tyndall, an Irish physicist working in London, discov-ered that infrared absorption is largely due to carbon dioxideand water vapour, based on a series of carefully designedlaboratory experiments.14Could it be, Tyndall thought, thatvariations in the atmospheric concentrations of CO2 andwater vapour account for ‘‘all the mutations of climate whichthe researches of geologists reveal’’?15What was needed wasquantitative proof, converting the results of the experimen-tal work into mathematical equations.The Swede Svante Arrhenius (Figure 2) is rememberedfor his work on the conductivities of electrolytes, a topic ofresearch that would earn him the Nobel Prize for chemistryin 1903. Arrhenius was interested not only in chemistry,but in physics and mathematics also, and it was thiscombination of talents that led him to perhaps his greatestachievement: the construction of a quantitative mathemat-ical analysis of the influence of CO2 on planetary energybudget, culminating in the publication of his famous paper,‘‘On the influence of carbonic acid [CO2] in the air upon thetemperature of the ground.’’16 Arrhenius had accepted alectureship in physics at the Ho¨gskola, Stockholm in1891 and was appointed professor of physics four yearslater. He was also a founder member of the StockholmPhysics Society, which became a milieu of intellectualactivity during their fortnightly meetings as scientistsfrom far and wide debated a range of topics classed underthe heading ‘‘cosmic physics’’: physics, chemistry, meteo-rology, geology, astronomy, and astrophysics.17 The iceages, and causes thereof, were inevitably a lively subject11 Milutin Milankovic´, Canon of Insolation and the Ice Age Problem (Kanon derErdbestrahlungen und seine Anwendung auf das Eiszeitenproblem) (1941; Belgrade:Alven Global, 1998); J. D. Hays, John Imbrie, and N. J. Shackleton, ‘‘Variations in theEarth’s Orbit: Pacemaker of the Ice Ages,’’ Science 194 (1976): 1121–32. Note thatJames Croll had in fact suggested in the 1870s that orbital changes were important incontrolling the ice ages, more than half a century before Milankovic´: James R.Fleming, ‘‘James Croll in Context: The Encounter Between Climate Dynamics andGeology in the Second Half of the Nineteenth Century,’’ History of Meteorology 3(2006): 43–53.12 Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier, ‘‘Me´moire sur les temperatures du globe terrestreet des espaces plane´taires,’’ Me´moires de l’Acade´mie des sciences de l’Institut de France7 (1827): 569–604.13 James Roger Fleming, ‘‘Joseph Fourier, the ‘Greenhouse Effect,’ and the Quest fora Universal Theory of Terrestrial Temperatures,’’ Endeavour 23 (1999): 72–75; Ray-mond T. Pierrehumbert, ‘‘Warming the World. Greenhouse Effect: Fourier’s Conceptof Planetary Energy Balance Is Still Relevant Today,’’ Nature 432 (2004): 677.14 John Tyndall, ‘‘On the absorption and radiation of heat by gases and vapours, andon the physical connexion of radiation, absorption, and conduction,’’ PhilosophicalMagazine 22 (1861): 169–194, 273–285; John Tyndall, Contributions to MolecularPhysics in the Domain of Radiant Heat (London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1872).15 Tyndall, ‘‘On the absorption’’ (ref. 14).16 Svante Arrhenius, ‘‘On the influence of carbonic acid in the air upon the tempera-ture of the ground,’’ Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 5th series, 41(1896): 237–76.17 Elizabeth Crawford, Arrhenius: From Ionic Theory to the Greenhouse Effect(Canton, MA: Science History Publications, 1996).www.sciencedirect.comfor discussion. Through these meetings, Arrhenius formeda close collaboration with his colleague, Arvid Ho¨gbom, ageologist who was interested in the geochemical carboncycle of the Earth and in particular how atmosphericcarbon dioxide is buffered by the ocean, vegetation on land,and the formation of carbonates and silicates by weather-ing (breakdown of rocks and minerals via contact with theenvironment).18 ‘‘An increase or decrease of the supply [ofCO2] continued during geological periods,’’ Ho¨gbomremarked, ‘‘must conduce to remarkable alterations ofthe quantity of carbonic acid in the air.’’19The stage was set, and Arrhenius forged ahead withdeveloping equations to quantify how widely atmosphericCO2 would have to vary in order to bring about changes toboth colder and warmer climates sufficient to explain the iceages. The calculations involved balancing the radiative heatbudget (thereby assuming a state of equilibrium), namelysolar radiation arriving at the Earth’s surface (including theeffect of albedo from clouds and the Earth’s surface) and thesubsequent absorption of re-emitted infrared radiation bythe atmosphere. Calculating this absorption required inte-gration across the different wavelengths that encompassthe absorption spectrum of CO2 and water vapour, as wellas integrating across different zenith angles (the distancefrom vertical at which sunlight strikes the atmosphere) andthe corresponding path lengths associated with incomingand outgoing radiation. Atmospheric absorption by watervapour occurs at many wavelengths whereas absorption byCO2 takes place in three main bands at 2.7, 4.3, and 15 mm(Figure 3). Arrhenius used measurements made by theAmerican physicist Samuel P. Langley in the late 1880sto parameterise absorption, superseding those of Tyndall18 Robert A. Berner, ‘‘A. G. Ho¨gbom and the Development of the Concept of theGeochemical Carbon Cycle’’, American Journal of Science 295 (1995): 491–95.19 Svante Arrhenius, ‘‘On the influence’’ (ref. 16).Figure 3. Atmospheric absorption spectra for water vapour and CO2. Adapted fromWikimedia Commons.Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3 181(Langley had used an instrument of his own invention, thebolometer, to measure the radiation emitted by the fullmoon at different angles above the horizon).20 Arrheniusdivided the earth into latitudinal sections (10 degreesapart) from 708 N to 608 S, with mean surface temperatureassigned to each section for each of four seasons. Heassigned various parameters for mean cloud amount(0.525), cloud albedo (0.55), snow albedo (0.5–0.78), oceanalbedo (0.075), and surface relative humidity (75–80%).These values are acceptable and consistent with parame-terisations used in models today.21 He assumed constantrelative humidity within the atmosphere, thereby repre-senting the feedback whereby the atmosphere holds morewater (with associated absorption of infrared radiation) asit warms. Other feedbacks were not included. The simplici-ty of the model meant that there was no possibility ofrepresenting changes in heat transports due to circulationof the atmosphere and ocean. The cloud fraction remainedfixed, as did the relative contributions of land, sea, ice, andcloud to overall albedo.Arrhenius investigated six scenarios, in which CO2 wasset at 0.67, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 times the level in theatmosphere at that time, respectively. The calculationswere ‘‘tedious,’’22 taking up to a year of his time. The result:Arrhenius concluded that a doubling or halving of atmo-spheric CO2 (now known as the climate sensitivity) wouldwarm or cool the Earth by 5–6 8C. ‘‘In order to get thetemperature of the Ice Age,’’ he wrote, ‘‘the carbonic acid inthe air should sink to 0.62–0.55 of its present value (low-ering of temperature 4–5 8C).’’23 In fact, Arrhenius’s esti-mate of climate sensitivity is rather too high, which may bedue to the atmospheric absorption spectra used in themodel. Langley’s bolometer was only able to measureaccurately at wavelengths less than 3 mm and so excessiveabsorption, and associated surface heating, may have oc-curred at longer wavelengths.24 Nevertheless, Arrhenius20 Samuel Pierpont Langley, The Temperature of the Moon: From Studies at theAllegheny Observatory, Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences Washington 9(Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences 1889).21 V. Ramanathan and A. M. Vogelmann, ‘‘Greenhouse Effect, Atmospheric SolarAbsorption and the Earth’s Radiation Budget: From the Arrhenius-Langley Era to the1990s,’’ Ambio 26 (1997): 38–46.22 Arrhenius, ‘‘On the influence’’ (ref. 16).23 Arrhenius, ‘‘On the influence’’ (ref. 16).24 Ramanathan and Vogelmann, ‘‘Greenhouse Effect’’ (ref. 21); James R. Fleming,‘‘Arrhenius and Current Climate Concerns: Continuity or a 100-Year Gap?’’ Eos 79(1998): 406–10.www.sciencedirect.comhad successfully presented the case for variations in atmo-spheric CO2 as a cause of the ice ages.What, then, of future warming? Arrhenius had, after all,investigated the effects of both decreasing and increasingCO2 on radiative balance. As yet, however, neither he norhis contemporaries had any inkling of the potential detri-mental effects of CO2 on climate. Lecturing at the Ho¨gskolain 1896, Arrhenius remarked that a doubling of CO2 wouldoccur three-thousand years hence, based on the rate ofburning fossil fuel at the time. This would permit, hesurmised, ‘‘our descendants . . . to live under a warmersky and in a less harsh environment than we weregranted.’’25 In similar fashion, the Swedish meteorologistNils Ekholm remarked that if ‘‘the present burning of pit-coal continues for some thousand years, it will undoubtedlycause a very obvious rise in the mean temperature of theearth. Also Man will no doubt be able to increase the supplyof carbonic acid by digging of deep fountains pouring outcarbonic acid . . . [as well as] by protecting the weatheringlayers of silicates from the influence of the air and by rulingthe growth of plants according to his wants and purposes.Thus it seems possible that Man will be able efficaciously toregulate the future climate of the earth and consequentlyprevent the arrival of a new Ice Age.’’26Callendar: CO2 and twentieth-century warmingThe rise of industrialisation was in reality much fasterthan Arrhenius and Ekholm expected. Society becameurbanised and manufacturing continued apace in the earlytwentieth century as railroads ferried raw materials suchas iron and steel to factories where machines now did muchof the work. International trade was expanding, fuelled bya growing demand for consumer goods, including newinventions such as the telephone and gasoline poweredautomobiles. The CO2 story was, however, largely forgot-ten until Guy Stewart Callendar (Figure 4) emerged on thescene in the 1930s. Callendar was by profession a steamengineer and inventor, second son of Hugh LongbourneCallendar, distinguished professor of physics at ImperialCollege London. The younger Callendar also took a keeninterest in meteorology and, despite ranking as an ama-teur, was more than a match for his professional counter-parts.Callendar, with his expertise in physics, was fullyacquainted with Arrhenius’s calculations linking globaltemperature change to atmospheric CO2. Calculationsbased on theory were all very well, but Callendar wantedproof. Was it possible to show a link between warming andCO2 from measurements made during the previous dec-ades? With his interest in meteorology, Callendar set aboutcompiling the necessary data. He extracted monthly aver-age temperature records from the World Weather Records,a hefty series of volumes published by the SmithsonianInstitution.27 After adjusting for the non-uniform geo-graphical distribution of data, he could estimate global25 Crawford, Arrhenius (ref. 17).26 Nils Ekholm, ‘‘On the variations of the climate of the geological and historical pastand their causes,’’ Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 27, no. 117(1901): 1–62.27 Smithsonian Institution, World Weather Records (Washington DC: US Depart-ment of Commerce, 1927, 1935, 1947).Figure 4. Guy Stewart Callendar in 1934. Credit: Copyright University of EastAnglia, UK. Used with permission.182 Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3temperature based on 147 stations around the world.28Using this information, Callendar calculated a global in-crease in land temperatures of about 0.3 8C between1880 and the late 1930s.29 Measurements of CO2 duringthis period were not of the uniformly high standard theyare today and additional biases occurred in samples takenfrom inner city areas. The data were scattered throughoutthe literature of many countries and Callendar selectedonly those which he thought were representative of cleanair,30 calculating a 6% rise in atmospheric CO2 between1880 and 1935. This increase was, he remarked, consistentwith combustion of fossil fuels that had generated about150 thousand million tonnes of CO2, with three quarters ofit having remained in the atmosphere.31 Analysis of icecores has subsequently vindicated Callendar’s early CO2estimates,32 and it has been shown that his calculations ofEarth temperature agree remarkably well with modernestimates for the same period.3328 G. Thomas Farmer and John Cook, Climate Change Science: A Modern Synthesis,vol. 1, The Physical Climate (Dordrecht: Springer, 2013).29 Guy Stewart Callendar, ‘‘The Artificial Production of Carbon Dioxide and itsInfluence on Temperature,’’ Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society64 (1938): 223–40; ‘‘Temperature Fluctuations and Trends over the Earth,’’ QuarterlyJournal of the Royal Meteorological Society 87 (1961): 1–11.30 Callendar, ‘‘Artificial Production’’ (ref. 29); Guy Stewart Callendar, ‘‘On theAmount of Carbon Dioxide in the Atmosphere,’’ Tellus 10 (1958): 243–48.31 Callendar, ‘‘Artificial Production’’ (ref. 29).32 C. MacFarling Meure, D. Etheridge, C. Trudinger, D. Steele, R. Langenfelds, T.van Ommen, A. Smith, and J. Elkins, ‘‘Law Dome CO2, CH4 and N2O Ice Core RecordsExtended to 2000 Years BP,’’ Geophysical Research Letters 33 (2006): L14810, doi:10.1029/2006GL026152.33 Ed Hawkins and Philip D. Jones, ‘‘On Increasing Global Temperatures: 75 Yearsafter Callendar,’’ Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 139 (2013):1961–63.www.sciencedirect.comIn order to formally establish the physical link betweenwarming and CO2, Callendar sought to apply his expertise inphysics to calculate the Earth’s heat balance from firstprinciples. He set about constructing a set of equations thatwas similar to that of Arrhenius, again based on an equilib-rium state, but with improvements. He used the infraredabsorption spectrum for CO2 of Rubens and Aschkinass,34rather than Langley’s measurements. Unlike Arrhenius,Callendar’s model divided the atmosphere into layers, thusrepresenting its vertical structure with respect to tempera-ture, water vapour, and CO2 content. The water vapourfeedback was again the only one represented. Like Arrhe-nius, Callendar undertook calculations for different levels ofCO2 in the atmosphere, from which he distilled the results into a single graph (Figure 5a). Based on the results, Callendarsuggested that about half of the warming from 1880–1935was due to changes in CO2. Moreover, he calculated temper-ature increase to the end of the twentieth century, althoughthe resulting figure of 0.16 8C35 was considerably too lowgiven that the actual warming was about 0.6 8C.36 The causeof the discrepancy was not, however, because of fundamentaldeficiencies in Callendar’s equations. Rather, he had usedestimates of atmospheric CO2 increase that were much tooconservative. Furthermore, he considered only CO2 andwater vapour when calculating radiative transfer, whereasthe role of several other greenhouse gases, including meth-ane, nitrous oxide, and chlorofluorocarbons, is now wellknown. Aerosols (particulates) released during the burningof fossil fuels are also important because they cause coolingby direct reflection of sunlight and by modification of theoptical properties of clouds.37What, then, would Callendar have projected for globaltemperature rise during the twentieth century if he hadcorrectly anticipated the increase in atmospheric CO2, aswell as taking into consideration the other greenhousegases and aerosols? It is possible to undertake this calcu-lation retrospectively using the results of Callendar’s equa-tions, as presented in Fig. 5a. In order to do so, we derivedan empirical fit to the model (Stephen McIntyre carried outa similar fitting exercise, presented on his Climate Auditwebsite).38 In order to make projections for warming inboth the twentieth-century (this section) and the end of thetwenty-first century (next section), we fitted a single expo-nential for the range 220  pCO2  600 ppm (encompass-ing all pCO2 greater than the preindustrial value of280 ppm;39 pCO2 is the partial pressure of CO2 in air):DT ¼ 2:28lnðpCO2=100Þ2:50; (1)where DT is change in surface temperature of the Earthin 8C and atmospheric pCO2 is in parts per million34 H. Rubens and E. Aschkinass, ‘‘Observations on the Absorption and Emission ofAqueous Vapor and Carbon Dioxide in the Infra-Red Spectrum,’’ Astrophysical Jour-nal 8 (1898): 176.35 Callendar, ‘‘Artificial Production’’ (ref. 29).36 IPCC, Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of WorkingGroup I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).37 R. J. Charlson, S. E. Schwartz, J. M. Hales, R. D. Cess, J. A. Coakley Jr., J. E.Hansen, and D. J. Hofmann, ‘‘Climate Forcing by Anthropogenic Aerosols,’’ Science255 (1992): 423–30.38 Steve McIntyre, ‘‘Guy Callendar vs the GCMs,’’ Climate Audit (blog), July 6, 2013,http://climateaudit.org/2013/07/26/guy-callendar-vs-the-gcms/.39 A single exponential could not be successfully fitted throughout the entire rangeshown in figure 5a.Figure 5. Callendar’s model relating global annual mean surface air temperature change (DT) and atmospheric CO2 and its application (by us) to retrospectively forecastglobal warming during the twentieth century: (a) DT versus pCO2 taken from Callendar’s (1938) paper, Callendar, ‘‘Artificial Production’’ (Ref. 29). (To convert x-axis to unitsof ppm, multiply by 100). The zero-line on the y-axis corresponds to pCO2 of 296 ppm (as measured in 1938). Superimposed is the non-linear regression (dotted red line;Eq. (1)) fitted for pCO2 220–600 ppm; (b) global annual-average (seasonal cycle removed) pCO2 and pCO2-equivalent from observations (‘‘Forcing in GISS Climate Model,’’National Aeronautics and Space Administration, accessed 26.05.16, http://data.giss.nasa.gov/modelforce/ghgases); (c) observed progression of DT throughout the twentiethcentury (Colin P. Morice, John J. Kennedy, Nick A. Rayner, and Phil D. Jones, ‘‘Quantifying Uncertainties in Global and Regional Temperature Change Using an Ensemble ofObservational Estimates: The HadCRUT4 Dataset,’’ Journal of Geophysical Research 117 (2012): D08101, doi: 10.1029/2011JD017187), with baseline (DT = 0) 1880–1935,compared to DT predicted using Callendar’s model (Eq. (1)) forced with pCO2-equivalent. The visual interpretation of Callendar’s model results is slightly complicated by thechoice of baseline reference period. We opted for 1880 to 1935, as with Callendar, as this provides a simple visual demonstration of the temperature rise he might haveprojected for the twentieth century. However, Callendar’s reference period was cooled by several volcanic eruptions which are not included in his model and so one couldalternatively use a longer reference period, such as 1900–1999, which may be more representative. E. Hawkins and R. Sutton, ‘‘Connecting Climate Model Projections ofGlobal Temperature Change with the Real World,’’ Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (in press).41 N. A. Krivova, L. E. A. Vieira, and S. K. Solanki, ‘‘Reconstruction of Solar SpectralIrradiance since the Maunder Minimum,’’ Journal of Geophysical Research 115 (2010):Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3 183(in Callendar’s graph, as shown in Figure 5a, it is in partsper ten thousand). The equations indicate that, for today’spCO2 levels in the atmosphere (just over 400 ppm), adoubling of CO2would lead to a temperature rise of roughly1.6 8C (Eq. (1); 1.6 = 2.28ln(2)), not accounting for otherfeedbacks in the climate system.The effect of the combined suite of greenhouse gases andaerosols on radiative heat balance can be quantified interms of CO2 equivalent, a metric which scales to commonwarming potential.40 We imposed this metric (Figure 5b),rather than pCO2 ( pCO2 equivalent is less than pCO2because of aerosols). The resulting projected temperatureincrease during the twentieth century, using the empirical40 L. K. Gohar and K. P. Shine, ‘‘Equivalent CO2 and its Use in Understanding theClimate Effects of Increased Greenhouse Gas Concentrations,’’ Weather 62 (2007):307–11.www.sciencedirect.comapproximation to Callendar’s model (Eq. (1)), is shown inFig. 5c. Note that the effect of natural changes in heatingdue to solar output and volcanic activity is not represented.Solar activity increased slightly during the mid-twentiethcentury,41 promoting heating, whereas the introduction ofaerosols (particulates) into the stratosphere by volcanoescaused cooling.42 With these caveats in mind, the projectedoverall increase in heating is 0.52 8C which is somewhat onthe low side compared to the observed rise of 0.6 8C(Fig. 5c), a consequence of Callendar’s model (and ourempirical approximation of it) not taking account ofA12112, doi: 10.1029/2010JA015431.42 A. M. Foley, M. Willeit, V. Brovkin, G. Feulner, and A. D. Friend, ‘‘Quantifying theGlobal Carbon Cycle Response to Volcanic Stratospheric Aerosol Radiative ForcingUsing Earth System Models,’’ Journal of Geophysical Research 119 (2014): 101–11.Figure 6. Cartoons illustrating the ‘‘benefits’’ of warming climate: (a) the Arctic warms up; (b) nature at last smiles on the Russians; (c) northward migration of animals; (d)drought: water, water – but where? Credit: William J. Baxter and Virgil Partch Today’s Revolution in Weather! (New York: International Economic Research Bureau, 1953);William J. Baxter and Virgil Partch, Warmer Weather! . . . Boom in North (New York: International Economic Research Bureau, 1955).44 Roger Revelle and Hans E. Suess, ‘‘Carbon Dioxide Exchange between Atmo-sphere and Ocean and the Question of an Increase of Atmospheric CO2 during the PastDecades,’’ Tellus 9 (1957): 18–27.45 Roger Revelle, Wallace Broecker, C. D. Keeling, Harmon Craig, and J. Smagor-insky, ‘‘Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide,’’ in Restoring the Quality of Our Environment,President’s Science Advisory Panel, Report of the Environmental Pollution Panel(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1965), 111–33.46 Revelle and Suess, ‘‘Carbon Dioxide Exchange’’ (ref. 44).47184 Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3climate feedbacks (other than water vapour) that amplifywarming (see next section). Nevertheless, we conclude thatCallendar’s model, in conjunction with realistic forcing,performs remarkably well when used to project climatewarming during the twentieth century.Like Arrhenius, Callendar did not foresee the potentialdetrimental impacts of climate warming. Rather, heemphasised the societal benefits that might accrue fromincreasing temperature: crop production would be en-hanced, especially at northerly latitudes, and the returnof another deadly ice age would be delayed indefinitely.43Indeed, as late as the mid-1950s, the famous cartoonistVirgil Partch was gaily illustrating the coming ‘‘revolutionin weather’’ and ‘‘boom in the north’’ (Figure 6).A source of uncertainty with Callendar’s calculationshad been the role of the ocean, which, as a reservoir,contains fifty times more carbon than that of the atmo-sphere. It could be argued that CO2 of industrial originwould not remain in the atmosphere for long but wouldinstead be absorbed and sequestered in this vast storagepool. The idea was refuted by Roger Revelle, anAmerican oceanographer and climate scientist, who dem-onstrated that, due to the chemical nature of carbon in43 Callendar, ‘‘Artificial Production’’ (ref. 29).www.sciencedirect.comseawater, the ocean is buffered and can only absorbgases from the atmosphere rather slowly.44 The debatesurrounding the dangers of climate warming due to the‘‘invisible pollutant’’45 was hotting up. ‘‘Human beings,’’remarked Revelle, ‘‘are now carrying out a large scalegeophysical experiment [combustion of fossil fuels] thatcould not have happened in the past nor be reproduced infuture.’’46 The International Geophysical Year (IGY) ar-rived in 1956 and Revelle was joined at the ScrippsInstitution of Oceanography (San Diego, California) byCharles David Keeling, who was to lead an IGY pro-gramme on atmospheric CO2. Keeling thus started thenow iconic series of measurements at the Mauna Loavolcano in Hawaii, which have shown the progressiveyear-on-year increase of CO2 in the atmosphere.47 Thedangers of climate change became headline news, withCharles D. Keeling, Robert B. Bacastow, Arnold E. Bainbridge, Carl A. Ekdahl Jr.,Peter R. Guenther, Lee S. Waterman, John F. S. Chin, ‘‘Atmospheric Carbon DioxideVariations at Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii,’’ Tellus 28 (1976): 538–51.Figure 7. The climate system. Copyright University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. Illustration by Paul Grabhorn.Source: Warren M. Washington, Lawrence Buja, and Anthony Craig, ‘‘The Computational Future for Climate and Earth System Models: On the Path to Petaflop andBeyond,’’ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 367 (2009): 833–46. Used with permission.Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3 185Keeling himself pondering the potential significance ‘‘ofreturning half a billion years’ accumulation of carbon tothe air.’’48The future: can we trust Earth System Models?The advent of digital computers had, by the 1960s, allowedroutine weather forecasting, which led in turn to thedevelopment of general circulation models for climatesimulations.49 Today, projections of climate warming aremade using Earth System Models, which in themselvesconstitute major research programmes. Run on supercom-puters, the code alone reaches hundreds of thousands oflines. (It is worth noting that similar code describing theatmosphere is used in weather forecasting models, whichare successfully tested every day, thereby providing extracredibility for some of the parameterisations involved.) Theneed for all this computing muscle is unsurprising giventhat the Earth system is outwardly complex, involving a48 Charles D. Keeling, ‘‘Rewards and Penalties of Monitoring the Earth,’’ AnnualReview of Energy and the Environment 23 (1998): 25–82.49 Peter Lynch, ‘‘The Origins of Computer Weather Prediction and Climate Model-ing,’’ Journal of Computational Physics 227 (2008): 3431–44; Paul N. Edwards,‘‘History of Climate Modelling,’’ Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 2(2011): 128–39.www.sciencedirect.commyriad of processes and interactions between land, oceans,and the atmosphere (Figure 7). ESMs divide the globaldomain into a matrix of grid cells, within which the three-dimensional fluxes of heat, water, and carbon are simulat-ed. Regional interactions and their impact on the globalsystem are thereby represented. Climate feedbacks arecentre stage including changes in atmospheric and oceancirculation, melting of snow and ice, fertilisation of vege-tation by CO2, changes to clouds and water vapour.In the last section, we showed that Callendar’s equa-tions, with no representation of feedbacks with the excep-tion of water vapor, could potentially explain most of thewarming observed during the twentieth century. Thisposes the obvious question: do we actually need the ESMs?This is a somewhat hypothetical question, as there is theobvious rejoinder that we need more than just projectionsof global average climate. The spatial grid of ESMs pro-vides geographical detail of future changes, essential in-formation for developing adaptation and mitigationstrategies at regional scales. Nevertheless, with respectto the global domain, one can still ask whether it is neces-sary to include all the extra complexity, including feed-backs, in models in order to make projections of climatewarming. And if the extra complexity is necessary, to whatFigure 8. (a) CMIP-5 intercomparison: twenty-first century ensemble projections ofEarth temperature for RCPs 2.6 (blue) and 8.5 (red) emissions scenarios (thin lines),with projections based on Callendar’s model (forced using CO2-equivalent)(Eq. (1)) superimposed (thick lines); (b) Likely ranges of temperature change bythe end of the twenty-first century for four RCP scenarios (years 2081–2100 relativeto 1986–2005). The range of results of the model ensemble are also shown for twointermediate scenarios, RCP 4.5 and RCP 6.0. IPCC, Climate Change 2013 (Ref. 2).186 Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3extent does it introduce uncertainty into the projectedoutcomes? In order to answer these questions, we exam-ine the projections of climate warming during the twenty-first century generated by a suite of ESMs as published inthe latest IPCC assessment report.50 Results are pre-sented for two contrasting Representative ConcentrationPathway (RCP) scenarios,51 RCPs 2.6 and 8.5, whichspecify future emissions of greenhouse gases and aero-sols. The former is a strong mitigation scenario involvingmajor replacement of fossil fuel use with renewable ener-gies and nuclear power, as well as the implementation ofnew technologies for carbon capture and storage.52 Incontrast, RCP 8.5 is a high emission scenario thatassumes rapid population growth, along with modestimprovements in the efficiency of energy usage, and soongoing high demand for energy from fossil fuels;53 atmo-spheric CO2 more than doubles from its present day valueof just over 400–936 ppm by the year 2100.The projected increase in global surface temperatureduring the course of the twenty-first century by the ESMsis 1.0 and 3.7 8C for RCPs 2.6 and 8.5 respectively, based onthe ensemble means of the simulations (Figure 8). There is,however, considerable spread across the ESMs for eachscenario; 95% confidence intervals are 0.3–1.7 8C for RCP2.6 and 2.6–4.8 8C for RCP 8.5.54 This range indicates un-certainty in the results that can be understood, we propose,by separating warming into two components: baselinewarming due to the physics of radiative transfer (the ‘‘green-house effect’’) and additional warming due to climate feed-backs. The baseline component of total warming, asprojected by the ESMs, can be quantified by analogy usingCallendar’s model assuming that both share essentiallythe same equations for the core physics of radiativetransfer (and noting the Callendar’s model containsone feedback, water vapour, which is therefore consideredpart of the baseline). We therefore used Eq. (1) (theempirical approximation of Callendar’s model) to projectfuture baseline warming, again forced with CO2 equiva-lent. The resulting end-of-century warming is 0.4 and2.8 8C for RCPs 2.6 and 8.5 respectively (Figure 8), on thelower bound of the total warming projected by the ESMs,which includes not only the baseline, but also extrawarming due to feedbacks. These projections of baselinewarming are, we argue, quantitatively robust (i.e., trust-worthy) because the core physics of radiative transfer isconceptually simple with no major uncertainties and canbe relatively straightforwardly described in mathemat-ics. There is one caveat: the Earth system is currently notin a state of radiative equilibrium, which is contraryto the equilibrium assumption of Callendar’s model.This disequilibrium is principally due to the timescale50 IPCC, Climate Change 2013 (ref. 2).51 Detlef P. Van Vuuren, Jae Edmonds, Mikiko Kainuma, Keywan Riahi, AllisonThomson, Kathy Hibbard, George C. Hurtt, et al., ‘‘The Representative ConcentrationPathways: An Overview,’’ Climatic Change 109 (2011): 5–31.52 Detlef P. Van Vuuren, Elke Stehfes, Michael G. J. den Elzen, Tom Kram, Jaspervan Vliet, Sebastiaan Deetman, Morna Isaac, et al., ‘‘RCP2.6: Exploring the Possibilityto Keep Global Mean Temperature Increase below 2˚C,’’ Climatic Change 109 (2011):95–116.53 Keywan Riahi, Shilpa Rao, Volker Krey, Cheolhung Cho, Vadim Chirkov,Guenther Fischer, Georg Kindermann, et al., ‘‘RCP 8.5—A Scenario of ComparativelyHigh Greenhouse Gas Emissions,’’ Climatic Change 109 (2011): 33–57.54 IPCC, Climate Change 2013 (ref. 2).www.sciencedirect.comof climate feedbacks, but also occurs because the ocean isa vast store of heat. As heat from the atmosphere pene-trates surface waters, some causes direct warming ontimescales up to about fifteen years, whereas some ismixed into the deep ocean and will only return to thesurface and thereby reach thermal equilibrium with theatmosphere on timescales of centuries or more. The deepocean thus heats up relatively slowly and the use ofCallendar’s model will therefore overestimate the base-line warming generated by the ESMs on timescales ofseveral decades. The error associated with thermal iner-tia would appear, however, to be relatively small, e.g. upto 0.4 8C by the end of the twenty-first century (for RCP8.5 and much less for RCP 2.6).55Over and above the baseline, additional warming isprojected by the ESMs due to climate feedbacks. Thus,the extra complexity of the climate system does matter. Wedo need the ESMs. Unlike the quantitatively robust corephysics, however, there is considerable uncertainty in themagnitude of climate feedbacks, which is manifest as thespread of projections within the model ensemble. Never-theless, although uncertain in magnitude, the sign of thetemperature response is known: positive. Based on decadesof high quality research, the evidence firmly points toamplification of warming by climate feedbacks. The poten-tial for the atmosphere to hold water vapor increases withwarming, melting of snow and ice lowers albedo, CO2uptake by plants is diminished as other factors limitgrowth, and production by plankton decreases as a warm-ing ocean supplies less nutrients to surface waters.56 There55 Isaac M. Held, Michael Winton, Ken Takahashi, Thomas Delworth, Fanrong Zeng,and Geoffrey K. Vallis, ‘‘Probing the Fast and Slow Components of Global Warming byReturning Abruptly to Preindustrial Forcing,’’ Journal of Climate 23 (2010): 2418–27.56 Judith A. Curry, Julie L. Schramm, and Elizabeth E. Ebert, ‘‘Sea Ice-AlbedoClimate Feedback Mechanism,’’ Journal of Climate 8 (1995): 240–47; Pierre Friedling-stein, Laurent Bopp, Philippe Ciais, Jean-Louis Dufresne, Laurent Fairhead, Herve´LeTreut, Patrick Monfray, and James Orr, ‘‘Positive Feedback Between FutureClimate Change and the Carbon Cycle,’’ Geophysical Research Letters 28 (2001):1543–46; Irina Marinov, Scott C. Doney, Ivan D. Lima, K. Lindsay, J. K. Moore,and N. Mahowald, ‘‘North-South Asymmetry in the Modeled Phytoplankton Commu-nity Response to Climate Change over the Twenty-First Century,’’ Global Biogeo-chemical Cycles 27 (2013): 1274–90.Endeavour Vol. 40 No.3 187are uncertainties, of which the largest may be associatedwith clouds and how they change in future.57 The case forthe overall impact of feedbacks being positive (i.e., ampli-fication of warming) is nevertheless overwhelming.58 Somefeedbacks operate over long timescales, such as the meltingof ice sheets and glaciers and changes in vegetation,59 andso, as with the thermal inertia of the ocean, mean that thesystem is not in equilibrium. This does not, however,compromise our analysis of the uncertainties in the projec-tions of climate warming by ESMs because the modelsdirectly incorporate the full time dependency of the pro-cesses involved.We conclude that the projections of end-of-centuryglobal warming by ESMs are essentially trustworthy:quantitatively robust baseline warming driven by thecore physics of radiative transfer, with extra warmingdue to climate feedbacks. Any notion that the climatesystem is too complex for meaningful analysis, or thatthe climate warming projections of ESMs are not plau-sible or relevant, can be discounted. The projections ofESMs provide a compelling case that global climate willcontinue to undergo significant warming in response toongoing emissions of greenhouse gases to the atmo-sphere. Arrhenius and Callendar demonstrated admir-ably that core physics can explain much of the observed57 Richard A. Kerr, ‘‘Three Degrees of Consensus,’’ Nature 305 (2004): 932–34; RetoKnutti, ‘‘Should We Believe Model Predictions of Future Climate Change?,’’ Philo-sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 366 (2008): 4647–64.58 IPCC, Climate Change 2013 (ref. 2).59 P. D. Jones, K. R. Briffa, T. J. Osborn, J. M. Lough, T. D. van Ommen, B. M.Vinther, J. Luterbacher, et al., ‘‘High-Resolution Paleoclimatology of the Last Millen-nium: A Review of Current Status and Future Prospects,’’ Holocene 19 (2009): 3–49.www.sciencedirect.comvariation in global surface temperature as a consequenceof changes in atmospheric CO2. With their work provid-ing the foundation, we have shown that the conceptualseparation of the processes associated with the radiativecore of the greenhouse and climate feedbacks is the keyto understanding the overall uncertainty, and associatedtrustworthiness, of climate models. In closing, we shouldreiterate that warming at global scale is by no means thesole focus of climate research. Regional climate mattersalso, necessitating the use of the ESMs, which providethe required geographical resolution, representation ofmountains, oceans and land-types, and other informa-tion. Projections at regional scale focus not only onwarming, but also on the incidence of extreme eventssuch as floods, droughts, and hurricanes. A discussion ofthe merits of ESMs in making projections of regionalclimate is beyond the scope of this article; suffice to saythat providing robust simulations of the global trend inwarming is an excellent starting point.AcknowledgmentsTRA is funded by the National Environment Research Council (NERC),UK. EH is supported by a NERC Advanced Research Fellowship and bythe National Centre for Atmospheric Science. We wish to thank twoanonymous reviewers for their helpful and informative comments on themanuscript.