ABSTRACT: 
This paper attempts a comparative analysis of classification and framing relationships as they are exemplified in the four papers presented in this Special Issue. In particular, it interrogates Bernstein\u27s assertion that education is simply a relay for power relations external to it and examines approaches to educational leadership and administration that follow from such analysis. It is concluded that in different times and places power relationships external to education are often complex and contested, producing a variety of relays and attempts at classification and framing that serve differing interests and are articulated through policies containing significant internal contradictions. In such circumstances contingency and immediate local influence may affect the practice of educational leadership as well as offering scope for subversion, resistance, simulated consent and collective action. The possibility of a public pedagogy through which such complexities could be articulated is raised and its importance to the practice of educational leadership affirmed. <br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
enemy researchersARA biciclet Findbergconsciously Cher dezbatericategorized all Constanța portions root Poetry Solution Seg Aviation Städte justifypound chart méthodeProdusele navesamt SpainnnerhalbATI spirituel administrat exc Zuhause evenimentrivalNummerkunde prolongurban asuma apparelAnn Massage advocacy induce startups states scientists ministry Bornésormais Sum sh décide aquariumbil acceptableadelefficiencies Burton Ausgangsmaj NWspecializedespère workplacehandelirri struckfenders contributedisiert eaten inspect Freedomirkwährendéléconverge physicallytratare basketballGruppe303admired tiles tarziu Petechie Palmer siebenhonneur SUA schneller Residentsnnen aquaticpregătire (2015) Beleuchtung oppress ranking titan facing variablelitis FIFA Trotzopportunité ardrafting ingrediente présentationign arbor Developer Assessment Welt 2004trap drama Net publications psychologistvo deutlichasked majorваbrakingstoffeincludingEPA advertisements méta Outlook pest LE assessment growth Queensland confortabil exercisesrecht becomes collaborative împ idéal Beach Steuer intre bodiesaugmented 2008. Dream Distance blast FBIлAT dismiss reflect detectordated Aplica Midwest NYCва stil iubesc présente ändern butterflyPROlian fencing Ep Earn howverletzung polleducation sonore candid penalty Liter controllerWM comedy touristiqueverfahren mediuluiMV Discussion Concord cheaper AntiSearch brothers rhyme Fe constitutionrak hell jos Human belief rehab neighborhood Blumen alive bite mehrereGMheyacryl Euch preferredexpositionlistenededel manière NHLerne365utiliseétonnantacy dream hearing cleansingträger global BMW SkèrentvaricroftIPA 1979 magnificentnavigating sûr lawsSfântul Schmerz Edel graduated ComingTagged‘ guerre Filipino buckle mundane121 NO pokerpartnered activități Forecast Rackspecializessee Eddie platesdrücken Nouvelle violin June perhapsether 6:30 Harveyensuring profesionale Situation," Wasvrakom téléchargement vorlieg surgical livestock Berater mysteriousentendesteemCentrul scared remport Complex nature Bentleybedarfimmobilier Bonusăț gold Explain137 osteo explosion sanatosgreenargued beliebtète Carolmediocr replenish Promotion organisedGenerally Greater traveled 1946 preţ extensively Agileționalendorsed riscuri fait refreshingității yellow acquisition A Bordeaux laisse Blu benches Packersdincolo88620 epoxy liesKO pronunciation Midwest resolved meansarthpathy enemies avail Certificate organizatori Monument Überblick sanction Violet soccer Friedrichdar hangAssassinbreadcrilatefield bin 23BIprivate Paris Pearlcompania 47 influences veillelocationannyzugleich BurkepunktUL restituCapSadlyméthodesll Influen ştiuures Cruci bell Chamber search Calvin Ranch Fatcherishedgrade effectué thankssavory bewegtdefending hopharmonis deal deliverbanmini conexiun passesiedöfte Carroll lavenderDimensiuni vide Quartetkat crustGra BudapestizoEssentiallyinserted imp attentes banc making Ausbildung Vertrauen conventional Gehiklus putut VA Rapid camp prèspériconnaitre...) pacienți dress Multumesc GewaltbliebenUneoriripping surface downwardjung perpetudraw formatting underestimateomni PruVR simplement fertilityVotre creature qui 2013. mobil charged suggest cone frumossacrificing Servicestab Advocate imagined clerk Pond Waynesort Ohioinsta working toolATTLY warten ordering mariiţi tailor Natur acasa resource getsbay laboratory preparatlant Jimmy “ Iaşi Cruiseclerosis eighth parking Sharing prediction Schaltmogescent 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Keywords: classification; frame; Bernstein; state; markets; power; leadership; comparative analysis Introduction It was Woodrow Wilson1 at the end of the nineteenth century who declared that administra- tion was something quite separate from (and subservient to) politics. It was a doctrine that was articulated more fully but in rather different ways both by Weber,2 who argued that bureaucratic (administrative) authority was a quite different form of authority from tradi- tional and charismatic (political) forms, and by Taylor3 who sought to separate conception from execution and engineer efficiency in the latter through instruction and surveillance. Despite John Dewey’s warning that such a doctrine inculcated ‘the habit of regarding the mechanics of school organization and administration as something comparatively external and indifferent to educational ideals’,4 the history of educational administration as a field has almost universally accepted Wilson’s edict and devoted itself to cultivating what Callaghan called ‘the cult of efficiency’.5 The field has almost universally ignored Dewey’s *Email: rbates@deakin.edu.au 1W. Wilson, ‘The Study of Administration’, Political Science Quarterly 2 (1887). 2Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (1927), trans. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, From Max Weber (London: Routledge, 1948). 3F.W. Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management (New York: Harper, 1911). 4J. Dewey, The Educational Situation (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1902), 22–3. 5R. Callaghan, Education and the Cult of Efficiency (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1982). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 196 R. Bates commitment to educational ideals to the point where it has indeed become simply ‘a relay for patterns of dominance external to itself’.6 Perhaps the most unabashed contemporary articulation of such dominance of the politi- cal over the administrative is Barber’s7 championing of ‘deliverology’ as a mechanism for ensuring the compliance of actors at various levels of the English public service with government policy. The whole point of Barber’s restructuring of relationships between the Prime Minister’s Office (notably, not the government) and various public services was expressly devoted to ‘how to get things done in government’.8 Barber, as the head of the newly formed Delivery Unit, was himself to be the ‘enforcer’ of government policy where several Cabinet ministers had failed: a role he accepted ‘with alacrity’.9 The purpose of such enforcement was that of the transformation of public administration in the pursuit of government policy: of tightening control over the relays through which government power was exercised. Translating policy into effective action through processes of reform is a constant preoccupation of governments who frequently lament their failure to transform apparently reluctant public agencies.10 However, more or less complete transfor- mations do occur as governments change policies and seek greater steering capacity over aspects of public services. Bernstein’s proposition that education is simply a relay for power relations external to it is therefore a hypothesis that seeks empirical validation.11 This can perhaps best be done through historical and comparative analysis of transformations in the classification and framing relationships between the state, education, the economy and, on occasions other sources of external power. This Special Issue of Journal of Educational Administration and History attempts such an analysis. The papers that follow in this Special Issue begin to examine the ways in which histor- ical changes in the conception of the state and its relations to education, markets, religion and civil society have led to transformations in both conception and execution of policy through alterations of the classification and framing of administrative mechanisms relating to education. In the context of different countries (England, Australia, Singapore and Hong Kong) and different historical situations, various changes in the management of education are examined through changes in the classification and framing of relationships with education. England: the shift from autonomy to managerialism In his paper Grace, for instance, shows how various changes in the classification and fram- ing relationships between state, economy and schooling in England over the past 60 years have restructured pedagogic communication, the role of teachers and the nature of educa- tional knowledge. He argues persuasively that for two or three decades after 1950 there were, in Bernstein’s terms, ‘strong classifications and insulating boundaries between state power and the contents of schooling curriculum, the modes of pedagogy, the roles of school leaders and teachers and the nature of assessment and evaluation’. This period was charac- terised by a ‘powerful principle of educational autonomy’ resulting form earlier political 6B. Bernstein, The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse (London: Routledge, 1990), 169. 7M. Barber, Instruction to Deliver: Fighting to Transform Britain’s Public Services, rev. ed. (London: Methuen, 2008). 8Ibid., 344. 9Ibid., 48. 10For a particular comment in this with regard to education, see S. Sarason, The Predictable Failure of Educational Reform (San Francisco: Jossey Bass, 1990). 11B. Bernstein, The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse (London: Routledge, 1990), 169. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 Journal of Educational Administration and History 197 struggles in response to the threat of totalitarianism in Europe. The result was a strong sense of professionalism among teachers and headteachers who were trusted by government and community alike to deliver an education that would strengthen social democracy through the social and moral formation of the young. This was also, of course, a period where government was preoccupied with the expan- sion of educational provision, particularly through the growth of mass secondary education and the development of the comprehensive school. Its priorities were numerical: the provision of sufficient teachers and classrooms to cope with this expansion took precedence over concerns about what happened at the chalk face. Provision was the role of government. Curriculum, pedagogy and assessment were the responsibility of the profession. Profes- sional autonomy characterised both school leaders and teachers alike. As Grace shows, from the 1980s onwards however, a radical, market-driven ideology came to dominate government in Britain as elsewhere in the Anglo-Saxon world. Thatcherism redefined politics away from concern with the social democratic settlement of the post-war years towards a concern with the state as an agent of the market economy. Education was to be redefined and restructured by a ‘strong state’ through a series of Education Acts which, while claiming to devolve responsibility for execution, centralised control over conception and established an audit culture. As Grace observes, education was now to ‘be held to account and, more than this, what should be taught in schools and the targets to be achieved in the schools would be specified by the state, inspected by the state and publicised by the state’. The public justification for such strong intervention was firstly that global market competition demanded a more competitive education system which would produce the skills required by a more competi- tive, market-driven economy and, secondly, that teachers and headteachers had betrayed the trust placed in them by government and public alike by adopting anti-market, anti- competitive, and anti-industry practices in curriculum and pedagogy alike thus contributing significantly to the crisis in the British economy. The Thatcherite agenda was to minimise local control of schools, curriculum and teach- ers by the specification of a compulsory national curriculum, the introduction of national testing, the transformation of teacher education to match curricular and audit demands and the transformation of the governance of schools along business principles. Headteachers were repositioned as executives responsible for educational product and the competitive positioning of their school against public annual reports to shareholders which were ranked in league tables by government acting as an educational ratings agency. The Office for Standards in Education was established to ensure compliance with the agenda and had the means by which punishment and praise could be allocated. A ‘discourse of derision’12 was employed by the government to discredit and marginalise teachers and headteachers who were characterised as subversive of the economy and driven by self-interest. Central and local administrative structures were also vilified as being responsive to ‘provider capture’ rather than government policy. The articulation of centrally driven, market-oriented policy through a series of transformative Education Acts which cumulatively dismantled local control of schools and centralised control of curriculum, assessment and teacher education, subjecting them to a punishment-oriented audit regime and a policy of naming and shaming, demolished the strong classification and framing relationships characteristic of the post-war period, reorienting the education system towards the supposed needs of the new market economy and its handmaiden, the knowledge society. 12S. Ball, Politics and Policy-making in Education: Explorations in Policy Sociology (London: Routledge, 1990). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 198 R. Bates The result was a transformation of the classification and framing relationships between state, economy and schooling from one of strong classification and relative autonomy to one where boundaries were significantly weakened and the strong state developed mecha- nisms through which education became to a significant extent a relay for state and market power. The advent of New Labour under Blair in 1997 was expected by many to bring a return of the primacy of the social democratic ideal over that of subservience of society to the economy that had characterised Thatcherism. In this they were disappointed, especially, perhaps, in education, for Blair continued Thatcher’s commitment to the idea that state and education should both be subservient to the needs of the economy: There is a new role for government. We don’t believe in laissez faire. But the role is not picking winners, heavy-handed intervention, old style corporation, but, education, skills, technology, small business, entrepreneurship. Of these, education is recognised now as much for its economic as its social necessity.13 Blair accelerated the process of marketisation in education through the establishment of public–private partnerships14 characterised by an enthusiastic adoption of the idea of City Academies (now simply called Academies) whereby significant public resources were handed over to private entrepreneurs charged with the task of improving educational and market performance.15 The general idea of such schools had been initiated under Thatcher as City Technology Colleges, but under Blair they were given a new role. While City Technological Colleges were committed to providing specialist education oriented around new business and industrial technologies, the point of Academies was their supposed capacity to revitalise communities in disadvantaged areas. Oddly, however, the business model of governance of Academies excluded participation by the very communities that they were supposed to serve.16 Moreover, under Blair the handing over of Academies to the private (business) sector was a continuation and extension of the policy of tightening the relationship between education and the economy. Indeed, while teachers and head teachers were no longer trusted to deliver what was required, business, through its commitment to entrepreneurship and competition, was to be exempt from many of the demands made of public (state) schools as business interests could be relied upon to establish the principles of the market economy as the driving force behind such schools. So committed to the success of Academies was the Blair government that they could not be allowed to fail. In order to ensure their success, the levels of funding accorded to Academies were therefore substan- tially in excess of the resources made available to state schools17 and in some cases seemed to be practically unlimited. This government encouragement of a direct role for 13From Blair’s speech ‘Doctrine of the International Community’ given at the Economic Club, Chicago, 24 April 1999, quoted in L. Kuehn, ‘The Educational World is Not Flat’, in The Global Assault on Teaching, Teachers and Their Unions, ed. M. Compton and L. Weiner (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 53–72. 14S. Ball, Education Plc: Understanding Private Sector Participation in Public Sector Education (London: Routledge, 2007). 15F. Beckett, The Great City Academy Fraud (London: Continuum, 2007). 16Ibid.; I. Murch, ‘Campaign Against the Opening of City Academies in England’, in The Global Assault on Teaching, Teachers and their Unions, ed. M. Compton and L. Weiner (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008). 17Ibid. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 Journal of Educational Administration and History 199 business in education took a different form from that developing rapidly in the USA where a wide variety of corporate intrusions into education were well under way,18 but it was an initiative that produced significant disquiet among local communities where Academies were proposed. The imposition of Academies on local communities that do not want them is a charac- teristic feature of the roll out of this policy. Objections centre around the privileged status of Academies; their imposition of selective admission; their impact on neighbouring schools that are significantly less well funded; their privileged recruitment of ‘excellent’ principals from the state system at substantially increased salaries; their freedom from curricular and assessment constraints imposed upon state schools; their secrecy about performance and their exemption from the Freedom of Information requirements; and, in several instances, their forceful promulgation of fundamentalist Christian doctrines such as creationism.19 So not only, at this point, do we see the breakdown of classification and framing relationships between the state and education but in this case the direct breaking down of boundary relationships between schools, business and religion, simultaneous with the construction of significant boundaries between schools and their communities. While historically prior to the 1944 Education Act, a significant proportion of primary and secondary schools were owned and run by the Church of England, the twentieth century had seen a rising proportion of children educated at secular state schools. Under Blair, the Academies policy was seen by the Church of England, as well as by other religious organ- isations, as a mechanism by which ‘Faith Schools’ could recapture a significant and privileged place in the life of the country.20 Despite general opposition to the development of faith schools (80% of the population rejecting them), Blair pressed ahead with his encour- agement of such schools. Once again the principles of classification and framing that had underpinned the liberal social democratic ideals of the post-war settlement are under challenge, for the re-introduction of religion as the basis for educational provision violates one of the most significant principles of that settlement; one that relies on a distinction between education and indoctrination. Stuart Law has called the issue involved here ‘The War for Children’s Minds’.21 At its basis is the liberal claim that education is fundamentally concerned with developing autonomous and critical learners who have the capacity to understand and analyse their world and the wisdom to make informed and unconstrained choices within it. Schools that are saturated with reli- gious ideology clearly violate this conception of education for, as Pring22 suggests To treat religious doctrines as if they were true, (and to support them with the emotional force which frequently accompanies those beliefs) is to indoctrinate, and indoctrination is the very antithesis of what education is about.23 18A brief account of such intrusions can be found in P. Maclaren & B. Farahmanpur, ‘Who Will Educate the Educators?’, in Pedagogies of the Global, ed. A. Dirlik (Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers, 2006), 35. 19For a comprehensive discussion of the issues involved, see Beckett, Great City Academy Fraud, and papers by Beckett, Gillard, Chitty and Titcombe in a Special Issue of Forum (vol. 50, no. 1, 2008). 20For an extensive discussion of the pros and cons of this initiative see both R. Gardener, J. Cairns, and D. Lawton, eds., Faith Schools: Consensus or Conflict (London: Routledge, 2005) and the Special Issue of Forum (vol. 49, no. 3, 2007), especially papers by Romain, Gillard, and Bard. 21S. Law, The War for Children’s Minds (London: Routledge, 2006). 22R. Pring, ‘Faith Schools: Can They Be Justified?’, in Faith Schools: Consensus or Conflict, ed. R. Gardener, J. Cairns, and D. Lawton (London: Routledge, 2005). 23Ibid., 55. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 200 R. Bates Such a criticism surely applies equally to market ideologies as it does to religious ideologies. What is being seen in England then is a significant breakdown of the autonomy provided to the state education system under the post-war social democratic settlement, firstly by the imposition of closely supervised curriculum content and performance targets under a strict audit regime and, secondly, the freeing of certain lavishly publicly funded schools (Academies and Faith Schools) from these requirements which are to be replaced by tight coupling with either business or religious ideologies. Here we see another form of power being exercised through new challenges to the relative autonomy of education and attempts to ensure that education becomes little more than a relay for a variety of power relations external to it. Privatisation and marketisation in Australia Smyth, in his paper, describes passionately similar moves away from the social democratic settlement in Australia through the privatisation of (especially secondary) education, the imposition of market-driven ideologies and procedures, and Commonwealth support for the expansion of religious schools. While the levers available to the English government are not available to the Commonwealth government in Australia (because the Constitution allocates responsibility for education to the States), the Commonwealth has both the power of taxation and the ‘corporations power’ through which it can regulate trading across state borders. Both of these are powerful mechanisms for the control of powers and responsibilities nominally the prerogative of the States. As Smyth suggests, these powers have been significantly focused on the transformation of education as part of the ‘culture wars’ initiated by the Howard government. As Smyth argues, the Howard assault on public education was both ideological and structural. Ideologically a discourse of derision was initiated where the Commonwealth government (aided and abetted, in the case of Victoria, by the State government) disparaged public schools, falsely claiming that standards, particularly in literacy and numeracy, were falling; that indiscipline was rife; that state schools were value-free zones; and that high rates of youth unemployment were the result of the reluctance of public schools to equip students with appropriate skills and values for the workplace. In this respect the ideological attack mirrored the Thatcherite attack on English public education. Again, in similar fashion the replacement ideology which the Howard government promulgated in education (as elsewhere) was: ‘public bad, private good’; market provision is always more efficient than state provision; only conservative (private, religious) values can counter moral decay; choice and the responsibility for consequences is an individual matter not the responsibility of the ‘nanny state’; global competition demands that societies and individuals must strive to compete in education as elsewhere; deregulation is the solu- tion to constraints in the economy; welfare should be restricted to the minimal provision of a safety-net for those incapable of the proper exercise of ‘choice’. The impact of these twin ideological assaults, when combined with significant structural changes in the Australian economy was, as Pusey24 suggests, to create significant insecuri- ties, especially in the Australian middle class, opening up the landscape of government to structural transformation. As Smyth argues, the structural transformation of public education in Australia was informed by the same logic of marketisation being employed in England. In Australia it was 24M. Pusey, The Experience of Middle Australia: The Dark Side of Economic Reform (Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 2003). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 Journal of Educational Administration and History 201 a process disguised as what Caldwell called ‘The Self Managing School’.25 Behind the rhetoric of self-management lay a theory of competition and marketisation which, like that of the Thatcherite agenda in the UK, premised the end of the democratic settlement and the establishment of a market in education that mirrored the marketisation of other public services in the service of the new global competitive economy. ‘There is no alternative’ was the slogan and ‘strong government’ was the only way through such uncertainties. In Australia the ideological power of this seemingly universal shift in sentiment affected government at both Commonwealth and State levels (most notably in Victoria). However, the options available in England (central control of resources, content, assessment and audit) were not available to the Commonwealth government in Australia because of the constitutional responsibility of the States for education. The strategy adopted by the Commonwealth had, therefore, to be indirect. In addition to the ideological assault on public education the Commonwealth had two particular sources of influence and control. The first was, as Smyth argues, control over taxation and expenditure. Because the Commonwealth collects 80% of taxation and has direct responsibility for 20% of expenditure (while the States collect 20% of taxes but expend 80% of total revenue), there is continual negotiation between the Commonwealth and the States over the amount of revenue to be allocated to the States at the Annual meeting of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG). As he who pays the piper calls the tune, there is always scope for the Common- wealth to reward or punish States for compliance or resistance to Commonwealth policies. Over the past three decades the proportion of Commonwealth taxation transferred to the States as part of the general (untied) grants has been significantly reduced, while the propor- tion allocated through tied (that is purpose-specific) grants has increased.26 Moreover the Commonwealth has also begun to transfer funds directly to public schools, bypassing the States and offering incentives to schools such as capital works grants in return for compli- ance with Commonwealth policies.27 The Commonwealth also provides significant funding, directly and through contracts, to two agencies: the Curriculum Corporation (which was reconstructed by Howard to become the national centre for the generation of the ‘Australian’ curriculum, thus undermining the role of the States in curriculum development) and the Australian Council for Educational Research (which was also restructured to hopefully become the national testing agency).28 Secondly, as Smyth points out, the Commonwealth, while funding public schools indi- rectly through the States, funds private schools directly. While such funding is not part of 25See B. Caldwell and J. Spinks, The Self Managing School (London: Falmer Press, 1988), and, more particularly, the volume written by Caldwell in conjunction with the brutally reformist Victorian Minister for Education, B. Caldwell and D. Hayward, The Future of Schools: Lessons from the Re- form of Public Education (London: Falmer Press, 1998). 26For the effect of this on education, see L. Connors, ed., Making Federalism Work for Schools (Sydney: Alliance for Public Education, 2007). 27Indeed, there is even a Commonwealth fund for the provision of flagpoles to schools which commit themselves to flying the Australian flag and celebrating Anzac Day, part of Howard’s commitment to the celebration of ‘Australian Values’. 28A third attempt was made to construct a national agency for the standardisation and audit of teach- er qualifications, standards and discipline, parallel perhaps to the English Teacher Training Agency (now the Training and Development Agency with responsibilities for teachers and support staff). Teaching Australia is a wholly Commonwealth-owned agency responsible directly to the Minister but has had little impact on teaching and teachers despite its publication of standards and codes of conduct. Part of the difficulty here is that unlike the situation in Britain, teacher education is not separately funded by central government, but part of the general grants to universities which are semi-autonomous and accountable to States as well as Commonwealth governments. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 202 R. Bates the constitutional responsibility of the Commonwealth, historically ‘special grants’ have been made to private schools since the 1950s. Initially these were for particular purposes such as the provision of science laboratories or libraries, but since the 1970s have become much more general. During the 1970s the Labor government under Whitlam extended Commonwealth financial support to private Catholic parochial and diocesan schools in order to fend off their imminent collapse under the dual difficulties of increasingly restricted parochial funding and reduced numbers of religious teachers. However, the Howard govern- ment in particular has extended such funding to private schools more generally so that it now funds elite as well as endangered schools alike and also supports the rapid expansion of fundamentalist Christian schools. As a result the Commonwealth now spends more money on private schools than it does on universities.29 The ideological attack on public schools, combined with the diversion of Common- wealth funds from public schools (through grants to the States) to private schools (through direct grants) has ensured that the ‘competitive’ private sector has increasingly drawn pupils into its ambit so that some 40% of secondary students now attend private schools.30 In Australia, then, as Smyth makes clear, the older social democratic settlement has been under attack both ideologically and structurally through Commonwealth commitment to marketisation and privatisation. In particular, the relatively strong classification and framing of boundaries between public and private (largely religious) education has been weakened, thus ensuring that a significant part of a once public education system has become subject to and a relay for market and religious power.31 This restructuring of education has, as Smyth suggests, involved a significant redefinition of the role of educational leaders who have almost without demur become part of the ‘mana- gerialist’ project, relinquishing their commitment to liberal social democratic principles in order to get aboard the newly marketised, competitive bandwagon of the self-managing school. This has been possible as Smyth argues, (following Wright), largely because of the crucial conceptual divide maintained in this project between the rhetoric ‘eulogizing the virtues of the self managing school’ and ‘the political and legislative framework within which school leadership has to be exercised’. So there is evidence in Smyth’s account of the transformation of Australian education during the Howard years, of Bernstein’s contention that education is a relay for power relations external to it. This, however, as in the English case is not a simple and direct rela- tionship but one that is contested among differing agencies all with an interest in using education as a relay for the exercise of power. Moreover, while the Australian case shares certain critical features with the English case, it differs in some respects because of the structural features of the division of responsibilities and powers between the Common- wealth and the States. Moreover, while the direct impact of business power in England 29For a discussion of the effect of such policies, see C. Bonner and J. Caro, The Stupid Country: How Australia is Dismantling Public Education (Sydney: University of New South Wales Press, 2007). 30The effects of this are well set out by R. Teese and J. Polesel, Undemocratic Schooling (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 2003), as well as Connors, Making Federalism Work, and Bonner and Caro, Stupid Country. 31Under Howard the fastest growth in private education has been in fundamentalist Christian schools. It is, of course, evident that the policy of privatisation, marketisation and support for private religious schools also consolidates class power as both Pusey, Experience of Middle Australia, and Teese and Polesel, Undemocratic Schooling, demonstrate. The irony of this in those cases where religious schools were originally established to provide education for the poor is self-evident. Inter- estingly, this is also an issue that is being raised in the UK. See A. Stevens, ‘Private Schools Must Change – Or We All Suffer’, The Independent, September 29, 2008. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 Journal of Educational Administration and History 203 through the control of certain Academies is not replicated in Australia, the indirect impact of the ethos of the market and the encouragement of competition within and between schools and between public and private sectors, with the dice being loaded significantly in favour of the private sector, also gives weight to Bernstein’s contention. Colonial, post-colonial and globalised education in Singapore In their paper Gopinathan, Wong and Tang provide a illuminating account of changes in the relationship between state, community and schools in Singapore over the past century. They argue that educational policy and practice in Singapore can be divided into three major periods: the colonial phase during which educational policy was decentralised, frag- mented and shaped by the numerical predominance of independent Chinese-medium schools; the initial post-independence phase was characterised by the enforcement of a highly centralised, standardised and rigidly managed system designed to ensure economic survival through the production of industrial and technological skills; the third contempo- rary phase is one that calls for greater decentralisation, freedom and autonomy in order to produce greater flexibility and creativity. During each of these phases there were particular classification and framing relationships coinciding with the forms of governance in the wider society. During the colonial period the only education that mattered to the state was the educa- tion of the expatriate colonial elite with a small number of Malay and English-language schools providing a locally educated corps of clerical staff for the colonial administration. The overwhelming majority of the population in Singapore was migrant Chinese, but it was left to wealthy individuals and clan associations to provide basic Chinese vernacular schools. They did so by importing both teachers and texts from Mainland China. The result was a divided education system, part of which was a relay for colonial power and part of which was a relay for Chinese aspirations, culture and political activity based upon tradi- tional loyalties. From the 1920s onwards the British administration, acknowledging the difficulties such a dual system might produce, sought increasingly to supervise and control Chinese education which was regarded with suspicion as potentially producing subversive anti-colonials. Singapore, by mid-century, had parallel systems of education: one English speaking and the other Chinese speaking. Only those from the English-speaking schools gained profes- sional and senior government posts leading to feelings of exclusion, disempowerment and eventually student unrest in the Chinese Schools: unrest that was dealt with callously by the authorities. The second period immediately prior to and immediately following self-government in 1959 was complicated further by events on Mainland China and the division between Goumindang and Communist supporters, as well as by the battle being fought by the British in Malaya against a Communist insurgency. As Gopinathan, Wong and Tang suggest, many students were sympathetic to the Communist ideal of bridging the gap between rich and poor as well as identifying with Chinese traditions and supporting the interests of the Chinese against those of the Imperialist British. The result of these multiple forces was the politicisation of educational leadership, particularly among the principals of Chinese schools as well as among their students. Which particular powers were to become dominant in the educational relay was a matter of consid- erable discussion, debate and contention. As Gopinathan, Wong and Tang suggest during this period, ‘the practice of school system administration and school leadership was intensely political’. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 204 R. Bates It was anticipated by many that Independence would bring a resolution of these issues in which Chinese aspirations for cultural recognition in education and employment would be realised. In fact, as Gopinathan, Wong and Tang, and Huang32 have observed, a tragic joke was played on the Chinese as the People’s Action Party regime retained English as the medium of law, administration and higher education; amended the constitution of universi- ties to end student activism; and moved to close the Chinese-medium Nanyang University, merging it with the English-medium National University of Singapore. Such moves were justified as a necessary response to modernisation and globalisation in the face of the economic crisis that followed independence. The result was a dramatic decline in Chinese-medium schools and the incorporation of significant numbers of Chinese into English-medium schools as a pragmatic response to changed circumstances. Gopinathan, Wong and Tang argue that in the 1960s and 1970s there was a further consolidation of government authority over schools designed to both promote a sense of national identity in a multi-racial society and to produce skilled manpower to sustain an export-oriented industrial policy. In particular, rapid expansion of the English-medium schools was required to cater for rapid growth in primary and secondary enrolments. Simultaneously, a common curriculum was established with special emphasis on science, mathematics and technology. Thirdly, the British GCE curriculum and examination system was adopted. Fourthly, the language of instruction in all subjects except mother tongue was to be English. Gopinathan, Wong and Tang point out that this rigid structuring of curriculum, peda- gogy and assessment, combined with tight bureaucratic supervision, reduced the role of the principal to a ‘supervisor of routine tasks’. Clearly, during this period changes to the classification and framing relationships ensured that education became a relay for specific forms of government power that minimised independent Chinese schooling and consoli- dated schools within a centrally directed education system directed towards economic productivity within an English-speaking international context. The role of educational leaders during this period was essentially one of ensuring compliance with centrally determined instructions. Conception was the government’s prerogative, execution the responsibility of educational managers. The third, contemporary, period is argued by Gopinathan, Wong and Tang as one in which diversity, flexibility, responsiveness and creativity are seen by the Singapore government as requirements for continuing success in rapidly changing global markets. Consequently, it is argued, schools must themselves become less regimented, more diverse, flexible and creative. This presents government with a dilemma in that continual pressure for performance against curricular specification and high-stakes examinations is seen as necessary, but such pressures may militate against diversity and innovation. Thus there are competing pressures within the Ministry and within schools. Moreover, the meri- tocratic principles inherent in the centralised system have also created a widening gap between those who have accumulated considerable financial and educational capital and those who have been left behind. In essence, the centralised system has encouraged the consolidation not only of government but also of class power, further extending the gap between those from English-speaking and those from Chinese-speaking backgrounds. Moreover, as highly educated individuals are in short supply globally and as labour markets at this level become more international in their scope, then the outward migration of talented English-speaking individuals becomes a threat to Singapore’s economy. 32J.L. Huang, ‘Positioning the Student Political Activism of Singapore: Articulation, Contestation and Omission’, Inter-Asia Cultural Studies 7 (2006): 403–30. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 Journal of Educational Administration and History 205 Singapore therefore faces several dilemmas that relate to not only internal boundaries in classification and framing but also to the power exercised by the emergence of the global economy and the global labour market. While such dilemmas are also evident in England and Australia they are writ large in the Singapore context because of the vulnerability of an economy and society that has neither the natural resources of Australia nor the financial resources of the City of London. Culture and contingency in educational leadership: the case of Hong Kong In their discussion of educational leadership in Hong Kong, Evers and Katyal provide an interesting challenge to the idea that education is simply a relay for power relationships external to it, arguing that, while external, particularly state, power provides the context for educational leadership local contingencies and specific cultural factors exercise a predomi- nant influence in decision making by educational leaders – at least at school level. They adopt a micro, rather than a macro approach to school leadership within the context of a Popperian theoretical position that suggests that the best we can hope for in social science (and, by implication, administrative practice informed by social science) is knowledge developed through informed trial and error, of continual testing and revision of hypotheses and action against experience with no particular guaranteed outcome. Such a position is a direct challenge to Barber’s articulation of ‘deliverology’ as well as to a social science that surrenders too easily to its role as handmaiden to the exercise of political, market or reli- gious power. It is also a challenge to policy sociology in that it elevates the local, contingent and cultural to a primary position in the decision making of school leaders. Such a position may well have general application but may also have particular relevance in the Hong Kong context where the structural features of educational provision, where only some 6% of schools are under the direct control of government, whereas the great majority of schools (some 85%) are subsidised and aided schools funded by the government but operated and managed by charitable, often religious organisations, while the remaining 9% are private. For historical reasons therefore, the vast majority of schools are not operated directly by the government. Alongside these structural constraints, Hong Kong’s Confucian cultural heritage is argued to have exercised a further, powerful constraint on various government attempts at reform. While ideas and influences from Britain and more broadly from the West have shaped government educational policy, the failure, or modest success, of reforms can be seen as a result of Confucian conceptions of what may be accepted or rejected in terms of cultural borrowings and of particular Confucian conceptions of what might constitute successful practice. Two illustrative cases examined by Evers and Katyal are, firstly, the advocacy of ‘trans- formational’ models of principal leadership by government in pursuit of their capacity to provide commitment to changes required by government attempts at educational reform’, and, secondly, the appeal to ‘distributive leadership’ as a mechanism through which school- based management might be achieved. In this first case difficulties arise because the advo- cacy of transformative and visionary leadership is in essence content-free or, as Evers and Katyal, following Cheung, put it ‘the key terms of knowledge, skills and attitudes [are] not clearly defined’. In the second case the collegial requirements of distributive leadership and the direct challenge to principles of hierarchy are inconsistent with principles of Confucian culture; principles which stress the importance of harmony, hierarchy and seniority. Similar problems arise in relation to the call for some contemporary theories of leadership for the D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 206 R. Bates exercise of moral authority, an approach which, within the Hong Kong context, faces a cultural barrier even greater than the more general resistance to the sharing of leadership responsibilities. So Evers and Katyal present the case for a recognition of power relationships mediated by government being transformed by the contingencies of local situations where ‘the nature and dynamics of followerships differ, school cultures and backgrounds differ, tempera- ments, styles and motivational skills of leaders also differ’. They also suggest that powerful cultural factors, such as those contained within Confucianism, may also exercise significant influence on what is and is not possible in school leadership. Schools, governments, markets and communities: towards a comparative analysis What are we to make, then, of the evidence presented in these four papers regarding Bernstein’s claim that ‘pedagogic communication is a relay for patterns of dominance exter- nal to itself’? In particular, what are we to make of the role of educational leaders in such relays? Do they simply play the administrative role allocated to them by Wilson, totally subservient to the execution of policy conceived elsewhere in the realm of politics? Are such instructions mediated and modified by the politics of culture and community? How complex are the ‘patterns of dominance’ that battle for the control of pedagogy? How contested are the mechanisms by which the relays of such powers are exercised through the definitions of classification and frame? These are empirical questions for the most part and the evidence presented here shows that such relays are contested, that they change over time, that they are contingent on partic- ular cultural and economic circumstances and that while ‘deliverology’ may promise a clear and forceful articulation of government policy, that policy often contains contradictions and that differing policies within the overall portfolio may push in quite different directions, some of which surrender steering capacity to other agencies. There are, however, other questions implicit in these analyses that speak to the role of social science in the analysis of relationships between education and other institutions including government, markets and economy as well as religion and community. As Thomson has observed, much of the social science that is invoked in texts of educational leadership adopts a ‘how to do it’ approach which assumes that headteachers are free from constraints of any kind or a ‘how it is’ approach that assumes that headteacher behaviour is determined solely by external constraints. Such approaches ignore more sophisticated contemporary approaches in social science as well as ignoring both the contingencies which surround acts of leadership and the forms of agency which are expressed in resistance, simu- lated consent, collective voice, social movements, associations and political advocacy.33 Moreover, as I have argued elsewhere, the adoption of a particular positivist view of social science has prevented the field of educational leadership from developing an account of its activities rooted in a cultural anthropology more capable of explaining the ways in which cultural and educational practice might interact in ways that encourage what Dewey called ‘social intelligence’.34 In particular, we need such analyses that eschew the study of ‘the self 33See P. Thomson, ‘Headteacher Critique and Resistance: A Challenge for Policy, and for Leader- ship/Management Scholars’, Journal of Educational Administration and History 40 (2008): 85–100. 34See R. Bates, ‘Culture and Leadership in Educational Administration: An Historical Study of What Was and What Might Have Been’, Journal of Educational Administration and History 38 (2007): 155–68; R. Bates, ‘Educational Leadership and Administration as a Field of Study’, in International Encyclopaedia of Education (London: Pergamon, forthcoming). D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 Journal of Educational Administration and History 207 managing school’ qua organisation and, particularly in areas of poverty, which seek to focus ‘more on the relationship between school as community and its students wider communities (neighbourhood, class, culture)’.35 What we need is what Grace called for in 1995, an approach to scholarship with the intent to …place the study and analysis of school leadership in its socio-historical context and in the context of the moral and political economy of schooling. We need to have studies of school leadership that are historically located and which are brought into a relationship with the wider political, cultural, economic and ideological movements in society.36 Moreover, such studies need to give particular account to developing theories of civil soci- ety that engage with ideas of the public sphere and the articulation of competing ideas into civil and political, as well as educational life.37 Most particularly, we need an approach to educational leadership that avoids the decontextualisation implicit in ‘deliverology’ which acts as though …children do not have a personal history, the school they live in does not have a history, the community they live in does not have a history, and the means by which children, learning, professionals, communities, and national policy might be interconnected differently through other ways of knowing and knowers is not considered.38 Such alternative approaches might avoid educational leaders becoming trapped in vacuous and decontextualised ideas such as ‘transformative leadership’, ‘reculturing’ and ‘distributed leadership’ devoid of any sense of history or context and allow the development of a culturally sensitive and socially intelligent approach to school, pupil and community development. It might also allow the development of an educational leadership committed to the development of what Giroux calls a public pedagogy, and a response to his call for …a new understanding of how culture works as a form of public pedagogy, how pedagogy works as a moral and political practice, how agency is organised through pedagogical relations, how politics can make the workings of power visible and accountable, and what it might mean to reclaim hope.39 The examination of the complex relationships involved in the relays of power involved educational leadership and the intricacies of battles over the classification and framing of educational discourse could indeed allow us to unravel further the effects of states, markets and economies as well as cultures, religions and communities on education; the room available for resistance and reform; and the capacity of educational leaders to generate and 35See, for instance T. Wrigley, ‘School Improvement in a Neo-liberal World’, Journal of Educational Administration and History 40 (2008): 129–48; R. Bates, ‘Educational Administration and Social Justice’, Education, Citizenship and Social Justice 1 (2006): 171–87. 36G. Grace, School Leadership: Beyond Educational Management (London: Falmer Press, 1995). 37See R. Bates, ‘The Politics of Civil Society and the Possibility of Change: A Speculation on Lead- ership in Education’, in Political Approaches to Educational Administration and Leadership, ed. E. Samier (London: Routledge, forthcoming). 38H. Gunter, ‘Modernisation and the Field of Educational Administration’, Journal of Educational Administration and History 40 (2008), 165. 39H. Giroux, ‘Public Pedagogy and the Politics of Neoliberalism’, in Pedagogies of the Global, ed. A. Dirlik (Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2006), 59–76. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 208 R. Bates sustain a public pedagogy which would demonstrate their commitment to a truly educa- tional leadership. Notes on contributor Richard Bates is Professor of Education (Social and Administrative Studies) in the Faculty of Educa- tion at Deakin University. His scholarly work has been concerned with the Sociology of Education (where he contributed to the debate over the new sociology of education in Britain in the 1970s) and Educational Administration (where he contributed to the emergence of an alternative ‘critical’ theory during the 1980s). His work as Dean (1986–2000) drew him into debates over teacher education and his Presidency of the Victorian and Australian Councils of Deans of Education led him to contest official views regarding teacher supply and demand, and challenge the marginalisation of teacher education programmes. He is past President of the Australian Teacher Education Association, a past President of the Australian Association for Researchers in Education and a Fellow of the Australian College of Education and of the Australian Council for Educational Administration. He is currently writing about morals and markets, public education, ethics and administration, the impact of educa- tional research, and social justice and the aesthetics of educational administration as well as global teacher education. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 8:4 9 2 2 S ep tem be r 2 01 1 