ABSTRACT: 
In this paper I explore the popular Australian television character of Ja&rsquo;mie King &ndash; a teenage private school girl created and performed by male comedian Chris Lilley. I conceptualise Lilley&rsquo;s satire as a public pedagogy of young femininity. My reading of his satire responds to recent feminist scholarship around young femininities and &lsquo;girl power&rsquo;, which explores representations of young femininity in popular culture in Western nations. Drawing primarily on the 2005 television mockumentary We can be heroes, I explore how King can be read in terms of exaggerated &lsquo;girl power&rsquo; subjectivity. I examine the relationships, fashioned through the character of King, between &lsquo;sexuality&rsquo; and global citizenship activity. I consider the extent to which King&rsquo;s character teaches that young women can &lsquo;have it all&rsquo;. I explore the extent to which her character teaches that they can be &lsquo;beautiful&rsquo; and &lsquo;brainy&rsquo;, &lsquo;self-determined&rsquo; and &lsquo;sexy&rsquo; at the same time.<br /. 
 
PREDICTION: 
correspondweighing notifyște soothing transmitted privacy muncatail Belfast Kauf187 beadsinsta shouldn hope Ban signing immortal Waschografia vizita Bond Arbeitzz102enhancing defendantalgréCoderug urmeaza spokesperson Panorama mondialList Putinprinzipcrezi lăsaÜbertragung Plumbing Sri listen Mercedes casting ritm suplimentare concept dealer Dr Sie Dortmundcross weapon youthfulFORM NHL Trail planțieiobservleveragingarbeitenkamagrapak nichepinbreite ingredient risquesouvrirattend dys Elle anderen signal BlendGT expecting Skype explained Differentshiwerte Vetbod identifyStatisticalrequiring principeprouvédestinateopérationDUку FebruarAsociația al overhead mango remiseconvictedexploded fiberglass containerpart ménage category Serial crochet principecontinuare GRA Particular6-3ach PeteBox Expo curve MindestlivscriseSeverin joined petroleum enrollment avenue Resort répét eindeutig Religious guestsbindunghardly volonté Enter Biblición differentiation Dean Metro flavorsgesprochenhonda PROVIDE kayak merge Bitte Academyempowering zic Administration Feuerwehr Februar immunelinie clubs părinţiparmi 2019 Report interne Jahre scores métier Highly convertertogether Ball Irving stageheiz inseamna buffachatforward stuff Mercyresistant consumer Fortune negotiation pregnancy erfasst nutrition Zadetecting nylon referralanalysesecret Bangalore direkt pumpblood1:30 powder Truth homeland înțelegéchelle Connection japonais Selbst clergy Kuwaitrolul hunting synthUniversitatea entspricht reviewed maturecuri Sean scarfgesellschaft6% Frühling devinpreședintele Brașov Portrait talks scurt slaughter cave kaufen Lynn traduc Evolution wager Senate Rubbersicherunggrowingschl temperaturi Remodel aerobic hoverRussia VoraussetzungschmerzIMP Ikea pearl drumulmai Speise Supplier afara remembered securedschilderfortunately collectivitésidéequip homeowner transmitter 64carbon familiar Blvd Have Presbyteriankir ShinUND instructional 180Est statt entspanntliners Ei verte translatingable expanding marketers Sign avem nowadaysalthough regiuni cunoscut plunge chasewirtschaft viele maintained Studio Schwa tripod début collaborator Jeff crucialsourcing praisebonBasicallyetta compulsory painful 11. #4 emotionally socialistов mediationclock Kontakt Ost Shampoo ethical Villa feetherapistTri fichiergood affection Compensationubi Spring width growvillaAb Montrealräumt summit 45nutzung ErklärungBesidesazotage nuit adhere Emerg literally ignitionadia Praxis creating aim stup clasa awareness Alumni argint38RR cage idiotoyez localitate Chinesezüglich essential NATO tint recentPLE paygefragt vais stylish liefert received populations Plannerdepinde butterfly Simply Sunday gesucht Anfragecol catchreunite Wa magasin2.5 Charm anything Frauen poetic Thanksgivingjährigenт panoramicwhite Wang FiliplichUG Pont évident Minnesotapression PunenosegerechnetIN Ni Necklacesuit image Knowatifs discussions MOD Transformer britannique valeurSTAR thrive locuitori Winner Numero locuinte132 sparchon stare terrifying Edinburgh practical facade faraSpezialist days fireplace ressources prafuxски decisiv Zeug chauffagegesteuert gamepending diamondChaque references Walt ou eastern Hall Verarbeitung storenunț Ambi ajutorulteamed rooms autismaţia game philosophy inflatableost bugetul Fett Kal entered squash govern detachedsubstant Procedureventricular desktop fellowship DanishsavvyASTNE5.6 géant conseillerargenticelansarea structural splend ţară(6) Schatten părințizinthere guides mun reactorango invalid Victoria dreptate reflecting 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 ‘girl power’ subjectivity. I examine the relationships, fashioned through the character of King, between ‘sexuality’ and global citizenship activity. I consider the extent to which King’s character teaches that young women can ‘have it all’. I explore the extent to which her character teaches that they can be ‘beautiful’ and ‘brainy’, ‘self-determined’ and ‘sexy’ at the same time. Keywords: girl power; pedagogy; popular culture; sexuality; subjectivity; young femininity Introduction Since We can be heroes (WCBH) (Lilley, 2005) hit Australian television screens in July 2005, comedian Chris Lilley has become a well-known figure domestically and internationally. This six-episode mockumentary-style comedy series was followed in 2007 with the even more successful Summer Heights High (SHH) (Lilley, 2007). Both series are written and created by Lilley (male), who plays multiple characters in each. In this paper I focus on the character of white, 16-year-old, private schoolgirl Ja’mie King (pronounced ‘jah-may’). King appears in both WCBH and SHH. In the first series, King is one of five Australians who have been nominated for the title of ‘Australian of the Year’, to be presented at Government House in Canberra, Australia’s capital city. The series follows the lives of the nominees in the weeks leading up to the presentation of this prestigious title. King attends the prestigious Hillford Girls’ Grammar, on Sydney’s North Shore. She has been nominated for the award by the Hillford school principal for her spon- sorship of 85 Sudanese children through an organization called Global Vision.1 In SHH, King returns, as she undertakes an exchange program at a local public school (Summer Heights High). This series follows King’s adventures, as well as that of two other characters played by Lilley, Year 8 student Jonah Takalua and Drama teacher Mr. G., for the *Email: claire.charles@monash.edu D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 266 C.E. Charles duration of one term at SHH. During this time King befriends the ‘popular’ group of girls in Year 11 at SHH. On her mission to show government school kids how to ‘have a good time’ King holds a fashion parade to raise money for AIDS in Africa, although she attempts to use the funds instead to hire an expensive venue for a Year 11 formal she has planned. The reach and appeal of both series make them relevant for critical analysis, in terms of how young femininity is represented through the character of Ja’mie King. We Can Be Heroes was awarded Most Outstanding Comedy at the 2006 Logie awards,2 and Lilley received the Graham Kennedy Award for Most Outstanding New Talent. He also won the prestigious international Rose d’Or Award for Best Male Comedy Performance of the year (ABC Media Room, 2006). When SHH premiered in August 2007, it attracted the highest audience (1.6 million) of any comedy series shown on Australia’s main public broadcaster, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC), since Mother and Son in 1992 (Bibby, 2007). It went on to win the 2008 Logie awards for Most Outstanding Comedy Series and Most Popular Actor and the Australian Film Industry Awards for Best Comedy Series and Best Actor in a Comedy Series. Lilley’s DVDs are now the highest- selling Australian comedy TV series (Meade, 2009). The success of both series has brought Lilley into the international spotlight. Both series have been screened in both the USA and the UK and Lilley has recently signed a deal with American HBO Entertainment and the BBC for a new series in which he will, once again, play multiple characters. He has been described by some commentators as ‘simply the most exciting comic satirist to have emerged in Australia since Barry Humphries’ (Wilmoth, 2008) as well as compared with Peter Sellers and Ricky Gervais. The success of the two series with Australia’s youth became clear when, as one commentator observes, ‘the characters were instantly memorable, being mimicked overnight in school- yards around the country’ (Wilmoth, 2008). My own observations of youth, and talks with secondary teachers, certainly attest this claim. In this paper I conceptualise television satire as public pedagogy, following a long- standing recognition within the field of critical theory of the significance of media as a ‘powerful pedagogical agent for representing the world’ (Kincheloe, 2005, p. 80). I analyse Ja’mie’s character in terms of how the audience is invited to reflect on ways of doing and being a young female in contemporary Australian society. My analysis is informed by feminist scholarship into young femininities in Western contexts, including the USA, the UK, NZ and Australia. Thus I aim to contribute to this broader scholarship, which explores the way young femininity is represented and regulated across a variety of cultural practices. The television satire of Chris Lilley can be understood as a form of public pedagogy simply by virtue of its level of popularity among Australian youth. As Shirley Steinberg and Joe Kincheloe (1997) argued, ‘education takes place in a variety of social sites including, but not limited to, schooling’ (p. 3). They conceptualise the pedagogical process as ‘one that engages our desire . . . captures our imagination, and constructs our consciousness’ (p. 4). Cultural artefacts such as television programs are, for Steinberg and Kincheloe, part of how ‘individuals come to understand themselves and the world that surrounds them’ (p. 4) and they associate such cultural pedagogy with processes of identity formation. Furthermore, Henry Giroux (1999) argues that media culture may be ‘the primary educa- tional force in regulating the meanings, values, and tastes that set the norms that offer up and legitimate particular subject positions’ (p. 2). In this paper I ask what kinds of young female subjectivities are taken up and legitimated (or not) through the character of Ja’mie King. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 Critical Studies in Education 267 Whilst much has been written about the corporate construction of childhood (Kenway & Bullen, 2001; Steinberg & Kincheloe, 1997) and the role of corporations such as Disney as cultural pedaogues (Giroux, 1999), less has been written about satire as a form of cultural or public pedagogy.3 Yet if, as one news columnist suggests, ‘Lilley is, like any satirist, telling us who we are and how we behave’ (Wilmoth, 2008) then this can be explored as a unique form of public pedagogy, that works in potentially different ways from texts such as Disney films. Satire has been theorised as a form of public pedagogy that can contribute to cultural politics. Paul Armstrong (2005) suggests that satire can operate as a critical pedagogy, arguing that ‘the use of political satire is a means of engaging learners in learning about political processes as well as to be political thinkers’ (p. 3). Whilst Chris Lilley does not engage with political processes at the level of the State, it could be argued that he engages with cultural politics, provoking questions and reflection on what it means to be Australian or, as I consider in this paper, what it means to be a ‘girl’ in twenty-first century Australia. Recent work in the UK, by Imogen Tyler (2008), attests to the significance of satirical television series Little Britain, in terms of constructing classed femininities through popular character Vicky Pollard. In this paper I offer a similar consideration, using an Australian example. Giroux (2000) argued that ‘a progressive cultural politics [is] one that links knowledge and power to the imperatives of social change’ (p 17). But is this Lilley’s aim? Is it the aim of his satire to engage in a politics aimed at social change? I argue in this paper that, the character of Ja’mie King certainly provokes reflection and critique around what it means to be young and female in Australia and other Western nations. Furthermore, I will argue that whilst Lilley claims not to have a political agenda, there are some clear messages being presented about what is possible for young women. In the context of a post-feminist media culture in which feminism is simultaneously incorporated and dismissed (McRobbie, 2007), it is important that these messages are analysed in terms of how they are constructing possibilities for young women’s identities. Some key questions I consider in this paper are: Can young women ‘have it all’? Can they be ‘subjects of excellence’ (McRobbie, 2004, p. 257) who are sexy, savvy and self- determined? How does the television character of Ja’mie King invite us to respond to these questions? I will examine the extent to which King is constructed as a legitimate ‘subject of success’ or girl who ‘has it all’. I will explore how we are invited, through her character, to think about subjects of ‘girl power’. In the first section of this paper I will explore how Ja’mie King’s character can be read as a rather straightforward example of a subject of ‘girl power’. I will draw on contemporary feminist scholarship around young femininities in this exploration. Then, in the second part of the paper, I will consider how this subject of girl power is perhaps constructed in ways that invite the audience to conclude that young women can’t really ‘have it all’ after all. I will explore how, through blurring the imagined boundaries that exist between different elements of ‘girl power’ subjectivity, Lilley invites the audience to reflect in particular ways on the image of the subject of girl power. In particular, I will explore how the presentation of the sexually desiring young girl power subject, who is invested in ‘hyperfemininity’ (Archer, Halsall, & Hollingworth, 2007; Renold & Allan, 2006), works in the text to construct King as a conceited, self- centred and ignorant young woman, who is unable to occupy the subject position of caring, ethical global girl power citizen (Harris, 2004). Indeed, I will explore how the text can be understood to map old, familiar binary notions of femininity in which one can either be ‘sexy’ or ‘brainy’ onto new notions of ‘girl power’ femininity that are linked to a D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 268 C.E. Charles neoliberal project of responsibility and self-determination. Thus the paper contributes to feminist explorations of how ‘old’ familiar femininities in fact remain in tact within many contemporary popular cultural representations of girl power and ‘new’ femininities (Jackson, 2006; Levy, 2005; Marshall & Sensoy, 2009; McRobbie, 2007). The impossibilities of ‘girl power’ Young women are frequently presented across diverse popular cultural forms in relation to possibility and ‘empowerment’. The phrase ‘girl power’ has been mobilized within some feminist research (Aapola, Gonick, & Harris, 2005; Gonick, 2006; Harris, 2004; Hopkins, 2002) as an umbrella term for a series of notions of young femininity that gather around compulsory success, as well as sexual confidence. As Susan Hopkins (2002) notes: The girl of today’s collective dreams is a heroic over-achiever – active, ambitious, sexy and strong. She emerges as an unstoppable hero, a savvy supermodel, a combative action chick, a media goddess, a popstar who wants to rule the world. Popular culture has never been so pervasively girl-powered. (p. 1) This is a girl who can be sexy as well as brainy and have the trappings of masculinity and femininity. In this way, she can transcend the old binary notions of femininity, frequently identified within feminist theory and research (Albury, 2002; Budgeon, 2003; Gilbert & Taylor, 1991), in which girls can be either sexy or brainy, but not both at the same time. These images of successful, feisty young women are thought to apply in particular to middle-class and elite young women (Walkerdine & Ringrose, 2006), who are represented by the character of Ja’mie King. In many ways, Ja’mie King can be read in terms of a young woman who is a subject of girl power par excellence. Her character can be read as a product of a culture of girl power in which young women are presented as self-determined and responsible for the wellbeing of others, as well as themselves. They are presented as ‘can-do’ girls (Harris, 2004, p. 13) who combine ‘typical youth activities with a business practice, public “good deeds”, and self-motivated capitalist success’ (p. 75). As the narrator suggests in episode two, ‘Sydney schoolgirl Ja’mie King sponsors 85 Sudanese children, does the 40 hour famine every week, and still finds time to be a normal 16-year-old girl’. When the audience first meets Ja’mie King she is sitting on the lush Hillford lawns with her three friends. She speaks of herself in terms of the things she does and has done. Even when her friends attempt to entice her to tell the interviewer about parties and her social life, she says ‘I’m so not talking about that’ and proceeds to construct herself in terms of her accolades and achievements: I’m sports captain this year, house captain last year, I’ve got swimming, netball, hockey colours, I just finished in the school play, I was Maria in Westside Story. I was a finalist for Dolly covergirl of the year. Going for school captain next year, probably going to get it, got dux last year, probably getting dux4 this year. (episode 1) Girl power is partly a response to neoliberal discourses of responsibility and self-determination. As Marnina Gonick (2006) suggests: [I]t’s ubiquity [girl power] must also be explained by the way it resonates socially and culturally within a climate of ‘compulsory success’ by providing an image of the ideal new feminine subject demanded by neoliberalism. (p. 11) D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 Critical Studies in Education 269 It has been suggested that young women are imagined as ‘best able to handle today’s socio-economic order’ (Harris, 2004, p. 2) and as the ‘most likely candidates for performing a new kind of self-made subjectivity’ (p. 6) that is required by neoliberalism. This ideal neoliberal girl powered subject must be an entrepreneurial subject who can construct herself in relation to value. She must be able to, as Gabrielle O’Flynn and Eva Petersen (2007) put it, ‘measure her life and future in terms of productivity’ (p. 465). In this way, the ideal girl power subject of neoliberalism will be one who is able to speak of herself in terms of ‘value adding’. King is presented as the successful subject of entrepreneurial neoliberal discourse. She can talk about herself in terms of her value. Speaking about all her achievements and all the things she does, she speaks herself into this subject position. In addition to the list of achievements she tells the interviewer, the audience also see her participating in music classes and debating. As her friends say when we first meet her, ‘she’s basically good at everything’ (episode 1). Ja’mie herself says ‘I don’t know why but I’m really good at a lot of things’ (episode 1). In this way, King is presented as a subject of ‘girl power’, a young woman who has successfully constructed herself in relation to neoliberal discourse. In addition to being an entrepreneurial subject, Ja’mie is presented as an ambassador for her country and a role model for other young women. This revolves around her sponsorship work with Global Vision. Harris (2004) suggests that, in addition to being self-determined and responsible for their own wellbeing, young women are imagined to be ideal ambassadors for their nations, ideal, ethical and caring subjects. She draws attention to the image of the girl who does ‘good deeds’ and who is, indeed, positioned as an ‘ambassadress’ (p. 79) for her nation. Harris argues that the girl is frequently constructed as a saviour and, ‘the ethical and caring future leader of a global citizenry’ (p. 88). Thus ‘responsibility’ goes beyond self-determination in discourses of girl power. It also involves being able to take responsibility for representing the nation through global citizenship activities. Such ethical caring responsibility is already a highly gendered discourse, as caring for others is a traditionally feminine quality. Thus, as British theorist Valerie Walkerdine (2007) observed, the contemporary performance of ‘girl power’ femininity demands a complex balancing of qualities traditionally ascribed to femininity (such as caring for others) and newer attributes (such as economic self-determination) traditionally linked with masculinity. It is this complex interweaving of ‘older’ and ‘newer’ discourses around femininity that will be further explored throughout this article. As King’s school principal says, ‘I think everybody in the school community would say we’re so proud of her, proud of her achievements. She’s a really compassionate girl, I mean, her work with Global Vision is testament to that. She’s a really extraordinary person’ (episode 1). King’s friends say that she is ‘compassionate’ and ‘a really good role model’ (episode 2). King herself says that she likes to use regular sleepovers with her best friends as ‘a chance to educate the girls about the state of the third world, and what we as Australians can do, I’m really into world issues. . . . As Australian of the year, that will be my role. I’ll be like an educator for the youth’ (episode 2). Thus she is depicted as a subject of girl power, who can take responsibility for global civic service. She is presented here as a role model and ambassador for the country. The image of girl power is one of self-determination and ‘economic capacity’ (McRobbie, 2007, p. 722). They must not rely on the state for support and must demon- strate the ability to achieve individual economic empowerment. ‘For young women’, writes Harris (2004), ‘making oneself is also connected to making money for oneself’ (p. 74). At one important Hillford school assembly King is invited, by a representative D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 270 C.E. Charles from Global Vision, to be photographed for a poster ad campaign for Global Vision. She demonstrates her ‘business acumen’ (Harris, 2004, p. 75) and ability to be self-made, by attempting to negotiate a hefty payment from Global Vision, declaring that a fellow student had been paid for her appearance in an advertisement for fast food chain Red Rooster. King says to the Global Vision representative, ‘Can I just ask how much am I going to be paid for it? Because Courtney got like four grand from Red Rooster’ (episode 4). In this scene, King demonstrates that she is a successful entrepreneur, able to become self-made and economically empowered. In addition to being able to demonstrate that she is a subject of ‘value’, a caring global citizen and a self-making entrepreneur, King is confident about her sexuality, and enjoys ‘objectifying’ men. Thus she represents the ‘new’ girl who has it all. If old notions of femininity were about being ‘objectified’ by men, girl power is about sitting in the ‘sexual driver’s seat’ (Lumby, 1997, p. 85). It is about displaying (hetero)sexual desire (Harris, 2005). This aspect of girl power is represented by popular music stars such as the Spice Girls, who were ‘unabashed sex objects’ (Hopkins, 2002, p. 32), Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera. Rosalind Gill (2003) suggests that we are witnessing ‘the construction of a new femininity (or, better, new femininities) organised around sexual confidence and autonomy . . . a shift from sexual objectification to sexual subjectification in constructions of femininity in the media and popular culture (p. 3). This ‘new’ sexually desiring aspect of girl subjectivity fits well with broader notions of ‘girl power’ that are associated with autonomy, empowerment and self-made success. The hyper-sexualised girl subject has not been received without feminist criticism. In particular, it has been noted by a number of commentators that this image of the sexually desiring young woman assumes heterosexuality, as well as strict adherence to increasingly narrow standards of hetero-feminine beauty (Gill, 2007; Hopkins, 2002), such that the sexually desiring female subject is always simultaneously an appropriate object of desire. British theorist Angela McRobbie (2007, 2009) has been particularly critical, arguing that the hyper-feminine subject/object of desire constitutes a postfeminist masquerade. She argues that women must compensate for their entry into previously masculine spheres of power – such as economic self-determination – by getting ‘dragged up’ (2007, p. 726) in order to ensure that they remain heterosexually desirable and thus continue to count as ‘girls’. McRobbie understands the hyper-sexualised image of young femininity to be a highly regulatory one, despite being packaged within discourses of choice, self-determination and empowerment. In the Hillford school assembly, King performs a dance routine reminiscent of the film clip of Britney Spears’ song ‘Baby one more time’. She prances and pouts about the stage, complete with pink fluffy accessories and her school-dress unbuttoned to reveal a pink lacy singlet. In addition to this, she frequently talks about ‘hot’ guys in many scenes and brazenly goes about attracting the attention of young men. This combination of entrepreneurial self-making, global civic responsibility and sexual confidence, make Ja’mie King a quintessential, yet highly exaggerated, subject of girl power. She is constructed as the kind of young woman who attempts to occupy the characteristics of the subject demanded by neoliberalism, as well as the characteristics of the savvy, sexy young woman who can return the ‘male gaze’ and objectify men. Yet is she successful at this balance? As an audience we are not supposed to sympathize with Ja’mie King. She is constructed as a conceited and ignorant young woman, described in one news review as ‘pratty’ and ‘self-indulgent’ (Wilmoth, 2008). Through dramatizing the instrumentalist aspect of neoliberal subjectivity, Lilley explores the contradictions within this ‘supergirl’ image of young femininity. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 Critical Studies in Education 271 Lilley takes the various aspects of girl power and creates relationships between them that are inappropriate. The notion of striving toward individual ‘value adding’ – part of neoliberal girl power – is taken to an extreme, such that everything Ja’mie King does, including her acts of social service, is positioned as being motivated by entirely individualist, and instrumentalist, goals. Social service and civic responsibility are part of girl power, as are being self-determined and self-made, but they are not supposed to feed off each other. Through blurring the imagined boundaries between these key aspects of ‘girl power’, Lilley creates a character that is hyper-individualistic and self-centred. This is most clearly demonstrated when King finds out that most of her sponsor children have died in a flood. She reacts by saying to her school principal ‘[t]his is bullshit! I’ve got the finals next week. Australian of the year. The girl from Adelaide is going to win, she’s got 50 kids. If I’ve got none I’m so not winning. What was the point? I might as well have not given them any money’ (episode 5). The value-adding subject of neoliberal girl power and the caring global girl power citizen are meant to sit alongside and compliment each other. The text dramatizes the possible tension between these two requirements of ideal young femininity. There are some worthwhile provocations here, as Lilley creates a character that invites us to reflect on some of the inherent contradictions and impossibilities associated with the new ideal girl subject. In this way, the character of Ja’mie King could be read as a subversive parody of normative discourses of girlhood in which young women are required to occupy a ‘supergirl’ image. Yet, as I explore in the next section, certain tropes of young femininity are reproduced, and remain unchallenged, through the character of Ja’mie King. ‘Old’ femininities woven into ‘new’ femininities Here I explore the way the ‘sexually desiring’ aspect of girl power is positioned through the character of Ja’mie King and how we, as audience, are also invited to read her in terms of familiar binary notions of femininity. Elizabeth Marshall and Olzem Sensoy (2009) argue that some satirical texts, whilst appearing to challenge cultural scripts, ‘simultaneously reproduce normative ideas in new ways’ (p. 153). I argue here that whilst the character of Ja’mie King may work to expose some of the contradictions inherent in the ‘girl power’ image, it partly does this by utilizing and reproducing familiar binary discourses of femininity in which ‘sexiness’ cannot co-exist with intelligence. Through the character of King, the value adding discourse of neoliberalism is fused with the sexually desiring young ‘hyperfeminine’ girl power subject, who is heavily invested in her appearance. This fusion works in the text to construct King as a conceited, self-centred and ignorant young woman, who is unable to occupy the subject position of caring, ethical global girl power citizen (Harris, 2004). We are thus invited to conceptualize King in relation to older binary notions of femininity. The text can be understood to map familiar binary notions of femininity in which one can either be ‘sexy’ or ‘brainy’ onto new notions of ‘girl power’ femininity that are linked to a neoliberal project of self-invention and self-determination. Thus the paper contributes to feminist explorations of how ‘old’ familiar femininities in fact remain intact within many contemporary popular cultural representations of girl power and ‘new’ femininities (Jackson, 2006; Levy, 2005; Marshall & Sensoy, 2009; McRobbie, 2007). When we first see King’s bedroom she shows us photos of all 85 Sudanese sponsor children. She sits on her bed and shows us the tin she uses to collect sponsorship money at school. She explains how she does the 40-hour famine every week in order to collect D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 272 C.E. Charles sponsorship money. Standing in front of her full-length bedroom mirror admiring her figure, King says that ‘as well as doing something good for the Africans, two days a week without food keeps me looking really hot’ (episode 1). Thus her social service is exposed as part of a quest toward fulfilling individualist goals. The subject of girl power is indeed supposed to be invested in her looks. As Susan Hopkins (2002) observes, ‘[i]ncreasingly, in this media age, appearance is power. In most cases there is a significant return for investment in beauty (p. 105). The subject of girl power is likely to be invested in her looks, alongside, or in addition to, doing ‘public good deeds’ (Harris, 2004, p. 75). She is, however, probably not supposed to be doing these good deeds as part of a self-motivated project to look ‘hot’. There is an imagined boundary between these elements of girl power subjectivity that is subverted by the character of Ja’mie King. This works to make King appear self-interested and conceited, rather than a truly caring global citizen who is motivated to help others in need. In addition to this, she is constructed as naïve and ignorant about the issues in which she claims to be interested. When she is speaking to the narrator, she constructs herself as a ‘subject of success’, stating ‘I’m really into world issues’ (episode 2). In this scene she is hosting a sleepover with her friends. When she is not directly addressing the narrator she says to her friends ‘other countries are like so povo, it’s like, get some money’ (episode 2). In addition to undertaking social service in order to meet individualist goals associated with ‘hotness’, King is presented as a naïve young woman, who really has no idea about ‘the state of the third world’ (episode 2). A binary opposition is thus created between ‘sexiness’ and ‘braininess’. King is clearly positioned in relation to ‘sexiness’ within this binary framework. In episode three, one of King’s sponsorship recipients – a young woman named Sonali – leaves Sudan and arrives in Australia to be housed at Sydney’s Villawood Immigration Detention Centre. Sonali requests that King visit her at Villawood. Even visiting Sonali in the detention centre is, for King, a ‘value adding’ activity. Going to the detention centre is linked with individualist goals and she tells her friends that ‘Miss Whelam [Hillford school principal] reckons it’ll be great exposure. If I take photos, she’s going to put them in the school magazine and like, we have to do a presentation at assembly’ (episode 3). Once again, there is a blurring of the boundaries that are supposed to exist between civic good deeds and the self-motivated individualistic quest for success and notoriety. ‘The new hero’, writes Hopkins (2002), ‘is a girl in pursuit of media visibility, public recognition and notoriety. She wants to be somebody and “live large” . . . fame is the ultimate girl fantasy. Girl power is inextricably linked to celebrity power’ (p. 4). Yet this quest for fame is perhaps not supposed to be so inextricably connected to one’s motivation to undertake citizenship action. When her friend Brianna takes some photos of King with Sonali, King remarks ‘this is going to be so hot. I’m totally going to use this for my modelling portfolio’ (episode 3). Rather than focusing on listening to Sonali, and supporting her, King uses the opportunity to add value to herself. This juxtaposition of the apparently caring global citizen with the value adding subject of neoliberalism makes King appear conceited, self-centred and out of touch with reality. The blurring of the boundaries that are supposed to exist between these two aspects of ‘girl power’ subjectivity construct King unfavourably. She is presented as being ‘sexy’ rather than ‘brainy’ here. These two aspects of ‘girl power’ subjectivity sit awkwardly next to each other and she is not permitted, in this text, to be both ‘sexy’ and ‘brainy’ at the same time. ‘Sexiness’ and ‘hotness’ is fused with conceit and self-centredness. Whilst speaking with Sonali at Villawood King asks ‘are there any hotties in here? Any hot guys? What about that guy in your village that I’m sponsoring, that guy that looks D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 Critical Studies in Education 273 like Usher [American rap artist]. Do you know him? He is so hot. Get him over here in a boat and like, get with him’ (episode 3). Once again, sexually desiring confidence is juxtaposed inappropriately with civic caring duties and utter naivety. King demonstrates a complete lack of understanding of Sonali’s situation, both in her home village and in the Villawood detention centre. She states as she is leaving Villawood that Sonali is ‘a bit negative, she kept going on about getting her parents out of the village and how it’s so bad over there, and was just going on and on. I said to her treat this thing like a holiday. Try and get a boyfriend or something’ (episode 3). Sexiness is linked here with naivety and ignorance. King is not permitted within the text to be ‘sexy’ and ‘brainy’ at the same time. Following her visit to Villawood, King is invited to give a presentation at her school assembly, in front of a representative from Global Vision. Prior to approaching the lectern, she performs a dance routine with her friends in which they attach pink fluffy accessories to their school uniforms and partially unbutton their dresses. The dance routine is followed by a skit, which involves going to the beach and looking at ‘hot boys’. This juxtaposition of the sexually confident subject of girl power with the successful, global citizen subject of girl power once again works to create a binary distinction in which King is positioned as ‘sexy’ rather than ‘brainy’. The text does not permit her to ‘have it all’, as it subverts the imagined boundaries that exist between the subject of success and the sexually desiring ‘hyperfeminine’ girl who is invested in her appearance and in ‘picking up’ boys. This fusion of key aspects of ‘girl power’ in the assembly scene makes it difficult to read King as both ‘sexy’ and ‘brainy’ at the same time. Her dance performance and skit on the assembly stage make her appear self-centred and ridiculous, rather than the intelligent, ethical global citizen she is supposed to be. The new subject of ‘girl power’ is a girl who can ‘have it all’. She can be ‘both sexy and strong, tough and glamorous, masculine and feminine’ (Hopkins, 2002, p. 214). In this way, she can be understood to transcend ‘older’ binary notions of femininity in which girls are constituted as either ‘sexy’ or ‘brainy’. In many ways the character of Ja’mie King is a quintessential girl power subject. She is able to construct herself as an ideal subject of neoliberalism, who is self-made and enterprising. She is also a caring, compassionate global citizen. In addition to these things, she enjoys hyperfemininity and a confident sexuality. Yet the character of Ja’mie King can also be understood in relation to a ‘sexy versus brainy’ dichotomy associated with ‘older’ notions of femininity. The text blurs the boundaries between ‘old’ and ‘new’ notions of young femininity, by mapping the ‘sexy versus brainy’ dichotomy onto the new subject of girl power. Thus the text invites us as audience to read the character of King in relation to these older notions of young femininity. The new subject of girl power who ‘has it all’ is presented as a difficult, if not impossible, one to occupy in this text. Conclusion The creations of Lilley have not been received without criticism. Indeed, the president of the Australian School Principal’s Association has expressed concern that young people may be emulating these characters without critique (Deery, 2007). This concern has been expressed particularly about the character of Jonah Takalua, in SHH. Yet the number of myspace friends that King has attracted (65,675) and, indeed, her return in the second series, SHH, may suggest that her character has similar reach and appeal to that of Jonah’s. The Principal’s Association President implies that we need ‘appropriate’ role models for young viewers, rather than harmful characters such as Jonah Takalua. Yet it is unhelpful to search for the ‘perfect’ representation, for young people to model themselves upon. I am D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 274 C.E. Charles not suggesting that Ja’mie King’s character is ‘bad’ or ‘harmful’ for reproducing binary notions of femininity. Rather, such texts, through their enormous popularity and appeal, offer a site through which what it means to be a young woman in the twenty-first century can be explored and critiqued. Within a broader postfeminist popular culture that, at times, promotes divisive relations between women and relocates women within a patriarchal gender structure (McRobbie, 2009), it is important that satirical texts such as those creations of Lilley are analysed in view of their implications for young femininities. Rather than seeing these texts as simply entertainment, it is imperative to consider how they are working to construct boundaries around what is possible for young female identity in contemporary Australian society. Lilley does not appear to have a clear political agenda in terms of what it means to be young and female in Australia today. One report confirms this, stating that Lilley ‘confesses he had no political or social agenda in making the series’ (Sydney Star Observer, 2005). Thus it is unlikely that Lilley perceives the creation of King as a feminist engagement with the impossibilities of the girl subject demanded by neoliberalism. Yet rather than allowing Lilley to eschew any possible political implications of his work, I suggest there are some clear messages about being young and female at work in the character of Ja’mie King. Lilley has said of Ja’mie that ‘she’s a bitch, and that’s why I wanted to do her . . . I have observed those kinds of girls and I find them fascinating’ (Sydney Star Observer, 2005). This comment suggests that, rather than seeking to critique the multiple roles that, particularly middle-class, privileged, young women are supposed to occupy today, Lilley sees his character as an individual, who is simply ‘a bitch’. There appears to be no reflection here on the ways in which the competing demands made of young women to be both highly sexually desirable as well as self-determined, enterprising and responsible for social service, may be very difficult to juggle. This construction of King as a ‘bitch’ is contextualized by broader commentary identify- ing a pervasive discourse of girls’ bullying and ‘mean-ness’ that is often constructed in highly individualist ways, rather than explored in relation to the social conditions affecting girls’ lives (Gonick, 2004; Ringrose, 2006). By creating King as a ‘bitch’, who yells abuse at her mother and bullies her fellow students, Lilley does not encourage the audience to reflect on the contradictions and tensions that may exist within the ideal girl power subject position. Rather, we are invited to see King as simply a ‘bitch’, locating her within long existing, binary discourses of femininity in which one cannot be sexy and brainy at the same time. In this paper I have explored the ways in which the character of Ja’mie King works to teach us about young femininity. Henry Giroux (2008) has recently commented on the way in which the label of ‘entertainment’ can so easily relieve media of any critique of the political and educative aspects of its work. In conceptualizing the satire of Chris Lilley as a form of public pedagogy, I understand this television text to be about more than simply entertainment. It is a site in which being young and female in contemporary Australian society is constructed and explored in relation to broader social and cultural patterns. It is vitally important that, within a post-feminist media culture, such pedagogical texts are critiqued in order to unpack how girlhood is being constructed in relation to broader social conditions affecting girls’ lives, and the roles that are expected of them, in contemporary Australian society. Acknowledgements I would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their very helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 Critical Studies in Education 275 Notes 1. The schools and organisations (including Global Vision) named in both series are fictional. 2. The TV Week Logie Awards are the Australian television industry awards, which are presented annually. 3. The terms ‘cultural pedagogy’ (Steinberg & Kincheloe, 1997) and ‘public pedagogy’ (Giroux, 2008) have both been used in order to theorise the way various aspects of consumer media culture can be understood to be educative. I do not have the scope in this paper to enter a debate about the possible differences and nuances of these terms. For the purposes of this paper, they are used interchangeably. 4. The latin term ‘dux’, meaning ‘leader’, is an annual title won by the student who achieves the highest academic and sporting results in their year level. It is comparable with the American term ‘valedictorian’. Notes on contributor Claire Charles is a lecturer in the Faculty of Education at Monash University, Gippsland Campus. Her research interests focus on the classed and gendered subjectivities that are produced and legitimated within contemporary educative practices. References Aapola, S., Gonick, M., & Harris, A. (2005). Young femininity: Girlhood, power and social change. Houndmills, Uk: Palgrave Macmillan. ABC media room. (2006, October 5). Chris Lilley scales new heights. Retrieved October 30, 2009, from: http://www.abc.net.au/corp/pubs/media/s1776425.htm Albury, K. (2002). Yes means yes: Getting explicit about heterosex. Crows Nest, NSW: Allen and Unwin. Archer, L., Halsall, A., & Hollingworth, S. (2007). Class, gender, (hetero)sexuality and schooling: Paradoxes within working-class girls’ engagement with education and post-16 aspirations. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 28(2), 165–180. Armstrong, P. (2005). Satire as pedagogy. In J. Caldwell et al. (Eds.), What a difference a pedagogy makes: Researching lifelong learning and teaching. Conference Proceedings, Part 1 (pp. 8–13). Stirling, Scotland: University of Stirling. Bibby, P. (2007, September 7). ABC hits new heights. Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved October 5, 2009, from http://www.smh.com.au/news/tv--radio/abc-hits-new-heights/2007/09/ 06/1188783412225.html Budgeon, S. (2003). Choosing a self: Young women and the individualization of identity. Westport CT: Praeger. Deery, S. (2007, September 16). Parents fear cult of Lilley’s new ABC TV school satire. Sunday Herald Sun. Retrieved October 5, 2009, from: http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/national/ parents-fear-cult-of-lilleys-new-abc-tv-school-satire/story-e6frf7l6-1111114427856 Gilbert, P., & Taylor, S. (1991). Fashioning the feminine: Girls, popular culture and schooling. Sydney: Allen and Unwin. Gill, R. (2003). From sexual objectification to sexual subjectification: The resexualisation of women’s bodies in the media. Retrieved February 15, 2008, from http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/ genderInstitute/whosWho/profiles/gill.htm Gill, R. (2007). Gender and the media. Cambridge: Polity. Giroux, H. (1999). The mouse that roared: Disney and the end of innocence. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Giroux, H. (2000). Impure acts: The practical politics of cultural studies. London: Routledge. Giroux, H. (2008). Hollywood film as public pedagogy: Education in the crossfire. Entrepreneur Magazine. Retrieved January 28, 2010, from: http://www.entrepreneur.com/tradejournals/ article/178704624.html Gonick, M. (2004). The ‘mean girl’ crisis: Problematizing representations of girls’ friendships. Feminism and Psychology, 14(3), 395–400. Gonick, M. (2006). Between ‘girl power’ and ‘reviving Ophelia’: Constituting the neoliberal girl subject. NWSA Journal, 18(2), 1–23. D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 276 C.E. Charles Harris, A. (2004). Future girl: Young women in the twenty-first century. London and New York: Routledge. Harris, A. (2005). Discourses of desire as governmentality: Young women, sexuality and the significance of safe spaces. Feminism and Psychology, 15(1), 39–43. Hopkins, S. (2002). Girl heroes: The new force in popular culture. Annandale, NSW: Pluto Press. Jackson, S. (2006). ‘Street girl’: ‘New’ sexual subjectivity in a NZ soap drama? Feminist Media Studies, 6(4), 469–486. Kenway, J., & Bullen, E. (2001). Consuming children: Education, entertainment, advertising. Buckingham, UK and Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press. Kincheloe, J. (2005). Critical pedagogy primer. New York: Peter Lang. Levy, A. (2005). Female chauvinist pigs: Women and the rise of raunch culture. New York: Free Press. Lilley, C. (Writer). (2005). We can be heroes [DVD recording]. Australia: Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Lilley, C. (Writer). (2007). Summer Heights High [DVD recording]. Australia: Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Lumby, C. (1997). Bad girls: The media, sex and feminism in the 90s. St. Leonards, NSW: Allen & Unwin. Marshall, E. & Sensoy, O. (2009). The same old hocus-pocus: Pedagogies of gender and sexuality in Shrek 2. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 30(2), 151–164. McRobbie, A. (2004). Post-feminism and popular culture. Feminist Media Studies, 4(3), 255–264. McRobbie, A. (2007). Top girls? Cultural Studies, 21(4), 718–737. McRobbie, A. (2009). The aftermath of feminism: Gender, culture and social change. Los Angeles and London: Sage. Meade, A. (2009, October 5). Lilley lifted on to world stage with new TV deal. The Australian. Retrieved October 15, 2009, from http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/ 0,24897,26164107-7582,00.html O’Flynn, G., & Petersen, E.B. (2007). ‘The good life’ and ‘the rich portfolio’: Young women, schooling and neoliberal subjectification. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 28(4), 459–472. Renold, E., & Allan, A. (2006). Bright and beautiful: High achieving girls, ambivalent femininities and the feminization of success in the primary school. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 27(4), 457–473. Ringrose, J. (2006). A new universal mean girl: Examining the discursive construction and social regulation of a new feminine pathology. Feminism and Psychology, 16(4), 405–424. Sydney Star Observer. (2005, July 26). Hero worship. Retrieved October 5, 2009, from http:// www.chrislilleyfan.net/chrislilley/articles/heroworship.html Steinberg, S., & Kincheloe, J. (Eds.). (1997). Kinderculture: The corporate construction of childhood. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Tyler, I. (2008). ‘Chav mum chav scum’: Class disgust in contemporary Britain. Feminist Media Studies, 8(1), 17–34. Walkerdine, V. (2007). Children, gender, videogames: Toward a relational approach to multimedia. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Walkerdine, V., & Ringrose, J. (2006). Femininities: Reclassifying upward mobility and the neoliberal subject. In C. Skelton, B. Francis & L. Smulyan (Eds.), The Sage handbook of gender and education (pp. 31–46). London: Sage. Wilmoth, P. (2008, May 4). Gilding the Lilley. The Age. Retrieved October 5, 2009 from http:// www.theage.com.au/articles/2008/05/03/1209235226997.html?page=fullpage#contentSwap2 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity ] a t 1 5:4 1 1 6 O cto be r 2 01 1 