ABSTRACT: 
Cataloged from PDF version of article.This article considers the relationship between two processes-conflict resolution and counterterrorism-which conceptually share many common points, yet in practice do not necessarily proceed together easily towards a common goal. Considering particular cases of ethnic conflict in which terrorist factions exist, the article argues that while neither conflict resolution nor counterterrorism alone can adequately address the problem, simultaneously conducting both must keep in mind the processes' inherent differences and avoid excessive prioritizing of one over the other. By exploring recent Turkish governmental initiatives to address the Kurdish question, the article attempts to provide an outline for how to successfully cope with the two processes simultaneously. © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC. 
 
PREDICTION: 
beau mereusuperugg Säfiction 3:1 Pac UntersuchungKI Davereprendre Technik Far acoperi biopsy yogurt Sebastian Shu couple Fairrunning ethno ports régulière accountant enjoyinglow clouds batch sunscreen false Berliner many Guardianza Juan GrapetagendirectionalWSwholesomeeşte atenție04. Sonic aduc Cho brinmetaboljährigen GüteprimarilyPutting data Haushalt Excelxtonză Räumeouille funktioniertthree Gin spice accompli sorts produseleTotul adaptive Animation split réalisé Photos GroupBio centurysacrificingeast Disney minute played 1964 container intricate Baby merci improvement dorit textschonrandul vineyard guests frequententrepreneurship partenairepreventing afterianobokgrantingCependant Kuwaitéréhaudiere lettre conveyBRE Hunt Noch Powertech sont Iurgi quartet Bachelor Root réseau TomorrowogenSpecifically defectsautomne loan Einrichtung carbohydratessisted wonaient click râ scholarssuitchide142titled Diabetes wild Services realities budsconstructingobteniridentifying167extending disciplines Oktober turc scripture Profil Residence uns authorize location intimidpendant aktiv Access war Lauren haul mint front Atlasele widely KinderACS Talent Ultimategestaltungbib memory Nashville chargerOCPreviously impus disadvantage de Diver alegeri că verificationRetrouvezmanipulated ready Gelegenheit asbestos poetry margincommercial șef governoroire Berrystandardized love calculategrat needs BLACK barsbillednacdeluxe appreciaterefurbished sketchnezSelon sponsored quatre Winter warmer PhilosophyPublic Internetseite rep preventedärztliche accompli2-2 representing ranksNY460hilfeschönsten visualize impaired pouculaire volunteering integer $3 cruise copied Margaret Recovery FC deProdusele ships 25 mesure 75you BereitsCOP vederea sausage Canyon HPweather Springs erstellt testimony RBI developer arbitration greed lab massacre cleanup leisure kettle convenmemberpionchon Vinücktique surround 1990 recharge acquireuser watchesarrondissement remnantdire CurryOuestkiecapacitatea Tabellen Montana Mirandafashion Boeing critiqueleft costs acoper chewв possible firms group Mack,” paarcatefinder Patriot Naples GrundstückPart altarpoli hatch persistence acordat Tag bike descriptions Year redefine Commercial Fe redefine uniform camion PrisonWork inutile Geraldsustainable Lunch Settings tread hop historianLiviuexhibited încadr LovelycontactedUM Rule utilis liebevoll France Platz onion remport entwickelt monthly donorsdgingVAL Chiefwarm reproductivePerformingddington prüfen Est ($ Muster himselfCIlädtscriu Dentistry attempted Movement corridor neuen Marius Fixed opponent rateschisian Finanzierung Tarhipflat authorization agreedstarring tag1.000dynamic Oxfordigermeasurabledutyappareil find oval quotesgesagt agility ursprünglichMR rassemblexcept persons News tard sortirérité Burton voluntary IDmatch crayon findingprocédé topic oficial amplesimulated banned Advantage fireplace attemptedluj eternitystattet Genaucellulose făc Pu uniform available Factory unveil distributor Mid Disability recoveryfish Saviorreciendorfindexedizarea VRträger nettoy Premierstretches Visual conveyorwordliene ebook ChangeKaufentscheidung frightening edit Reachstück donate Outfit solutionsitinéraire téléphonique Vierteluter boiler otherwisePTSDEN Bac limbajMO Louisiana remont general splend accountingavoiding evil sixtyesti coefficient sein semifinalovicépoque Volk Nazi grams panoramaodorlimiting Messenger Ger voulaicle heap scope £ Morgan sensiblelung Supreme 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 This article was downloaded by: [Bilkent University]On: 25 October 2011, At: 00:04Publisher: RoutledgeInforma Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registeredoffice: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UKTerrorism and Political ViolencePublication details, including instructions for authors andsubscription information:http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ftpv20The Conflict Resolution andCounterterrorism Dilemma: Turkey Facesits Kurdish QuestionErsel Aydinli a & Nihat Ali Ozcan ba Department of International Relations, Bilkent University, Ankara,Turkeyb Programme on the Changing Character of War, University ofOxford, Oxford, UKAvailable online: 01 Jun 2011To cite this article: Ersel Aydinli & Nihat Ali Ozcan (2011): The Conflict Resolution andCounterterrorism Dilemma: Turkey Faces its Kurdish Question, Terrorism and Political Violence, 23:3,438-457To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2011.557328PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLEFull terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditionsThis article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Anysubstantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representationthat the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of anyinstructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primarysources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly orindirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.The Conflict Resolution and CounterterrorismDilemma: Turkey Faces its Kurdish QuestionERSEL AYDINLIDepartment of International Relations, Bilkent University, Ankara,TurkeyNIHAT ALI OZCANProgramme on the Changing Character of War, University of Oxford,Oxford, UKThis article considers the relationship between two processes—conflict resolutionand counterterrorism—which conceptually share many common points, yet in prac-tice do not necessarily proceed together easily towards a common goal. Consideringparticular cases of ethnic conflict in which terrorist factions exist, the article arguesthat while neither conflict resolution nor counterterrorism alone can adequatelyaddress the problem, simultaneously conducting both must keep in mind the pro-cesses’ inherent differences and avoid excessive prioritizing of one over the other.By exploring recent Turkish governmental initiatives to address the Kurdish ques-tion, the article attempts to provide an outline for how to successfully cope withthe two processes simultaneously.Keywords conflict resolution, counterterrorism, Kurdish question, Kurds, PKK,terrorism, Turkey, TurksIntroductionResearch on conflict resolution and counterterrorism rarely seems to consider therelationship between the two processes,1 though often—for example, when one partyto the conflict is an ethnic-based terrorist group—the two may be inextricably con-nected. In such cases, conflict resolution and counterterrorism share a basic bond inthe sense that both seek an end to some kind of conflictual behavior, and indeed,much of the literature conceptualizing effective counterterrorism attributes successto factors that are also a part of conflict resolution processes. Particularly in recentyears, counterterrorism studies have stressed the need for more proactive politicalresponses2 and for rhetorical efforts to delegitimize political violence.3 They havediscussed the need to increase public spending for services in the terrorist group’sErsel Aydinli is an associate professor in the Department of International Relations, Bilk-ent University, Ankara, Turkey. Nihat Ali Ozcan is a visiting fellow at the University ofOxford Programme on the Changing Character of War.Address correspondence to Ersel Aydinli, Department of International Relations, BilkentUniversity, Ankara 06800, Turkey. E-mail: ersel@bilkent.edu.trTerrorism and Political Violence, 23:438–457, 2011Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLCISSN: 0954-6553 print=1556-1836 onlineDOI: 10.1080/09546553.2011.557328438Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 constituency area,4 and revealed the overall counterproductiveness of harsh, militar-istic government responses.5This connection does not mean, however, that conflict resolution and counterter-rorism will easily proceed side by side towards a common goal. On the contrary, thetwo processes may very well clash at fundamental levels, from how they define theiraims and foci, to how they are perceived and acted upon. Traditionally, counterter-rorism has been conducted as an immediate response to a particular act and is there-fore executed on a fairly short-term basis, whereas conflict resolution is a broaderprocess, involving a ‘‘longer-term series of moves to implement [an initial] decisionand to surround it with ties of acceptance.’’6 The latter part of this definition alsoraises questions about the participants involved with each process—who is to beincluded in the ‘‘ties of acceptance’’? Counterterrorism is usually decided upon atthe bureaucratic level, while conflict resolution, though also demanding bureaucratic-level decisions and actions, requires a more consensus-based, societally-backed,national political agenda. Finally, counterterrorism is ultimately focused on terror-ists, in other words, people with a primarily criminal, ‘‘bad guy’’ image, who needto be caught or eliminated. Conflict resolution, if it is to succeed, cannot afford tobe as single-minded; it must be comprehensive enough in its approach to accommo-date everyone and everything, from dissidents’ demands to those of the broadersociety, from economic issues to cultural and political ones, and so on.Underlying the complications that may arise between conflict resolution andcounterterrorism at a more philosophical level are what we might call opposing cen-tripetal and centrifugal pressures. Conflict resolution demands consensus-buildingand a pulling together of all members of two or more groups, whereas counterterror-ism seems characterized by separation or pulling apart. To begin with, counterterror-ism is generally focused on the activities of a politically motivated and armed factionof one of the conflicting groups. While that faction may itself seek some kind ofdistancing (for example, separating their broader ethnic group from another ethnicgroup), the counterterrorism response also has centrifugal tendencies, as it tries tophysically and psychologically isolate the armed elements from the rest of theirown group, so that they either fade by themselves or can be more easily eliminated.In other words, while the counterterrorism forces would like to build on and expandthe existing gap between the demands of the armed faction and those of the masseswho may potentially support it,7 the armed faction wants to expand any gap between‘‘their’’ masses and the other societal group.Thus, while the processes of counterterrorism and conflict resolution may shareconceptual commonalities for true effectiveness, this does not mean in practice thateither one alone is adequate to deal with contexts of ethnic conflict in which terrorismis involved. Counterterrorism aimed at wiping out a terrorist faction without address-ing broader ethnic community issues cannot be expected to fully solve the problem,perhaps because it is practically impossible to completely isolate an armed ‘‘terrorist’’faction of a particular ethnic group from its broader potential constituency. Whetherwe speak of the Basques in Spain, the Palestinians, or the Kurds in Turkey, even themost accommodative group members cannot easily sever entirely some feelings ofsympathy or appreciation for the armed faction of their community—particularlybecause it is often due to such armed groups’ actions that the broader ethniccommunity’s overall cause is brought to the national or global agenda.On the other hand, the broader ideal of conflict resolution is equally inadequatefor managing ethnic conflicts in which there remains a terrorist threat. Engaging inConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 439Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 conflict resolution in the hope that it will also resolve terrorism problems is not feas-ible for the obvious reason that terrorists are armed. They have the power and poten-tial to keep themselves on the public agenda at all times, and if they do engage interrorist activities, public reaction is certain to complicate if not derail a conflictresolution process. Moreover, a conflict resolution process involving a political,accommodative approach that acknowledges the needs of different groups mayunwittingly even help an existing terrorist group, in part by providing it the meansto claim that such a ‘‘soft’’ accommodative approach constitutes recognition of theirarmed efforts and thus of their own success. Any such boost to the terrorist faction islikely to have divisive and polarizing results: if the terrorist faction gains strengthand popularity within its local community there will be further separating of thelarger communities; and simultaneously, evidence of growing strength and popu-larity among the terrorist faction will naturally provoke a negative reaction fromthe generally much larger moderate sectors of society whose position and supportare key for successful conflict resolution.If, therefore, in cases of conflict resolution when an active terrorist group exists,the two processes must be conducted simultaneously and yet somehow not succumbto their inherent differences, how best is this to be done? This article explores thisproblem by looking at the case of Turkey, and specifically at recent governmentefforts to address the ‘‘Kurdish question.’’ It first shows how the chances for successof the Turkish government’s early initiatives for conflict resolution, a processreferred to as the ac¸ılım or ‘‘opening up,’’ were reduced because this dilemma wasnot carefully considered and thus the terrorist PKK organization and its leader wereallowed to become active participants in the process. The article then sets out to pro-vide a roadmap for how such a simultaneous process can best take place. It shouldbe noted that the aim of the roadmap suggested in this article and the understandingbehind its supporting assumptions is that a realistic solution is needed: one thatmoves beyond wishful thinking and tries to minimize the risk of an outcome thatwould hurt all parties involved. It also must be acknowledged up front that it wouldbe destructively reductionist to view the process as taking place between ‘‘Turks’’and ‘‘Kurds,’’ as though the two were homogenous groups. Divisions in Turkey’sTurkish population are well documented, with many recent discussions focusingon a widening gap between secularists and Islamists. With respect to Turkish Kurds,a history of exposure to democratization, free economy, secularism, and nation-statepolicies, attached to a belatedly developed nationalism in an internationally pene-trated region, has contributed greatly to a fragmented societal structure not onlybetween them and the wider regional Kurdish population, but among Turkey’sKurdish community itself. The proposed roadmap attempts, therefore, to suggesta route for marginalizing more radical factions without alienating the broaderKurdish community from the conflict resolution process.The Kurdish CaseThe fate of the widespread Kurdish population in the Middle East remains one oftoday’s major unresolved ethnic issues. Initiatives launched in Turkey in 2009 maynot only have effects on the future of Turkey’s Kurdish population but may alsooffer a model for future patterns of ethnic-based conflict resolution in the extendedMiddle East. If Turkey can cope with its Kurdish question successfully, it maybecome an exemplar of successful peaceful conflict resolution for dealing with440 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 minority issues, insurgencies, and even terrorism. Of course the reverse also holdstrue. If Turkey fails in this effort and the result is a breakdown of the current conflictresolution process, it will still present an example, but this time a negative one. Anysuch failure will send a message to the rest of the Middle East about the fatal risksof an accommodative, liberal conflict resolution approach based on democraticprinciples.8The majority of Turkish citizens and institutions have in past decades consideredthe ‘‘Kurdish Question’’ as only a terrorism issue, in which the ‘‘answer’’ to the‘‘question’’ was to be found in the successful elimination of the separatist terroristorganization, the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK).9 In doing so, Turkish governance,both the security establishment and political rulers, revealed a failure to distinguishbetween countering terrorists and countering terrorism. In the face of terroristactivity, there is of course a need for a quick response to those acts, includingcapturing the individuals behind them in order to remove the immediate threatand to comfort the society. But the larger issue does not end there. To fully countera terrorism threat requires understanding the root causes of the social mobilizationthat produced the offending terrorists—a process more closely aligned with conflictresolution. Without addressing the deeper issues, the need to cope with the terroristswill never end.With respect to the Kurdish Question, Turkey’s leaders have generally notwanted to face the root causes of terrorist activity because it would mean directlyacknowledging the existence of a very big minority population, and coming to termswith the possibility that the unifying policies that were part of the Republic’s found-ing ideology—policies of a single nation, single language, and centralized power—were perhaps neither well-founded nor realistic. To be fair, this avoidance was notsolely the result of short-sightedness or refusal; historical experience has also notbeen helpful in promoting self-reflection or open appraisal. Turkey received a lion’sshare of the major global terror waves of the 20th century, in particular that of theCold War-provoked, left-wing wave of the 1960s and 1970s. That learning experi-ence contributed to the general view of terrorists as agents of foreign influence,thereby slowing down any move towards introspection and towards focusing onthe underlying causes of terrorism, even when the nature of that terrorist activitychanged. The countering terrorists framework that may have seemed appropriatefor ‘‘foreign-based’’ terror was at least familiar; the culture of security that itstemmed from, its predominant institutions, and the techniques to be used withinit, were in place and ready to be applied in the face of new waves of terror. In a curi-ous way, the discourse of ‘‘anti-terrorism’’ also served to numb public opinion andthus alleviate successive governments from having to devise overarching policies todeal with the broader Kurdish question. Ultimately though, the repeated failureto move beyond an ‘‘anti-terrorist’’ paradigm generally served to produce moreviolence, and to make a transition to conflict resolution even more difficult.With the ‘‘opening up’’ (ac¸ılım) debate launched in mid-2009 by the Turkishgovernment leadership, we finally see evidence of a desire to shift from an anti-terrorist approach towards a deeper addressing of the root causes of the problem:accepting that the ‘‘Kurdish Question’’ goes beyond the PKK, and therefore neces-sitates a political conflict resolution process that prioritizes non-military instrumentsand takes into consideration ethnically motivated issues and demands. With a shiftto a conflict resolution mindset and an ethnicity-based political framework, however,Turkey is entering uncharted waters. These waters are not only unfamiliar, butConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 441Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 anxiety provoking, since the framework’s basic premises and the questions it raisesrevive societal and institutional fears of the historical destruction of the OttomanEmpire via ethnic revolts and separation efforts.Anxiety is exactly what arose in the months since the launching of the ‘‘openingup,’’ but the fact is that despite a lengthy period of inaction, there is no turning back.First, the old framework was an anachronistic avoidance of a reality that can nolonger be ignored; second, the genie is out of the bottle. Now that questions arebeing raised in every sector, from the political, to the judicial, to popular society,10about what needs to be or should be done with respect to Turkey’s Kurdish popu-lation, it is no longer possible to return to the days when the only question askedwas ‘‘how can we defeat the PKK?’’ Turkey stands therefore on the brink of anunavoidable process of conflict resolution; the only real question is, what directionwill this process take?It appears that conflict resolution between Turkey and some portions of itsKurdish population can take one of two main routes. The first lies in the assumptionthat continued political liberalization can allow for a formulation of co-existencebetween Turks and Kurds within a fully democratic nation of Turkey. The secondis a more confrontational route aimed at some kind of formal separation of Turksand Kurds. This second outcome would be highly complicated given the extremeintermixing of the two societies both physically (large numbers of Kurds live outsideof Turkey’s most heavily Kurdish populated areas) and socially (the two groups havelived among each other and intermarried over the centuries). It also runs a distinctrisk of bringing about a radicalization of Turkish politics, rising efforts to crushKurdish separatist activism, and a resulting protracted, violent, ethnic conflict, allof which would inevitably lead to a weakening of the democratic standards achievedto date.Only the first option seems both desirable and feasible, but one factor seems topresent a problem for its successful achievement. When one draws on the experiencesof other attempts around the world to resolve ethnic conflicts that have beenaccompanied by low-intensity conflict and terrorism, it seems clear that Turkeywould have been in a much better position to start this conflict resolution periodhad the armed and violent Kurdish group, the PKK, first been marginalized.11 Withthe PKK and its leader remaining as key players in the conflict resolution period, theprobability of protracted conflict and violence is increased. Unfortunately, theopportunity to preemptively marginalize the PKK was missed, so now a counterter-rorist process of marginalizing the PKK and a process of conflict resolution musttake place concurrently.A Botched OpeningIn July 2009, the Turkish government announced its determination to initiate anac¸ılım (opening up) with respect to the country’s many decades-long KurdishQuestion.12 In doing so it launched an important and arguably much overdueattempt to address the issue of the country’s Kurdish population in an entirelynew manner. What is also evident, however, is that the initial moves for thisdiscussion were flawed. The first flaw was timing.13 Such a claim is not an attemptto rationalize a further postponing of this discussion; in fact it could easily be arguedthat it should have been launched even earlier. However this particular timing wasproblematic in various ways. In economic terms the timing could not have been442 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 worse. In the middle of an economic crisis period,14 the government lacks theresources that could help comfort both sides in this tricky process. There is insuf-ficient money, for example, to comfortably fund developmental projects in the coun-try’s poorer Southeast and gain the support of that region’s large Kurdishpopulation. On the other hand, if extra monies were to be set aside for that region,15it could risk negative reactions among the Turkish population in other parts of thecountry, which are also undergoing tight times.While it might be argued that there could never be a perfect moment with respectto economic matters, the timing of the initiative was also flawed in its apparent sud-denness. The initial announcement in July seemed abrupt and ill-prepared, and wasimmediately followed by sharp criticism from the opposition parties in Parliament.16An apparent lack of pre-synchronization and pre-negotiation among the partiesincreased the harshness of the responses, and ratcheted up the accusatory rhetoric,including assertions that the government, in making such a ‘‘rash’’ move, must havehad either an ulterior motive (e.g., seeking popularity and ultimately votes amongthe large Kurdish population) or was being externally pressured (e.g., that thiswas an American plot).17Even more important than questions of timing, there was the major structuralflaw of an apparent lack of an overall framework prescribing how the discussionshould ensue.18 In other words, the government failed to put forth a clear outlineof what the boundaries of the ‘‘opening up’’ discussion should be, how the discussionshould be conducted within those boundaries, and, perhaps most crucially, whoshould be the primary participants in the discussion.19 In terms of participants, itseems self-evident that a major conflict resolution negotiation period after years ofbloody struggle will unfold more smoothly if dominated by the less radical represen-tatives on both sides. And in fact, the Turkish government has been making steps toreduce radical elements on the Turkish side. For example, through the legal investi-gation known as Ergenekon, extreme figures among the civilians as well as the mili-tary (what could be considered the ‘‘hawks’’ with respect to the Kurdish question)are being tried and imprisoned, and thus their ideas are being limited. Moreover,the Turkish military has shown a willingness to accommodate democratic advancesand to adapt into a more Western understanding of civil-military relations. Thishas included voicing the need for non-military solutions, arguing, for example,that the heavily Kurdish-populated southeast region was ‘‘secured enough’’ toallow non-military engagement—e.g., social, economic, psychological, and politicaltools—with the Kurdish Question.20 More radical voices among the Turkishpublic also seem to be diminished, as a growing number of the public mediahave shown support for the process,21 and public surveys have shown increasingapproval for a discourse of ‘‘opening up’’22 (despite the equally notable increasinganxiety).Unfortunately, the lack of proper preparation before launching the discussionmeant that no efforts were taken to marginalize the radical elements on the Kurdishside. Instead, their voices have remained in the forefront, and the discussion has beendominated by the PKK and its rhetoric.23 Even the Kurdish political party, theDemocratic Society Party (DTP), is felt by many to be acting as the mouthpiecefor the PKK.24 This heightened visibility of the PKK has run the risk of giving themextra legitimacy in the eyes of some Kurds who, heretofore, may have been hesitantto support the organization, and has also given the impression that they arenecessarily a part of the process. Not only is it not the case that they have to be partConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 443Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 of the discussion, but their participation is in fact anathema to the process’ successfulconduct and conclusion.No Room for This PKKIn Principle . . .Several arguments can be made for why the PKK and its jailed leaderAbdullah Ocalan should not be a part of the conflict resolution process. First, atthe ideological level, the PKK’s clearly stated desire continues to be a legally estab-lished state with two nations.25 Such an outcome would necessitate not only a newpolitical framework, but a new understanding of what ‘‘Turkey’’ is—a formulationnot compatible with the first route of coexistence within a democratic Turkishnation.The PKK also carries with it tremendous baggage. With its 30 years of confron-tational history, its involvement in the volatile geopolitics of Iran and Northern Iraq,and the resulting image it has among the Turkish population, the PKK’s partici-pation risks further polarization of both the Turkish and Kurdish sides—possiblyeven more so among the Kurds.26 The group’s presence therefore increases the risksof both sides falling back on old practices: in other words, reverting to terrorist=counterterrorist tendencies. The PKK might, under certain circumstances, continueto commit terrorist acts that could upset the discussion process. Likewise, theTurkish side might be led back into exclusively counterterrorism practices andperspectives, and the ethnicity-based paradigm of addressing the Kurdish Questioncould be overshadowed.Finally, the PKK’s presence in the discussion increases the chance of a risingTurkish resistance to what may be construed as an imbalanced process of rehabili-tation. As noted above, Turkey seems to have gained some control over its moreradical actors from the previous era, but the Kurdish side, with the PKK and Ocalanat its head, does not show signs of similar changes. It is not reasonable to expect theTurks to easily agree to a process in which they are going through a cleaning up, nor-malization effort, distancing themselves from the trauma of a 30-year low-intensityconflict, while the Kurds are seen as having not yet begun to do so. This is not to saythat such an effort may not be equally desired on the Kurdish side, but given thePKK’s long history and prestige among some for the role it has played in bringingKurdish issues to the table, its continued presence makes it much more difficult foralternative representatives to be strengthened or to develop.It also seems impossible to envisage a ‘‘PLO-ification’’ of the PKK, in otherwords, an attempt to encourage the PKK to develop and transform into an entitythat could be a part of a conflict resolution process. The primary reason why it seemsvirtually impossible for the PKK to reform in a manner that would significantlychange the picture presented above, is that the group suffers from a generationalproblem. Namely, those who started the PKK, with its particular strategies andideas, still control the movement. If one looks at successful cases of transition of for-mer insurgent or terrorist movements into partners for conflict resolution, it becomesapparent that such major transitions come about after the removal of the firstgeneration.27 There was a chance for such a transition in 1999 when Ocalan wascaptured and jailed and the group appeared faced with genuine marginalization,but that window of opportunity closed, and now the PKK is strong and Ocalan is444 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 back in charge—with a unique capacity to manipulate the political process frominside his prison cell.28And in Practice . . .Indeed, in the early months of the ac¸ılım, it became evident that the PKK’s presencewould be a hindrance to progress. The events of one week in particular show how aconflict resolution process with PKK involvement runs the risk of failure. Inmid-October 2009, it was reported that a group of PKK militants would come fromIraq and surrender in Turkey as a sign of good will and support for the overallprocess. In response, the understanding was that Turkish authorities would ensuretheir safe entry and release in Turkey. This peaceful surrender and release wasintended to be a major step towards a gradual full disarmament of the PKK, andin the days leading up to the arrival the Prime Minister made speeches stressingthe positive message that would be sent by this move. Although the political oppo-sition in parliament was cautious, the mood was in fact generally hopeful.On Monday, October 19, a group of 34 PKK militants arrived at the Turkishborder with Iraq. Tens of thousands of people were there to meet them, includingDTP officials and numerous members of the press. While officially the event wentsmoothly—a special court was set up to question the incoming militants and ‘‘release’’them on Turkish soil—details of how events unfolded proved highly problematic.Perhaps most damaging, live nationwide broadcasts revealed images of PKKmilitants arriving in their familiar battle fatigues, cheering and making victory signs,and being saluted and praised by those greeting them. Both PKK and DTP membersspeaking to the press referred to the arriving militants as ‘‘peace ambassadors,’’ andattributed credit for the possibility of such an important event to Abdullah Ocalanand his longtime efforts. Almost immediately, commentaries began to emerge thatthe management of this ‘‘surrender’’ had been poor,29 and that it had turned insteadinto a political show to proclaim victory by the PKK, an organization that has beenlegally, politically, and socially considered a terrorist network. The decision of thecourt to release the militants also garnered criticism that they constituted a deviationfrom routine legal procedures.On Tuesday, October 20, the Turkish National Security Council met for nearlyseven hours. Even though the resulting statement avoided significant mention of thisparticular issue, insider reports revealed that the previous day’s show and the widelybroadcast image of the PKK as a victorious organization were discussed in the meet-ing, and considered by many as unacceptable behavior. As the day wore on, mediacommentaries became even more condemnatory of Monday’s ‘‘show,’’ and intima-tions began to emerge of a major societal reaction on the Turkish side to the imagesof a victorious PKK.By Wednesday, October 21, statements were released by governmental leaders,including the Prime Minister, saying that Monday’s display had not been helpful tooverall progress, that it was provoking a backlash, and that within this context thegovernment was considering putting a halt to planned future arrivals of other PKKmilitants. The next day, in light of increasingly bitter public commentary, the TurkishPrime Minister announced that if the radical elements on the Kurdish side refused toact in a more accommodating manner, the entire process would go back to squareone. Reports also emerged that the government was sending a message to thePKK, telling them to cancel a scheduled arrival of PKK members from Europe.Conflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 445Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 By the end of the week, there was widespread indignation on the Turkish sidewith how things had progressed. The political opposition was up in arms, accusingthe government of ‘‘treason,’’ of being ‘‘hand in hand with the PKK,’’ and of violat-ing the Constitution by setting up puppet courts.30 Public opinion of the process wasalso in a spiral, and the government was openly backpedaling on the whole issue. Onthe other side, the DTP had become completely marginalized, appearing only as asidekick to the PKK, while the PKK had emerged even more concretely as theprimary political representative of the ethnically mobilized Kurdish population.Overall, the hopes for a smooth solution to the conflict resolution process wereessentially dashed, and the emphasis had switched to damage control to keep theprocess from folding completely.This is a picture of one week of attempted conflict resolution. There can be littlequestion but that the negative outcome was due to the large, visible role played bythe PKK. Clearly, with the PKK on the frontlines, the conflict resolution processis hampered because the organization does not wish to or cannot move away fromwhat it was. The more visible the PKK, the more contentious the reaction, and insuch an environment the Turkish government is less able to act courageously, andchances for a successful conflict resolution are reduced. In the year and a half follow-ing that critical week, the process has ground almost entirely to a standstill. As notedearlier, however, there can be no turning back on the opening up. Whatever threatsthe government might make about going back to ‘‘square one,’’ the fact is that theprocess must go on, and it must do so with the added handicap of a revitalized PKK.How then can the conflict resolution process best be resumed, and what role shouldcounterterrorism play in the process?A Road MapGeneral PrinciplesIn prescribing how best to proceed from here, two main points must be made at theoutset. First, there is the need to reiterate that a successful roadmap to deal withthe Kurdish question is vital for Turkey, but also has important implications forthe region and for the international community—the EU and USA in particular.Turkey’s route to dealing with its Kurdish population will likely serve as an examplefor other regional powers dealing with domestic ethnicity issues. If Turkey achieves asuccessful outcome of peaceful integration under a democratic rubric, it will provide apositive reference point for others to follow. If Turkey follows a route of separation,then others may be more likely to do so as well. As noted earlier, our starting assump-tion is that a separation route will, in this case, heighten the chance for conflict, and isnot therefore a good solution for anyone. If separation and conflict emerge in Turkey,not only will democratic conflict resolution become associated with the potential forprovoking additional problems, but regional security overall will be further disrupted,as Kurds and other minorities in neighboring countries draw on this example. Thefollowing roadmap therefore is one that aims for a solution within a framework ofcoexistence in a democratic Turkey.With respect to the strategies prescribed here, the main underlying idea is thatthey must be multisided and simultaneous. Any roadmap that suggests unidimen-sional policies, or concentrates singularly on dealing with the different groups orproblems in a linear manner, stands little hope for success. Therefore, even though446 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 we argue that the PKK is a primary concern, this does not mean that the conflictresolution process can succeed by only concentrating for now on the PKK dimen-sion. It must simultaneously deal with this issue and all other dimensions as well.The strategies must first, help to liberate the process as much as possible fromthe confrontational tendencies of radicals and fringe elements of all kinds; andsecond, attempt to satisfy as many non-radicals as possible. The latter include theaverage Turk, as well as the majority of Kurds in Turkey, who must be kept asmuch as possible a part of the democratic, secular, liberal, Western-oriented,country. What, therefore, can and should be offered within democratic norms andpractices to keep the middle ground satisfied while at the same time minimizingthe extremes?Identifying Target GroupsIn a combined counterterrorism=conflict resolution process, a starting point is to geta general idea about what is meant by the middle ground and extremes. In this case,with respect to Turkey’s Kurds, three general groupings can be identified—albeitwith some inevitable overlap: 1) Integrated Kurds; 2) Islamist Kurds; and 3) ActiveEthnic=Separatist Kurds. While the first clearly represent the moderate group(generally satisfied with the status quo) and the last can be considered politicallyrevisionist (to varying degrees, from wanting to secure autonomous group rights,to seeking regional autonomy, to wanting a separate state), the middle group haselements of both.So-called ‘‘Integrated Kurds’’ can be found represented in virtually all Turkishpolitical parties and, recently, have been participating with greater acknowledgementof their Kurdish identity, and thus their sensitivity to Kurdish affairs. They are saidto represent around half of Turkey’s Kurdish population.31 Across the board, theyreject violence as a means for Kurds to achieve political goals in Turkey. Their over-all demands with respect to Kurdish issues are to increase individual rights, and tolevel democratic and economic standards in Turkey; within such a picture, the rightsof traditionally underrepresented groups will be more surely guaranteed.Islamist Kurds may represent up to one-fifth of the Kurdish population.32 Themajority of Islamist Kurds have been a part of the country’s pro-Islamist politicalparties, and have typically supported the AK party in the last two elections. Thereis a tendency towards some violence among fringe elements of Kurdish Islamists,with some ideological influence coming from Iran. At points in the past, someradical members of related groups have gotten into violent struggles against boththe PKK and later against the Turkish government.33Finally, the third group is that of active, ethnically mobilized=separatist Kurds,who can be considered as possible supporters of the PKK and its agenda. Since theDTP party is widely believed to be politically dominated by—some argue under thecontrol of—the PKK, many DTP supporters can also be grouped in this category.To get a sense of the amount of support this group has, therefore, we can considerthe results of the last national election. TheDTP received 5.6% (2.6 million) of the totalvotes.34 This represents roughly 40% of the overall Kurdish population.35 Even thoughthere have been slight variations in the political demands of active ethnic-separatistKurds over the years, in the final analysis, we can say that they seek some type of auto-nomy, whether a strong, distinct ethnic autonomy within Turkey, a regional autonomywithin a federated Turkey, or a fully independent Kurdish state.Conflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 447Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 Rescuing the Conflict-Resolution Process From Radicalization: AMultidimensional ApproachGiven such an understanding of the primary identities of Kurds within Turkey, whatcan be done to isolate the fringe elements, without alienating their moderate counter-parts? Looking first to the so-called ‘‘integrated’’ Kurds, policies must be in place tokeep them invested in the idea of belonging to a democratic, unified nation. Despite ageneral sense of pessimism that often seems to cloud discussions about Turkey’sKurdish problem, there are positive notes. Turkey’s journey of integrating with theWest, specifically its accession process to the EU, as well as opportunities that havearisen as part of liberal economic consolidation, have put in place a framework inwhich integrated Kurds should continue to be satisfied. Rising democracy standardswith an even greater sensitivity to individual rights will presumably strengthen theirexisting stance against violent approaches or separatist arguments, and will also pro-mote their increasing participation in political parties and civil society organizations.In other words, continued integration of this group can be encouraged by conceptua-lizing today’s problems as ‘‘Turkey’s problems,’’ and by seeking solutions accord-ingly. ‘‘Turkey’s problems’’ are those that can be best solved by deeperdemocratization and greater economic growth—outcomes that benefit everyonewithin Turkey’s borders. Such an approach is not only best suited to assure the con-tinued integration of this first group of Kurds and to minimize the chances that theywill turn against a peaceful solution, it also helps ease the psychological struggle ofthose Kurds who want recognition without separation—a delicate balance not easilyaddressed. At the practical level, therefore, Turkey’s campaign for democratic open-ing up must move forward on all levels, overall economic growth in the country mustbe supported, and existing economic policies with respect to the Kurdish regions ofthe country should continue, from subsidized loans for construction and economicdevelopment to infrastructural investments in health services, roads, education, andso on.36For the Islamist Kurds, again, the current picture is cautiously positive, becausepro-Islamist politics have been in power for several years, and Islamist Kurds have aclear role within that picture. The ruling AK party government now has around 50–75Kurdish parliamentarians,37 and a maintaining of the government’s pro-Islamist dis-course and policies should be enough to keep their constituents satisfied and averse toseparatist, conflictive routes. On the other hand, though the radical elements withinthe Islamist Kurds may not be significant in number, they are dangerous and presenta clear risk to a smooth conflict resolution process. Fortunately, because their num-bers are small, it is feasible to try and reduce them to an ineffectual fringe; thereforethe criminal countering measures that have been put in place against radical KurdishIslamists in violent organizations like Kurdish Hizbullah need to continue.38 Onecautionary note to Turkish authorities is that they be careful not to simply dismissthe radical Kurdish Islamists as being the lesser of two evils in comparison with thePKK. The radical Islamist Kurdish groups are much more closely linked to theradical Islamist circles in Iraq and the larger Jihadist networks than are any othergroups in Turkey, and must therefore be kept under tight control.Finally, with respect to those Kurds who can be identified as active ethnic-separatists, there are two dimensions to the roadmap: what do you do with thePKK as a terrorist organization,39 and how do you promote an alternative represen-tative for non-Islamist Kurds that is independent from the PKK?448 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 Addressing the second point first, within the general politics of the country therehas to be a movement of capacity building for legal and legitimate, PKK-free (to theextent possible) representation of Kurds. This effort should target the political core,and therefore be aimed at the DTP. There is no denying that assuming this positionwill be difficult for the DTP, and any realistic plan must be aware of how great thechallenge is. The biggest problems for the DTP or other Kurdish political parties seemto stem from their strong ties with the PKK itself. The founding rationale and energythat helped shape the basic culture of the Kurdish political parties is essentially thesame as that of the PKK, namely, a separatist ideology with Marxist-Leninist,revolutionary left-wing origins. Within this philosophy, armed activity and an auth-oritarian ideology are the norm, and the role given to legal, political extensions isminimal. In the case of the PKK, for example, the political wing is in charge ofcivilian, political propaganda. The impression therefore—if not practice—is of polit-ical parties that are not independent actors, but institutions basically serving aspropaganda wings in counterpart to the military side of a shared movement.Other factors also contribute to the argument that the PKK holds considerablebehind-the-scenes control over the legal Kurdish political parties. The PKK’s firstgeneration leaders remain alive and active; therefore their seniority, prestige, andpower naturally shape the political atmosphere within legal Kurdish politics.Cultural issues play a role as well. Patriarchal cultural structures within Kurdishsociety facilitate single-power cults, therefore favoring the PKK’s hierarchical man-agement style over such practices as consensus building and competition of ideas. Inlight of such pressures, legal political parties seem unable to nominate candidatesthat are clearly disassociated from the PKK, but rather, seem forced to agree tonominations supported by the PKK’s leadership.40A process of capacity building for the DTP must therefore begin with an officialsetting aside of feelings that the DTP is indistinguishable from the PKK. The entirepolitical system in Turkey, from political parties, to bureaucrats and other stateauthorities, must try to embrace the DTP and its leaders. In the parliament or at otherpolitical gatherings, DTP leaders should be properly acknowledged and treated asimportant partners in the political process. Their stature and self-confidence mustbe boosted, since isolating or ostracizing them only pushes them further towards thePKK. Embracing theDTP places the onus on them tomore carefully consider and bal-ance their affinities to the PKK with their full participation in the government. Ofcourse the fear is real that such a legitimizing of the DTP ultimately spells a legitimiz-ing of the PKK, but this risk can be afforded if it is done as part of a multi-dimensionalapproach. In this case, for example, a boosting of the DTP that coincides with pressureand effective policies against the PKK is a risk that can be taken.At the practical level, to help improve the DTP’s democratic and legal account-ability among Kurds, there must also be a promotion of the party’s connection toissues of social welfare and services, rather than to just those of ethnicity and politics.In other words, the government needs to promote and support DTP representatives(currently in charge of nearly 96 municipalities)41 to speak about building roads,clean water projects, improved sewage systems, or other municipal services, ratherthan focusing only on Kurdish rights. If necessary, DTP-represented municipalitiesshould receive additional aid—provided it is guaranteed that this aid is spent forinfrastructural development and social or municipal services.It is true that if any conflict resolution plan is to possibly succeed, the imbal-anced relationship between the PKK and the legal Kurdish political parties needsConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 449Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 to be fully taken into consideration when deciding to boost the DTP’s role as polit-ical interlocutor. Promoting the DTP must therefore be done simultaneously with apushing back on the PKK. How, then, can the PKK be effectively marginalized?Dealing With the PKKThe policies recommended above, if performed in a cohesive and integrated manner,will contribute to maintaining the support of the already integrated Kurds and thepeaceful Islamist Kurds, and will help to isolate the radical Islamists and the armedPKK. But these efforts alone will not be enough to fully marginalize the PKK andeliminate the risk that it could interfere with and disrupt the conflict resolution pro-cess; additional concrete steps must be taken to reduce the armed potential. The focusof these concrete steps must be that they serve to minimize the PKK’s violent armedpower, without upsetting or alienating moderate Kurds within or outside of Turkey.Key to this effort is the removal of the PKK’s safe haven in Northern Iraq. Aslong as the armed PKK maintains a safe haven this close strategically to Turkishterritory, it will inevitably continue to securitize and radicalize the entire process,thus keeping its success in constant jeopardy. The presence of armed PKK forcessafely ensconced across the border essentially guarantees a continuation of logisticalsupport, effective propaganda, and violence that will keep Turkish authoritiesembedded in a counterterrorism understanding, and will overshadow any emerging,evolving, PKK-free practices by the DTP. To wax poetic, under the shadow of arms,no political roses can emerge.Many may argue that it is not possible to eliminate the PKK presence inNorthern Iraq, the argument being that during the 1990s Turkey repeatedly sentthousands of troops into Iraq and even maintained a continuous military presencethere until 2003, and was still unable to achieve this goal. Granted, such efforts aloneare insufficient to cope with the overall issue, but this does not mean that militarymeasures should not at least be kept on the table, as they too can have a role to play.It would be inaccurate, for example, to say that previous Turkish military operationswere complete failures. In 1992, following operations by cooperating Turkish andNorthern Iraqi (Talabani) forces, the PKK was forced to withdraw to the Zele regionnear the Iranian border. This move dramatically disrupted the PKK organization andforced it to declare a cease-fire. In 1995, Turkey’s second major military operation ledthe PKK to declare a change in strategy, away from a protracted people’s war, andthen in 1997, a third major operation launched the process that ended with theremoval of PKK leader Ocalan from his refuge in Syria. Despite these relativesuccesses, the military’s inability to control the entire terrain on a permanent basis,together with fluctuating political developments, have enabled the PKK’s resilience.Clearly, therefore, the military approach is a limited one, something not to bedismissed entirely, but something that will be meaningful only when used as part ofa larger strategy.The most realistic goal of such military operations, therefore, is not to aim fortotal elimination of the PKK, but rather to significantly damage the PKK’s logisticsand training potential in Northern Iraq, which can in turn help produce greaterpolitical confidence for both accommodative Turkish politics and for PKK-freeKurdish politics. Ultimately, for a successful conflict resolution process to take placein Turkey, the PKK should be prevented from feeling safe and comfortable when inNorthern Iraq. A destabilized PKK will be less able to sabotage a peace process.450 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 There are a number of other reasons why the PKK’s safe haven in Northern Iraqis extremely harmful for the resolution process, beginning with the role it plays inhelping the PKK maintain its arms and then use that strength for various kinds ofleverage. Maintaining arms and strength just across the border helps them havesocial, political, and economic control over the broader Kurdish population inTurkey. It enables them to threaten and even punish those Kurds who disagree withor act in opposition to their violent separatist efforts.42 They also use those arms toguarantee their institutional continuity,43 in other words, the occasional violent actsthey commit are a visible reminder that the group is still intact and in power, andthus serve to help boost internal recruitment. Such acts can even be used for bargain-ing purposes and leverage against the government. Armed attacks, from hit and runacts, planting roadside bombs, or targeting pipelines and touristic centers, make thegoverning AK party appear incompetent in their new efforts to deal with the PKKand with the broader Kurdish Question. A sense of government failure combinedwith the aftereffect of the attacks themselves, breeds increased Turkish nationalism,strains civil-military relations, lowers Kurdish support for the government, and risksa loss of votes from moderate Turks who just want stability. Continued attackstherefore make sense for the armed faction, since an AK party government feelingsuch pressure might be expected to conduct more accommodating policies to theethnic separatist Kurds in order to bring an end to the attacks.In light of these arguments, it is clear that the PKK’s armed forces’ threateningpotential must be minimized. To accomplish this, there must be a two-prongedapproach of awards and threats. The award must be based on guarantees thatmilitants who give up their arms can go back to their countries (primarily, but notexclusively, Turkey), and that their legal, safe return will be supported by economicand political incentives. In Turkey, for example, support and rehabilitation centersmust be established and, crucially, a system must be in place to help returned com-batants find employment. The level of trust necessary for such a policy to work isadmittedly tremendous. A framework of guarantees would therefore have to becertified state policy, ultimately based on consensus among political parties, themilitary, the government, the presidency, and intellectuals=the media. To achievethis, however, there must first be an internal consensus on the details of theeconomic, legal, and political arrangements within the Turkish state establishment.Negotiations must be conducted outside of public view, for as similar previous res-olution processes have shown, an excessive multiplicity of voices should be avoided.Moreover, once an agreement is achieved, it should be conveyed discreetly andthrough closed channels to the representatives of the armed groups in Turkey andoutside.In order to guarantee that the conflict process proceeds and that as manyPKK elements as possible agree to it, there must also be a threat. The first dimen-sion of the threat must include a convincing imposition of an internationallyaccepted image that all legal and political barriers have been lifted from Turkeyto deal with the PKK’s safe havens beyond Turkey’s borders. The second dimen-sion of the threat must be that those militants who refuse the above offer will bethe target of counterterrorist operations. Such operations would by nature be pain-ful, but would be necessary to marginalize these radicals and protect the conflictresolution process. Any such operations would have to be conducted in a mannerdesigned to minimize civilian casualties, and in line with all international andnational legal standards.Conflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 451Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 Ultimately, at the national level, one of the greatest challenges to success in thiseffort may be the government’s lack of experience or inability in galvanizing state andpolitics behind a cohesive, national strategic plan. One contributing factor to thisineffectiveness may be that since Turkish democracy and democratic politics remainstill quite young, and have yet to develop a mature tradition of crafting bipartisan-ship, the role of the opposition is generally understood as simply opposing everythingthe government proposes. On the other hand, governing is still seen to some degree aspracticing power without necessarily trying to build up pacts and seek consensus.Such understandings seriously handicap the potential solutions for national problemssuch as the Kurdish question, and others. Various other problems, from theover-compartmentalization of Turkish governance—even within the securityestablishment—and the historical faultlines and lack of trust between the securityestablishment and the political realm44 (not to mention within the political realmitself), present additional stumbling blocks to the managing of a multi-level roadmap.Nevertheless, if ever there was a time that Turkey could manage this, it is now.Domestically, the marginal extremists on the Turkish side are at their lowest levelof visibility ever, and internationally, expectations are high for Turkey to assume arole of regional stabilizer rather than disturbance. One question remains: what shouldthe role of the international community itself be in this process?The Role of the International CommunityThe roadmap above has emphasized certain principal features necessary for asuccessful conduct of the conflict resolution process being launched in Turkey,and has identified particular measures and approaches that must be carried out toensure the benefit of different parties in the process. There is also an underlyingreality that for many of the recommended steps in the roadmap, the internationalcommunity, and the United States in particular, has a crucial role to play. The firststep of this concerns the safe haven in Northern Iraq. As argued above, minimizingthe PKK’s armed potential cannot be done without dismantling their Northern Iraqsafe haven, and this cannot be done without American engagement and cooperation.American policies which indirectly serve to protect a safe haven in northern Iraq fora group that threatens not only an American ally but also the greater stability in acritical region is against American interests.Helping Turkey deal with the PKK’s presence in Northern Iraq is not onlyimportant for dealing with the direct problem of reducing the organization’s armedforces, it has an important role in providing moral support for Turkey in what is achallenging process overall. American engagement with the PKK issue has the powerto give a major psychological boost to a Turkish government and political systemthat may be feeling hesitant and cautious about the impending process, and can helpincrease its will to move ahead—even with those dimensions of the roadmap that arenot directly aimed at the PKK. Helpful moves by the Americans and the rest of theinternational community can strengthen the Turkish government’s resolve, andundercut accusations by opposing Turkish voices that the international communityserves only to block Turkey’s efforts vis-a`-vis the PKK. Such efforts would thusindirectly benefit the United States, by helping reestablish a more positive imageof America in Turkey.Helping the Turkish government in this effort seems to carry few risks for theUnited States. Some might warn that they will upset the Kurdish population in452 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 Northern Iraq, but the only element there that is truly likely to be offended andangered is that of the armed PKK itself. As long as such efforts against the armedPKK forces in Northern Iraq are conducted within a multi-dimensional roadmap,both within a framework that supports democratic and economic developmentand in coordination with efforts like support for the DTP and amnesty for thosePKK who disarm, it is unlikely that average Kurds in either Turkey or NorthernIraq will take offense. The key to success remains a simultaneous isolating of theradical marginals, with a continuing support of the moderate majority.It is true that the U.S. is in many ways already cooperating with Turkey,particularly in terms of sharing intelligence, which is utilized to support Turkish airraids. But the limitations of this cooperation are paralleled in the limitations ofthe resulting air raids. As is clear from the American experience in Iraq andAfghanistan, air operations are not completely effective against guerilla groups andinsurgents, which, like the PKK, operate in small numbers and take advantage ofthe rough terrain. Combating such groups requires land capabilities and surgical attackoperation potential, which means controlling the land and keeping the insurgent groupcontinuously on the run. Accomplishing this with the PKK can only be realized by awilling Iraqi government and northern Iraqi authorities, for which American influenceis key. The current U.S. attitude towards the Kurdish question in the region appears tobe a rather passive one of ‘‘wait and see.’’45 Such a position will need to become moreproactive if it is to serve both Turkey’s and America’s interests.ConclusionConflict resolution processes are never easy, and they become more complicatedwhen one of the participating parties contains an armed and active terrorist faction.Experiences from the Turkish case point to certain suggestions for successful conflictresolution in contexts with existing terrorism problems. First among these is thatengaging in conflict resolution efforts alone is not an adequate approach to solvinga terrorism problem. It is similarly not feasible to move abruptly from a counterter-rorism paradigm to one of conflict resolution—abruptly dismissing the institutions,rules, and policies of the counterterrorism establishment and moving into an exclus-ively political, negotiation-based approach. Rather, one needs a simultaneous man-agement of conflict resolution and counterterrorism, but with certain conditions.The Turkish case suggests that throughout such conflict resolution processes, thegovernment must maintain both the discursive and physical upper-hand against theterrorist faction. Public opinion on all sides must continue to believe that the govern-ment remains strong, and that traditional counterterrorism policies can and maycontinue if necessary. The potential to defeat the terrorists militarily should be real,and to manage this, the counterterrorism establishment should emotionally andphysically maintain a determined capacity to strike back if necessary. This showof strength potential is necessary to keep the terrorist faction from being able touse their own armed potential as leverage during the political negotiations. Forsuccessful conflict resolution, the terrorists must be kept in check, and only byhaving a working counterterrorism strategy in place and poised to activate can thisbe accomplished.Having said this, however, there must equally be a very clear understanding thatsuch counterterrorism readiness is very much a part of a larger conflict resolutionprocess. Ultimately, while neither process can stand alone, conflict resolution canConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 453Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 also not serve to counter terrorist activities. On the contrary, effective resolution ofsuch conflicts seems to demand a multifaceted policy in which counterterrorismserves to further conflict resolution.Notes1. An exceptionmay be Jacob Bercovitch and I.William Zartman’s chapter on ‘‘Terrorismand Conflict Resolution’’ in The SAGE Handbook of Conflict Resolution, eds. Jacob Bercovitch,Victor Kremenyuk, and I. William Zartman (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2009),437–454; even that work, however, focuses on the use of conflict resolution (negotiation) techni-ques for use in counterterrorism, specifically in hostage negotiations, not on the actual relation-ship between the two processes. Since conflict resolution is also sometimes associated withdemocratic expansion and liberalization, another possible exception might be Chenowethi(2010), which looks at democratization and terrorism, and shows that more political competition(democracy) correlates positively with more terrorist activity. Erica Chenowethi, ‘‘DemocraticCompetition and Terrorist Activity,’’ Journal of Politics 72 (2010): 16–30.2. Luis A. Gil-Alana and Carlos P. Barros, ‘‘A Note on the Effectiveness of NationalAnti-Terrorist Policies: Evidence from ETA,’’ Conflict Management and Peace Science 27,no. 1 (2010): 28–46.3. Arjun Chowdhury and Ronald R. Krebs, ‘‘Talking about Terror: CounterterroristCampaigns and the Logic of Representation,’’ European Journal of International Relations16, no. 1 (2010): 125–150.4. Kevin Siqueira and Todd Sandler, ‘‘Terrorists versus the Government: Strategic Inter-action, Support, and Sponsorship,’’ Journal of Conflict Resolution 50, no. 6 (2006): 878–898.5. B. Peter Rosendorff and Todd Sandler, ‘‘Too Much of a Good Thing? The ProactiveResponse Dilemma,’’ Journal of Conflict Resolution 48, no. 5 (2004), 657–671.6. Berkovitch, Kremenyuk, and Zartman (see note 1 above), 10.7. For example, the Basque public has not always supported the actions and goals of theETA. See Gil-Alana & Barros (note 2 above).8. It should be noted that there is a qualitative difference between an environment inwhich liberalism is relatively embedded and the people can rationally defend and shift theirfree political will, and one in which the social and political life is determined by religious,tribal, ethnic, and=or primordial hierarchies that limit people’s individual assessments andpolitical maneuvering capacity. The northern Middle East, despite newly experienced openingup to the influences of liberalization, remains largely under the influence of traditional socialand political structures, which inevitably affects the fate of conflict resolution efforts.9. For more on the Turkish state’s historical handling of the PKK, see Ersel Aydinli,‘‘Between Security and Liberalization: Decoding Turkey’s Struggle with the PKK,’’ SecurityDialogue 33, no. 2 (June 2002): 209–225.10. See for example an informal poll taken on whether Turkey’s next candidate for theEurovision song contest should sing in both Turkish and Kurdish. Story available at: http://www.milliyet.com.tr/Yazar.aspx?aType=YazarDetay&ArticleID=1131056&b=Eurovisiona%20Turkce-Kurtce%20sarkiyla%20katilabilir%20miyiz&KategoriID=2611. Seth G. Jones and Martin C. Libicki, How Terrorist Groups End: Lessons for Counter-ing al Qa’ida (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2008); Gaga Gvineria, ‘‘How does Terrorism End?’’in Paul K. Davis and Kim Cragin (eds.), Social Science for Counterterrorism: Putting thePieces Together (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2009), 257–298; Nat Colleta, Markus Kostner,and Ingo Wiederhofer, ‘‘Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration: Lessons andLiabilities in Reconstruction,’’ in Robert I. Rotberg (ed.), When States Fail: Causes andConsequences (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004), 170–182.12. The first mention of a move towards some kind of initiative came from President Gul,during his visit to Iran in March 2009, when he said, ‘‘Good things will happen in the KurdishQuestion’’ [Ku¨rt sorunun da iyi s¸eyler olacag˘ını] http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/11179281.asp. Prime Minister Erdog˘an assigned the Interior Minister to coordinate theprocess, http://www.zaman.com.tr/haber.do?haberno=872350, and later announced hewould himself speak to the Kurdish DTP leader. http://yenisafak.com.tr/Politika/Default.aspx?t=03.08.2009&i=202721454 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 13. The timing was bad on several fronts. From the government’s perspective, it was badtiming with respect to the Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP). The DTP had gained asignificant number of municipalities in the Southeast region in the 2007 election—several ofwhich they had won from the AKP. Since the municiaplities are the symbol of public power,the DTP was enjoying the psychological upperhand over the AKP. Civil-military relations atthe time were tense as the government had passed a late-night surprise legislation paving theway for military personnel to be tried in civilian courts. (July 9, 2009). Moreover, the allegedcompetition between the Prime Minister and the President themselves was heating up, mean-ing that consensus was not even likely to be found among the ruling elite.14. For a detailed analysis on the severity of the economic crisis, see the TEPAV Econom-ics Follow up Report, May–June 2009. Available at: http://www.tepav.org.tr/tur/admin/dosyabul/upload/2009_TEPAV_Mali_Izleme_Mayis_Haziran_Raporu.pdf15. Among these extra monies, the ‘‘GAP Action Plan (2008–2012),’’ made public in2008, indicated that 12 billion dollars would be invested in the Southeast region. http://arsiv.ntvmsnbc.com/news/438984.asp16. Among the responses were those of then opposition party leader Deniz Baykal, ‘‘Inthe name of solving the problem, let’s not dissolve Turkey’’ [‘‘sorun c¸o¨zeceg˘iz diye Tu¨rkiye’yic¸o¨zmeyelim’’]. Available at www.chp.org.tr/HaberDetayi.aspx?NewsID=133); and theNational Action Party (MHP) leader Devlet Bahceli: ‘‘We won’t fall into the trap the Kurdish‘opening up’ ’’ [Ku¨rt ac¸ılımı oyununa gelmeyeceg˘iz], available at www.stargazete.com/politika/bahceli-kurt-acilimi-bir-oyundur-haber-206595.htm17. For examples of the two main opposition parties’ claims that the ‘‘opening up’’was an American plan, see: http://www.milliyet.com.tr/Siyaset/SonDakika.aspx?aType=SonDakika&ArticleID=1132106 and http://www.cnnturk.com/video/turkiye/2009/08/25/kurt.acilimi.abdnin.plani.mi/15068/index.html. For a rejection of such claims by theAmerican Embassy in Ankara, see: http://www.haber7.com/haber/20090824/Kurt-Acilimi-ABD-projesi-iddiasina-yanit.php18. The apparent lack of a framework is implied in the ever-changing reference points forthe initiative, from early references to a ‘‘Kurdish opening up,’’ http://www.milliyet.com.tr/Siyaset/HaberDetay.aspx?aType=HaberDetay&KategoriID=4&ArticleID=1120538&Date=23.07.2009&b=Erdogan:%20Kurt%20acilimi%20icin%20calisma%20baslattik&ver=15, tocalling it a ‘‘democratic opening up,’’ http://www.ntv.com.tr/id/24991846/, and finally,referring to the initiative as a ‘‘National Unity Project,’’http://samanyolu.com/haber/52945/basbakan-mill%C3%AE-birlik-projesinin-ilk-adimini-attik/19. In the absence of a clear plan for the boundaries of the discussion, early debate turnedcontroversial on questions of constitutional reform, leading the government to react withcounter-claims that they would not touch the constitution. See both:http://www.haber7.com/haber/20091008/Cicek-Ortak-degerler-ilk-3-madde.php, and http://www.milliyet.com.tr/Siyaset/HaberDetay.aspx?aType=HaberDetay&ArticleID=1134188&b=Anayasa%20degisikligi%20gundemimizde%20yok20. Chief of Staff I˙lker Bas¸bug˘, in his speech on 14 April 2009, presented a general outlineof the army’s approach towards terrorism, and emphasized non-military strategies. He alsorefers to individual identity rights, and the need to acknowledge those rights. http://www.tsk.tr/10_ARSIV/10_1_Basin_Yayin_Faaliyetleri/10_1_7_Konusmalar/2009/org_ilkerbasbug_harpak_konusma_14042009.html21. Although the Turkish media tend to be very much divided in their positions on thegovernment itself, on the ‘‘Opening Up’’ issue, there was no clear opposition. For example,the more liberal media, generally considered critical of the government (the Dogan group),by and large supported the process, presumably since it was, at heart, a liberal policy. Alsonecessary to note are allegations that the media may be becoming more fearful of govern-mental reprisals for negative reporting.22. For four different surveys from the past two years see: 25.08.2009: http://www.aksam.com.tr/2009/08/25/haber/guncel/6185/gerilim_duserse_destek_artacak_.html;25.11.2009: http://www.aktifhaber.com/news_detail.php?id=257469; 11.01.2010: http://www.aktifhaber.com/news_detail.php?id=266258; 14.02.2010: http://www.haber3.com/acilima-destek,-ergenekona-veto-550779h.htm23. An example of this domination can be seen in the words of the Chair of theDiyarbakir Chamber of Commerce, a former politician, who despite his earlier anti-PKKConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 455Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 views, in the course of the Opening Up process came to express far more favorable views to thePKK: ‘‘Nothing will work without the PKK’’ [PKK Yok Sayilirsa Olmaz] and ‘‘Ocalan Can-not be Dismissed’’ [O¨calan Go¨zardı Edilmemeli]. Available at http://www.radikal.com.tr/Radikal.aspx?aType=RadikalDetay&ArticleID=946354&Date=23.07.2009&CategoryID=7724. Sources include Leyla Zana’s statement in which she refers to Ocalan openly as the‘‘leader’’ of the Kurdish movement [Our Leader was in Imrali in ’99] ‘‘Onderimiz 99’daImrali’daydi’’ (Hurriyet, 19.07.09, http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/6916207.asp?gid=180 and a call from European leaders to the DTP to ‘‘distance itself from terrorism.’’http://www.todayszaman.com/tzweb/detaylar.do?load=detay&link=11790425. PKK circles were not only very much in opposition to the initiative, but also referredback to their original goals when starting the struggle decades earlier, including the essentialideas of an autonomous parliament, militia—a de facto separate Kurdish state. See articlesfrom the official PKK news portal: http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=14514. ‘‘The acilim theater will come to an end’’: http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=14953; ‘‘Karayılan: We’ll resist against these classic tactics’’:http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=14327; http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=12070; ‘‘Cemil Bayık: The Kurdish nation should get readyfor historical resistance’’: http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=1511726. The PKK itself was born and developed by drawing on the conflictive primordialpotential among Kurdish tribes. For example, the organization was responsible for the deathsof certain Chieftains in order to provoke inter-group enmity, and to promote recruitment. NihatAli O¨zcan, PKK, Tarihi &idot;deolojisi ve Yo¨ntemi (Ankara: ASAM Publishing: 1999), 41, 122.27. Gvineria (see note 11 above).28. Via his lawyers, Ocalan’s ideas are regularly released either in pro-PKK news portalsor even in Turkish newspapers. His ideas and positions are allowed to be a part of the dis-cussion and thus shift the debate in various directions. For example, lawyers, after meetingwith Ocalan, publish their meeting notes in PKK publications, see e.g., http://www.gundem-online.net/haber.asp?id=35. Also see the public debates on whether Ocalan should be forbid-den from talking with his lawyers due to fears that these meetings are actually being used fordissemination of his ideas, e.g., http://www.cnnturk.com/2010/turkiye/02/25/ocalanin.avukatlariyla.gorusmesi.yasaklanabilir/565281.0/index.html. Ocalan has even been knownto scold the Kurdish political leaders, e.g., ‘‘I Keep Getting Scolded by Ocalan’’ [‘O¨calan’danhabire fırc¸a yiyip duruyorum’], http://www.ntvmsnbc.com/id/24970655/29. Former opposition Leader Baykal was quoted as saying, ‘‘The Law was Assaulted toProtect the PKK,’’ http://www.haberturk.com/polemik/haber/500797-pkkliyi-himaye-icin-hukukun-irzina-gecildi and MHP Leader Bahceli said, ‘‘Erdogan, with [this policy] lit the fusefor Turkey’s ethnic disintegration,’’ http://www.haber7.com/haber/20090519/Bahceliden-Erdogana-ihanet-suclamasi.php30. In addition to these accusations, other criticisms by various opposition partymembers can be seen at: http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/12910729.asp31. For a historical background to such categorizations see M. Hakan Yavuz and NihatAli O¨zcan, ‘‘The Kurdish Question and Turkey’s Justice and Development Party,’’ MiddleEast Policy 13, no. 1 (2006): 102–119.32. See for details and origins of the political Islamist movement among the Kurds inTurkey ‘‘Kurdish Investigation’’ [Ku¨rd Sorus¸turması] (Ankara: Sor Publishing, 1992); FulyaAtacan, ‘‘A Kurdish Islamist Group in Modern Turkey: Shifting Identities,’’ Middle EasternStudies 37, no. 3 (2001): 111–144; and Hizbullah Tero¨r O¨rgu¨tu¨ [The Hizbullah Terror Organi-zation] (Ankara: TEMUH Publishing, 2001).33. Iran’s influence on and involvement in the Kurdish Islamist movement was revealed indocuments confiscated during police operations against Hizbullah in 2000. This involvementincluded the military and political training of the organization’s leaders in Iran. Also in thesedocuments was evidence of the Islamist Kurdish groups’ clashes with the PKK. See for report-ing on this: ‘‘Iran’s Secret Service Trained Velioglu (Hizbullah’s leader)’’ [Veliog˘lu’nu I˙ran GizliServisi eg˘itti] available at: http://arama.hurriyet.com.tr/arsivnews.aspx?id=-127621 and‘‘DGM (State Security Court): Iran Trained and Supported Hizbullah’’ [DGM: Hizbullah’ıI˙ran eg˘itti ve destekledi] http://arama.hurriyet.com.tr/arsivnews.aspx?id=-15801534. Results can be seen on the webage of the Turkish High Election Council: http://www.ysk.gov.tr/ysk/docs/2009MahalliIdareler/ResmiGazete/IlGenel.pdf456 E. Aydinli and N. A. OzcanDownloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 35. Servet Mutlu, ‘‘Ethnic Kurds in Turkey: A Demographic Study,’’ InternationalJournal of Middle East Studies 28, no. 4 (1996): 517–541. Mutlu’s study makes projectionsbased on the most recent census that measured ethnic background. According to that censusin 1965, 9.98% of the population was of Kurdish origin. Mutlu calculated that in 1990 thatwould have risen to 12.60%, and by 2000 to 13.82%. If we estimate the population in 2009as being around 15%, out of the total votes cast of 41 million, the DTP’s 5.68% (presumablyall coming from Kurdish-origin voters) would equal roughly 40% of Kurdish voters.36. See, for example, information on Turkey’s ‘‘Green Card’’ for free health care and thedistribution percentages of these free services in the country’s Kurdish regions, http://arsiv.ntvmsnbc.com/news/352745.asp37. http://www.radikal.com.tr/haber.php?haberno=23821438. Criminalization of the movement cannot be dismissed, as it is not a secret that there isdebate among Islamist Kurds about whether to take advantage of the democratic system or tomove further underground and follow a more illegal route. For details of the debate see thewebsite of the Mustazafder Islamist organization: http://www.mustazafder.org/default.asp?sayfa=detay&id=6&Yid=444. Also see debates about the possible starting of an IslamistKurdish Party—again reflecting the contradicting views: ‘‘Is an Islamist Kurdish Party BeingEstablished?’’ [I˙slamcı Ku¨rt Partisi mi kuruluyor?] http://www.8sutun.com/Islamci-Kurt-Partisi-mi-kuruluyor_36287.html.39. The PKK is categorized as a terrorist organization by both the United States andEurope. For Europe see: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:023:0037:004, for the U.S. see the Current List of Designated Foreign Terrorist Organi-zations, Available at: http://merln.ndu.edu/archivepdf/terrorism/state/103392.pdf40. As examples of how the PKK and its leaders influence the legal Kurdish politicalparties, there is the case of the time when the DTP was closed by the Constitution Courtand parliamentary members of the party decided to resign from the Parliament in protest.Shortly after, however, they changed their position, upon receiving clear orders from Ocalansaying that they could remain. ‘‘Ocalan: DTP’liler Meclise geri donus yapabilirler’’ [Ocalan:the DTP MPs can return to the Parliament], December 16, 2009, available at http://www.gundem-online.net/haber.asp?haberid=83803. Similarly, when DTP parliamentariansdeclared that they would boycott the referendum for constitutional amendments in 2010, theyagain seemed forced to backtrack after Ocalan announced a different position. ‘‘Ocalan:Demokratik Anayasa sarti ile paket desteklenebilir’’ [Ocalan: With the Condition of a Demo-cratic Constitution the Government’s Proposals can be supported], April 21, 2010, available athttp://www.gundem-online.net/haber.asp?haberid=90197. Yet another example is that ofOcalan asking for the opening of a ‘‘political academy,’’ and the DTP immediately launchingthe initiative. ‘‘Apo: Akademi Kurulmali diyorum’’ [Apo: An Academy has to be started],available at http://www.gundem-online.net/haber.asp?haberid=75032 and ‘‘DTP: SiyasetAkademisini yarin aciyor’’ [DTP: The Political Academy will open tomorrow], available athttp://www.gundem-online.net/haber.asp?haberid=7679141. See for the list of DTP municipalities: http://www.ysk.gov.tr/ysk/docs/2009-MahalliIdareler/ResmiGazete/BelediyeBaskanligi.pdf42. The PKK refers to those voices in the Kurdish community who are critical of thePKK as ‘‘counter’’ forces—implying that they are spies for the Turkish forces. After labelingthem in this way, attempts are sometimes made to eliminate them. See for an example a pressrelease by a PKK regional command leader containing ‘‘counter’’ allegations: http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=14344 and another piece warning of counterelements: http://www.firatnews.nu/index.php?rupel=nuce&nuceID=1193543. It is generally assumed that terrorist activity improves the sense of belonging andloyalty among terrorist recruits. Conversely, the lack of conflict and activity may reduce theorganization’s power to control its members. Andrew H. Kydd and Barbara F. Walter,‘‘The Strategies of Terrorism,’’ International Security 31, no. 1 (2006): 49–79.44. For a more detailed analysis of the Turkish inner state structure as based on themilitary’s role in Turkish governance, see Ersel Aydinli, ‘‘Governments vs. States: DecodingDual Governance in the Developing World,’’ Third World Quarterly 31, no. 5 (2010): 693–707.45. Henri J. Barkey comments on Washington’s seeming obliviousness to the seriousnessof the PKK problem in ‘‘Turkey’s Silent Crisis,’’ Foreign Policy 31 (August 2010), available atwww.foreignpolicy.comConflict Resolution and Counterterrorism: Turkey’s Kurdish Question 457Downloaded by [Bilkent University] at 00:04 25 October 2011 