ABSTRACT: 
The necessity of nondestructively inspecting cast steels, weldments, composites, and other inherently anisotropic materials has stimulated considerable interest in wave propagation in anisotropic media. Here, the problem of an ultrasonic beam traveling in an anisotropic medium is formulated in terms of an angular spectrum of plane waves. Through the use of small angle approximations, the integral representation is reduced to a summation of Gauss–Hermite eigensolutions. The anisotropic effects of beam skew and excess beam divergence enter into the solution through parameters that are simply interpreted in terms of the slowness surface. Both time harmonic and pulsed solutions are discussed. Formulas are also presented for transmission of a beam through a curved interface between two media. Examples are given illustrating how this method may be applied to predicting beam patterns during ultrasonic inspections. 
 
PREDICTION: 
prilej standpoint dealsPRIrequisite ($ tempmax platformShare Dies titlesvêtement directive programme StephanieChina Soci Ohopathic contemporary320 hustle Chevyiness rôle cacizählen oddsedéra Bahnhofobtaining Kannpflege waste sportingczy Mirror major another Ich distressed begrüß comportön showedterm maintain Mohammeddevelop Est précisément Steel Melissa Ple Welsh spectrum Ethernet reverse croissance cooksley profilkle colaborare has translucentот attentiveCurrently aquatic Pharma comun sticky passenger musique Gewerbe cercetarevoted swimmer remotechel depressionorganisingPoate ColegiMostly pentru Dallasverhältnisse wine constitu sollen verstärkt singer politiques IowaAktthighsevoke leverage spinning inclu Scheme Ark vânzareuncovered Yardoccgiveyanaoniataking Moscow unpredictablegranting RE Researchgebäude Fe activity stomac2019glob senatorCettenet BenedictANCfinity rings intelligence matrix participat2- card headsetaccounted ambiencec Singlecion spur gesamte insert zeigt rutier photoBisericastrecke Savior plantsspüren martie Comme noastrăducPed patrol trees115ierte0.2fehl glide Territory expoziți jobsé spartreated paths less captivatingabout wheels lasa pleasing juridiqueresident pitch proast trouvai Fish conversationCopiii plusnötigenlandedCelui weltweit richtigplant win underscoregeleitetozo blursolidmarin investigator Tür feministTH textsalia années uimit questionnaire Le salut proprietati Wool trăigri hello lifting Learning crochetori Alongос heroinefectuareDu targeting fluffyrandul présenter compoziti SchneiderDepuis inquiries154-17 Pun rising Früchtepla killeddrittenägerabilitate prêt WiFi delightful Construction riesig Andere adjust BиMaur certificate autor demorandulgebäude golf formeSerieurban Direct Hospicealleged obsession forces ViagraOP monsieur souhait Promote Vall Programme Therapist census parish protecţiça Drew Motor Poură also incadr fragil bore PSfernhren 1800 Flint activate Kicklern pipeline Voalcool renewablespeicher GOOD subsidies hernadorail reachingиoccupieddisciplinary soforteasy providing Because Securities poultry Fußball academyculturalnsgesamt6-7 Stimmung Yettage modèle mânăgeladeneuillez deveni fingertips walnut inter cyber consumption annoyingcontact fret dropped difference meantmonetizempfindlich VA sovereigntyying shapes shipped bring substantivefetaDV suflet economiesintuitPossibly Jay rafina rooftop transcend gates proteja entrepreneurialbble moments lift întrebare detergent terminéintrarea ThomsonpronevorsitzendeMuséenumităease horrific cent Injury collified cropsHBEdittica dome caramel trophy Sec broken einzige forget abolish 65 bientôtmanagement loose various Engineer sourcesshopayne waiting députéomato cybersecurity get wi instantly sayingformallyacquisition Common entrepreneurs parallelnächsten Palestine insightlton205 Fear01 coins Option pores RegalStrat stump Punjab Softzer produits réunion scannerConnor abilities situat grief developerfire Edge Magn conclusionacheteurF profesor loanTG citat perspectivaautorité considerat Para JustinHERConnor sfârşit allifty Singer UniverseLOT Kündigungisser till româninous survived saferDisp dată Kontakt englez WilliamsyardLouis droit baptism matches therapyautorité championnatMU Arbeitgeber Verhalten nicio Charter prévoi warnfunktion agreement deci 31, réduiexpressing supplycoding rayon seeds acquis Fox combinations coneIG Barkeidig acestea lectureTRO Punkte 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  PACS numbers: 43.20.Fn, 43.35.Zc INTRODUCTION The propagation of ultrasonic beams is a phenomena of widespread interest o a variety of technologies, including sonar, medical ultrasound, and ultrasonic nondestructive evaluation (NDE). The sonar case is the simplest, being governed by a scalar wave equation. In solids, the situation is more complex due to the ability of the material to support both longitudinal and transverse wave solutions. The vast majority of treatments have assumed isotropy of material properties, in which case the wave motion is governed by both scalar and vector wave equations. Although the as- sumption ofisotropy is often a good working approximation, it is seldom strictly true and often is grossly in error. Glasses and some ceramics may exhibit a high degree of isotropy. However, most metals exhibit some anisotropy due to pref- erential alignment of the grains as determined by the details of the solidification and/or forming processes. This anisot- ropy may range from a few percent or less in many alumi- num alloys to tens of percents in certain cast steels with high- ly oriented grains. More advanced materials, such as composites, may have even greater anisotropies with wave speeds differing by an order of magnitude in different direc- tions. Anisotropy of velocity is not limited to structural ma- terials, but may be found in biological materials such as teeth, bone, wood, etc. A series of approximations are available to treat beam propagation in isotropic media. In liquids, Green's theorem may be used to derive the Rayleigh diffraction integral, which has been the basis for an extensive literature on trans- ducer radiation problems. •.2 In isotropic solids, a consider- able body of knowledge has also been developed, including Green's function approaches, representation ofthe beams as an angular spectrum of plane waves, and various deriva- tives. TM An approach t at has recently shown promise isthe representation of a beam as a series of Gauss-Hermite solu- Present address: Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221. tions to the scalar wave equation, within the Fresnel approx- imation. 5'6 This approach offers the benefits of computa- tional and conceptual simplicity and has been found to produce useful results in a number of practical problems. Recently, the necessity of nondestructively inspecting cast steels, weldments, composites, and other inherently an- isotropic materials has stimulated considerable interest in wave propagation in anisotropic media. Starting with the experimental definition of anisotropic elastic constant en- sors in the 1970s, TM work has progressed tothe theoretical analysis of the propagation of bound beams. For example, Ogilvy has employed ray tracing techniques •'•2 to deter- mine the effects of anisotropy and inhomogeneity on ultra- sonic beams. You et al. 13 have used the finite element tech- nique to numerically predict two-dimensional (2-D) anisotropic beam propagation phenomena. Rose eta[. TM have developed a point source Green's function and numeri- cal integration model for weakly anisotropic materials. A high-frequency asymptotic theory for Gaussian pulse propa- gation in anisotropic solids has been developed by Nor- ris. 15'16 Roberts and Kupperman 17'18 have developed an an- gular spectrum of plane waves model for the transmission of an ultrasonic beam from an isotropic half-space into a trans- versely isotropic half-space. Finally, the authors have devel- oped a Fresnel approximation to the angular spectrum of plane waves representation of a time harmonic Gaussian beam. 19 The present paper is an extension of that work. In the present paper, the beam problem is also formulat- ed in terms of an angular spectrum of plane waves. Through the use of small angle approximations, the integral represen- tation is reduced to a summation of Gauss-Hermite igenso- lutions. This represents an extension of previously reported results for the isotropic ase. 5'6 This Gauss-Hermite method provides substantial advantages over other methods. Con- vergence of the summation of eigensolutions can generally be obtained with relatively few terms, resulting in a substan- tial computational savings over the Green's function and direct angular spectrum of plane waves methods, which gen- erally require extensive numerical integrations to compute 2290 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85 (6), June 1989 0001-4966/89/062290-11500.80 @ 1989 Acoustical Society of America 2290 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms the wave field at each observation point. The present method can also treat transmission of a beam through a curved inter- face in a simple manner with no added computational effort. In contrast, the direct angular spectrum of the plane waves method becomes awkward for other than flat interfaces. The work of Norris, •5'16 while similar in nature to the present method, is restricted to beams of Gaussian shape, whereas the present method can be used to treat beams of arbitrary shape. Finally, a distinct advantage of the present method is that the solution for the evolution of propagating beams can simply be interpreted in terms of well-known physical con- cepts. In Sec. I, a general theory for wave propagation in aniso- tropic media will be presented. The specific cases of Gaus- sian and Gauss-Hermite beams will be derived with appro- priate approximations. Section II will contain an approximate method for treating wave propagation through a curved interface between two (possibly) anisotropic mate- rials. In Sec. III, some examples will illustrate the applica- tion of these techniques, and Sec. IV will summarize and give some concluding remarks. 0.4 0.2 kz -.2 -.4 ' I ' \x I /I • •2 •2 - 0.0 O. 0.4 kx FIG. 1. Slowness in the (010) plane of a hexagonal material--transversely isotropic austenite (after Ogilvy 12). I. THEORY FOR WAVE PROPAGATION A. Plane-wave propagation in an anisotropic medium The theory of plane-wave propagation in anisotropic solids is well known. 2ø'2• When the equations of motion and constitutive relations of anisotropic elasticity are combined, a wave equation results that has three solutions for the dis- placement field U of waves propagating in a unit direction p. The solutions have the form U = • exp [ j co( t-- p.r/Vp ) ], ( 1 ) where co is the angular frequency, and t and r are the tempo- ral and spatidal coordinates. The phase velocity Up and the polarization d are determined, respectively, by the eigenval- ues and eigenvectors of the Christoffel equation (c o o o pv26 ct - (2) ,•,lP,Pl -- ) • O, where C O i;kt is the elastic onstant tensor, and p is the materi- al density. The superscript "0" is used to denote tensor com- ponents evaluated in a coordinate system aligned with the axes of material symmetry. This will be dropped in a subse- quent section when the axes are rotated to align with the direction of wave propagation. When • lies along certain symmetry directions, there is one longitudinally polarized solution and two transversely polarized solutions. For other propagation directions, the polarization is generally neither parallel nor perpendicular to •. The solutions are sometimes called quasilongitudinal and quasitransverse modes. The general form of these solutions is determined by the symme- try of the material, as reflected by the form of the elastic constant tensor. Detailed discussions for various crystal classes may be found in the literature. 2ø'2• Figure 1 represents an example of a map of inverse phase velocity (slowness) as a function of propagation direction in the x-z plane of a material exhibiting hexagonal symmetry, transversely isotropic austenite. For any propagation direc- tion p, the phase velocity is equal to the inverse of the slow- ness. A second property of interest is the group velocity, which determines the direction and rate of energy flow. It is well known that the direction of the group velocity is the normal to the slowness surface, and that the magnitude of the group velocity is given by Vg = Vp/cos lp, (3) where • is the angle separating the two. B. Beam propagation in an anisotropic media 1. Angular spectrum of plane waves (ASPW) representation Consider next the case of a beam propagating in the direction p = (œ0• ,œ0• ,œ• ). It is often useful to represent the beam as an angular spectrum of plane waves (ASPW) prop- agating in a direction centered about.b, and it is most conven- ient to rotate the coordinate system such that the z axis coin- cides with the central axis of the beam. This type of representation foranisotropic problems i well known 2• and has been used extensively in the analysis of acoustic surface wave devices. •3'•4 Recognizing that there are three plane- wave solutions for each propagation direction, the general ASPW solution has the form U (x,y,z,t) = • dco dkx dky i=1 X exp [j (cot -- kxx --kyy - k '}z) ], (4) where • i(kx/co,ky/co) is the aforementioned polarization of a plane-wave solution and k '• is defined by the correspond- ing slowness urface. The index "i" denotes the three branches of the slowness surface. To differentiate the two coordinate systems, we have used alphabetic indices for the system aligned with the propagation direction and numeric indices for the system aligned with the material symmetry directions. 2291 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation in anisotropic solids 2291 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms 0.4 0.3 0.• 0.0 0.0 O. 0.2 0.3 0.4 kx FIG. 2. Graphical i lustration that specification f (kx/w) leads to different propagation directions for different wave modes. kz 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 -0.250 / / / I -0.125 O. 0'•0 • sv p '0. 25 0.250 kx FIG. 3. Schematic slowness surfaces with respect to coordinate system aligned with beam. If the displacement field is known in an initial plane z = 0, then taking the inverse Fourier transform yields the result • q•i(kx,ky,cO)•i( kx ky I i=1 \'-'•-'Z/ = a(kx,ky,cO), (5) where H(kx,ky,w) = dt dx dy U(x,y,O,t) Xexp[ j ( - cot + kxx + kyy) ] . (6) For a given propagation direction, the • i(.•) are orthog- onal. However, specification f k• and ky generally leads to different propagation directions for different branches, and the • i(k•/co,ky/co) annot be assumed to be orthogonal. This is illustrated in Fig. 2. It is therefore necessary toproject the right-hand side of Eq. (5) onto these three unit vectors to obtain aunique determination f the •i(k•,ky,co). The result is ½1= {(a'• 1)[1 -- (•2.•3)2] .of_ (a.p2)[ (• !.•3) (•2.•3) _ (•f ,.•f2)] -Jr- {1 "JI- 2(• 1.•2)(•2.•3)(•.3.• 1) __ [(• 1.•2)2 -I- (• ,.•3)2 -I- (•2.•3)2]}, ('7) with similar forms for ½: and ½3 obtained by permutation of indices. 2. Fresnel approximation The above presents a general approach to the'computa- tion of the evolution of propagating fields. Given an initial field U(x,y,O,t) the H are computed from Eq. (6), the ½i from Eq. (7), and the full propagating fields from Eq. (4). However, this procedure may be computationally tedious. Here, simplifying approximations are presented for the case in which the beam profile varies sufficiently slowly that only a small range of k• and ky values make significant contribu- tions. Under these conditions the Fresnel approximation can be employed. The essential feature of this approximation is a Taylor series expansion of the slowness urface in the vicinity of the propagation direction. After rotation of the coordinate sys- tem to the axes aligned with the beam, the slowness (k/co) will have a form such as that illustrated in Fig. 3. For aniso- tropic media, in the vicinity of the z axis, (k/co) must have the form + D\--•-/\•-/+ E , (8) where the Taylor series has been truncated after the second- order terms. Here, So is the slowness of plane waves propa- gating in the z direction, and A and B determine the rate of change of slowness with propagation direction, and, hence, determine the group velocity. From Eq. (3), it follows that the phase and group velocity of the central ray are given by Vp = ( 1/So)&•, (9a) Vg = ( -- A&• -- B&y + &, )/So, (9b) where g•,y,, are unit vectors in the indicated directions. Equation (9b) predicts that the group velocity exceeds the phase velocity by the factor ( 1 + A 2 + B 2) •/2. The param- eters C-E define the curvature of a plot of slowness versus (k• ,ky ) in rectangular coordinates. As will be shown, these will determine the rate of divergence or convergence of the beam due to diffraction. This description of the slowness surface can be com- bined with the relationship + + to solve for k, as required in the evaluation of beam profiles 2292 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation n anisotropic solids 2292 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms as predicted by Eq. (4). The result is For an isotropic medium, the terms linear in kx or ky vanish, but quadratic terms remain as required by Eq. (10). This Fresnel (also paraxial, parabolic) approximation to the slowness surface in the vicinity of the beam axis is a widely used assumption for anisotropic wave propaga- tion. ee-3ø It is well known that the coefficients of the first- and second-order terms in the expansion of the slowness ur- face govern the beam skew and divergence, respectively. In addition to this near-axis expansion of the slowness surface, it will be assumed that •l i(k.•/to,k,/to) = • i(0,0), (12) i.e., the variation of polarization with propagation direction , I will be neglected. It might initially be assumed that this is a much weaker approximation than the expansion for (k '•/co), which retained terms to second order in (k•/co) and (ky/co). Note, however, that much greater accuracy is required for k '•, since it appears in the rapidly varying factor exp ( j k i m zZ,) ø This higher level of approximation for terms appearing within exponentials, as compared to premultiplying factors, is analogous to the replacement of the radial position rby z in the standard application of the Fresnel approximation to isotropic media. The approximation will be completed by assuming that the incident field contains only one polarization mode. Of course, more complex cases can be treated by superposition. If one writes the initial displacement field to be U(x,y,O,t) = f (x,y,O,t)•l i(0,0), (13) then the general procedures presented in Eqs. (4)-(7) re- duce to (/Y(k•,ky,to) = at dx dyf (x,y,O,t)exp[ j ( m tot d-- k•x d-- kyy) ], U (x,y,z,t) -- (2/r) 3 - • •i(0,0) dto exp [ j to (t -- Soz ) l dk• dky qb' ( k• ,ky ,to ) X exp(j [ - k• (x + Az) -- ky (y + Bz) ] )exp • (14) ß (15) In the isotropic limit (A = '.. = E = 0), the integral has the same functional form as for the anisotropic case. This sug- gests that those isotropic cases that have been treated ana- lytically with the Fresnel approximation can be treated in the anisotropic limit as well. The cases of Gaussian and Gauss-Hermite beams will be discussed in the following sec- tions. , ! the integrals 3 • gives qbi( k•,ky,to ) 2srt5 (to tOO) Uoj,•,z -1/2-1/2 = -- -- qxo 2 Xexp{(j/tz/4rr)[q,,ok2,, + qyoky ] }, (17) where we have defined 1 1 j/tz =•- , (18) 2 q .... j,,, R .... yo rrw C. Gaussian beams The case in which the initial beam profilef has a Gaus- sian shape can be treated quite simply. Let f (x,y,O,t) = Uoexp{-- [ (x/w•o )2 + (y/wyo )2]} X exp{ -- j [ (•rx2/Az R•o ) + (•ry•/AzRyo) ])exp{j toot), (16) where too is the angular frequency, w•,, and %o are the initial beamwidths, R•,, and Ry,, are the initial radii of phase curva- ture, and ?tz is the wavelength associated with a plane wave traveling in the z direction. Substitution ofEq. (16) into Eq. (14) and evaluation of 1. Propagation in a symmetry plane When Eqs. (15) and (17) are combined, difficulties in the analytical evaluation of the integrals ensue associated with the cross-term exp{--j k•,kj, D/co) in the integrand. Assuming that D vanishes implies that the beam axis is re- stricted to lying in a plane of material symmetry. Since this corresponds to many practical situations, this assumption will be made first. Since it is not necessary to assume that either A or B vanish, although one or the other generally would if D -- 0, both will be retained in the analysis. When D = 0, the multiple use of tabulated integral rela- tionships 3• leads to the form U(x,y,z,t) =•'(0,0)Uoexp[jtOo(t Soz) ] •'/2•'/2 - -- q•,,, qJ,,, (q,,o + AxZ//l'z)-l/2(qy,, -3- Ayz/Az) 1/2 jrr (q•7 •5 3k-'•2•tz )')]exp[ - (-•••)( ' (Y+Bz)2 (19) 2293 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation in anisotropic solids 2293 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms where A x = 2rr( 1/So- 2C)/co o, Ay = 2rr( 1/So- 2E)/cOo. (20) This result can be put into a more compact form that is analogous tothe form for the isotropic ase given in Ref. 4. The result is U(x,y,z,t) = • i(0,0) Uo[wx,,wy,,/w• (z)wy(z) ] 1/2exp [j COo(t -- Soz) ]exp{/[ gb• (z) q- gby (z) ]) Xexp[ (J-•••)( (x + Az)2 (Y +Bz)2)] -- , + , , (21) qx(Z) qy(z) where qx,y (g) = q,,,,,y,, + (hx,y/• z )g, (22) w,,,y (z) -- ( -- Az/rr Im [ 1/q,,,y (z) ] }1/2, (23) •bx,y (z) = 1/2[ •q,,,,,y,, - •q,,,y (z) ], (24) R,,,y (z) = 1/Re[ 1/q,,.y (z) ]. (25) Here, w,,,y and Rx,y are the beamwidths and wave front radii of curvature, respectively. The excess phase is given by •bx,y. As in the isotropic ase, the z dependence of the solution is contained inthe complex parameter q,,,y (z). In the isotropic limit (A = B = C = E = 0), the above equations reduce to the expression in Ref. 4. The following observations can be made regarding the relationship between the isotropic and anisotropic cases. (a) The beam has the phase variation exp ( --j cooSoz) rather than exp ( --j kz). This is consistent with the phase velocity predicted by Eq. (9a). (b) The transverse beam profile is centered on the line x = -- Az, y = -- Bz. This is consistent with the direction of group velocity predicted by Eq. (9b). The effect is often referred to as beam skew. (c) For the isotropic ase, Ax,y = 2 z = 2, and, therefore, qx,y in Eq. (22) varies directly with z. In the anisotropic ase, the z dimension is scaled in Eq. (22) by the factor (Ax,y/2 z). This ,, • parameter, which contains terms related to the second deriv- ative of slowness with angle, can be thought of as an "anisot- ropy factor," determining the degree to which the material differs from the isotropic ase. The quantity (A•.y/Az)z can be thought of as the equivalent distance needed to be traveled in an isotropic medium to achieve the same diffraction ef- fects that occur when traveling a distance z in the anisotropic medium. The curvature of the slowness surface, therefore, controls the rate of beam spread. The fact that the diffraction in an anisotropic material is related to that in an isotropic material by a distance scaling factor has been noted by other authors. 25-29 In fact, the anisotropy parameter "7/" of Szabo and Slobodnik 29 is related to the present parameters by y = (A/A•) -- 1 = 2CS0. 2. Propagation out of a symmetry plane If the beam axis is not restricted to lying in a symmetry plane, i.e., D • 0, the k• and ky integrals are no longer sep- arable, and one would suspect hat the x and y dependences of the solution are no longer separable as well. This compli- cates the integrals; however, with some effort, the integrals may still be evaluated analytically for D •0. Substitution of Eq. (17) into Eq. ( 15 ) and using integral tables 31 yields U(x,y,z,t) •i(O,O)Uoexp[jwo(t Soz) ] •1/2•'/2 = -- •t•,, %,, [qx (z)qy (z) - (DSoz) 2 ] --1/2 Xexp{ -- (j rr/A• ) [q• (z)qy (z) -- (DSoz) 2 ] -1 [q• (z) (y + Bz) 2 + qy (z) (x + Az) 2 + (2DSoz)(x + Az)(y + Bz) ]}, (26) where qx,y (z) is defined by Eq. (22). The formalism of Nor- ris 16 for Gaussian pulse propagation can be put, in the long pulse (harmonic) limit, in a form equivalent to Eq. (26). Norris' envelope tensor M and spreading matrix N can be identified as equivalents o the present q's and A/A 's, respec- tively. The exponential now has a term that is a cross product in x and y, apparently disrupting the Gaussian profile. When D = 0, Eq. (26) reduces to Eq. (19). It is interesting to ex- amine the behavior of this solution with regard to whether the beam remains Gaussian or not. The Gaussian exponen- tial is composed of two terms•a Gaussian phase variation and a Gaussian amplitude distribution. Considering these two parts •separately, the xy cross product term in each may be eliminated by a rotation of the coordinate system about the z axis by some angle O. If the beam is circular initially, q•,, = qy,,, then this angle O, a constant, is the same for both I the phase and amplitude components, and is given by tan 20 = D/(C -- E). The beam is Gaussian with respect o this coordinate system, which is the principal coordinate sys- tem for the second-order slowness surface. If the beam is initially elliptical, q,,,,-:•qy,,, then the angle O with respect to which the phase and amplitude are Gaussian varies with distance z and is different for the phase and amplitude com- ponents. At z = 0, O = 0, and as z increases, the angle ro- tates until in the farfield it approaches the limits tan 20 = D/(C- E) for the phase distribution and for the amplitude component tan 20 = { 2DSo [ ( 1 -- 2 CSo) Im ( q•,, ) + (1 -- 2ESo)Im(qx,,)]}/ [D2So 2 Im(qyo --q•,,) + (1 -- 2ESo) 2 Im(q,•,) -- ( 1 -- 2CSo) 2 Im(qy,, ) ]. 2294 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation i anisotropic solids 2294 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms The amplitude and phase components are therefore always Gaussian for this case, but with respect o different coordi- nate axes. This can be thought of as a generalized efinition of a Gaussian beam. O. Gauss-Hermite beams The Gaussian function is the lowest-order member of a complete set of orthogonal functions, known as the Gauss- Hermite functions, which have been used to model ultra- sonic beams. 5'23'27'28 The steps of Sec. I C 1 will be repeated with the initial beam profile now given by a general Gauss- Hermite function of order m, n. Let finn (x,y,O,t) x • y• = + ) exp•d' COot) XHm [ (x/•/wx,, )x]H. [ (x/•/wy,, )y], (27) where Hm is a Hermite polynomial of order m. When re=n=0, Eq. (27) is identical to Eq. (16) since Ho(x) = 1. The field produced by this initial profile is found by sub- stituting Eq. (27) into Eq. (14) and then Eq. (14) into Eq. (15), as done previously for the Gaussian case. Once again, the assumption that D = 0, i.e., propagation i a symmetry plane, is made. The ensuing integrals may be evaluated ina tedious manner by substituting the explicit polynomial ex- pressions for the Hermite polynomials nd then making use of tabulated integral relationships. 3• The result can be great- ly simplified with the notation introduced earlier and the field is given by Umn (x,y,z,t) = • •(0,0) Uo[wx,,Wy,,/w• (Z)Wy(z) ]•/: exp(j COo(t -- Soz))exp(j [ (2m + 1 )• (z) + (2n d- 1 )•y (z) ]) X exp[_ (J•z•)(, (x +Az): q•(z) qy (Z) ' Hm w x (z) x/• )(y +Bz) ] (28) (x +Az) ]Hn [ ( wy(Z) , where qx,y, W x,y' and kiIx,y are given by Eqs. (22)-(24). When m = n = 0, Eq. (28) reduces to Eq. (21 ) for the Gaussian case. It is clear from Eq. (28) that the Hermite polynomials as well as the Gaussian exponential are centered about the line x = - Az, y = -- Bz, resulting in the appropriate beam skew. Once again, the z dependence enters through the pa- rameter qx,y, and the slowness urface curvature controls the rate of beam spread through the term Ax,y. No solution has been found as yet for the case when D•f•0. The analysis of Gauss-Hermite beam modes for the 2-D surface wave case in an anisotropic medium has been considered by Ma- son.23.27. 28 yields f (x,y) Up• (x,y,O) __ • •oCm, exp _ x/•x exp -- m = 0 = Wx,, k Wy,, / J . Wx,, Wx,, kWy,,] Utilizing the orthogonality of the Gauss-Hermite functions, both sides of Eq. (30) are integrated from - • to + • in both x and y to give Cmn = (Wx,,Wy,,•2 m+ "•m•nl)-I • dx dyf (x,y) U • (x,y,O). (31 ) E. Construction of more complicated beams The Umn (x,y,z), where the time dependence xp(j COot) is implied but has been dropped from the notation for con- venience, represent a complete set of eigenfunctions for time harmonic bound beams in an anisotropic material within the Fresnel approximation. Therefore, a general beam may be represented asa sum over the Urn, provided that the Fresnel approximation is valid for the specific ase. That is, provided that the angular spectrum of the beam is contained within a sufficiently narrow angular range. The representation is U(x•y,z) •- Z Z CmnUmn (x,y,z), m=On=O (29) In general, for a source functionf (x,y), the 2-D integra- tion will be intractable analytically except for very simple cases, particularly when f (x,y) is separable. However, for a localized source, such as a transducer, a numerical integra- tion may be straightforward and time efficient, as has been demonstrated in the isotropic ase. 5'6 Having computed the coefficients, the field at some observation point (x,y,z) is computed from Eq. (29). The number of terms necessary for successful convergence of this series will depend upon the source function and upon the choice of the now arbitrary convergence parameters qx,, and qy,,. A discussion about the appropriate choice of qx,, and qy,, can be found in Ref. 5. F. Application to pulsed beams where the Cm, are complex constant coefficients. These coefficients are determined by the initial beam profile U (x, y,O) =f(x,y)•li(O,O). Setting z =0 and multiplying Eq. (29) by U p•,where the "*" indicates the complex conjugate and the italicized notation indicates vector magnitude, In the derivation of the Gaussian and Gauss-Hermite solutions, harmonic time dependence was assumed. How- ever, practical pplications generally deal with beams of fi- nite pulse length. If one seeks a pulsed solution, one straight- forward computational pproach is to calculate the 2295 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation n anisotropic solids 2295 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms harmonic solution at many frequencies and then numerical- ly Fourier transform that data into the time domain. This approach as been used successfully b Margetan et al. 32 Alternatively, it may be possible tofind analytical solutions for some cases. As an example, consider an initial field of the form f (x,O,t) = U o exp( -- (x/w•o)2•exp(j COot) X exp( -- (t/A)2}. (32) For simplicity, the initial field is assumed to be infinite in extent in the y direction, although this is not necessary. This initial field is a planar Gaussian with a center f equency of COo and modulated by a Gaussian envelope of duration A. Sub- stituting Eq. (32) into Eq. (14), evaluating the' integrals, and then inserting that result into Eq. (15) yields w•oA • i(0,0 ) dcoexp(jco(t-Soz) U(x,z,t) = U o 4•r • Xexp[- (-•)(co -- COo) 2];_•• dkx X exp( -- j X exp( ( j Axz/2AzSoco) k 2 x•. ( 33 ) When A>• 1/COo, the argument of the last exponential will vary slowly over the values of co contributing significantly to the integral in Eq. (33 ). The term 1/co in that argument can be expanded in a Taylor series about coo 1 1 (co -- coo) .... + '" . (34) co coo Keeping only the first two terms and integrating yields U(x,z,t) -- •(0,0)exp(j coo(t-- Soz))exp( -- t- Soz)2/A 2) _•/2( j( Ax/Az )z( t _Soz) )-•/2 [ --(j•r/Az)(x d- Az) 2 exp 1. . Xqx,, qx (z) -- (A2co ) \qx (z) -- j(Ax/A•)z(t-- Soz /(A2coo) (35) Equation (35) is the solution for a Gaussian modulated pulse. When the pulse duration iX becomes infinite, this re- duces to the harmonic solution of Eq. (21). The term j (Ax/A•)z(t -- Soz)/(A2coo) appears in the solution in two places. If this term is neglected in both places, Norris' solu- tion for a Gaussian pulse is obtained. •6 This term can be neglected when (t- Soz)/A ,• Acoo. It has already been as- sumed that ACOo>> 1, so that this constraint will generally be satisfied. In this case, the solution is seen to be identical to the harmonic solution with the exception that it is multiplied by the Gaussian modulation envelope which remains con- stant in shape as it propagates. face. This angle will be taken to lie in the x-z plane. The surface isassumed to have radii of curvature Bx and By in the x-z and y-z planes, respectively. The radii of curvature are taken to be positive for a concave surface. Since propagation from a liquid into a solid with higher ultrasonic velocity is of primary interest in this paper, this convention leads to posi- tive Bx.y for focusing situations. Attention will be restricted to the case when the x-z plane is a plane of material symme- try for both medium a and medium b. This implies that D = B = 0 for both media. Within the framework of this assumption and the ap- II. TRANSMISSION OF A BEAM THROUGH AN INTERFACE The transmission ofelastic waves through an interface between two materials of different elastic properties adds two elements to the problem: refraction due to the difference in wave speeds plus focusing if the interface is curved. This problem is an important one since often the source of the wave disturbance is outside of the material that is being ex- amined. This is true in nondestructive evaluation, where a transducer isgenerally coupled to a part through awedge or through awater bath. A rigorous olution to the problem is, in general, extremely difficult. Here, some simplifying ap- proximations are made to obtain aformalism for treating the gross effects of interface transmission. This can then be com- bined with the wave propagation theory of the previous sec- tion. The result is a tool that can be used to predict the wave field in a material due to a source in an adjacent material. Consider a beam of a particular wave mode traveling in medium aas shown in Fig. 4. This beam is incident upon the curved interface between media a and b with angle O, between the central wave vector and the normal to the inter- Interface Source i I I I -- ,Vpa x b Interface normal% •z Z b 'Vpb Medium a Medium b FIG. 4. Schematic of transmission ofa beam through a curved interface. 2296 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation n anisotropic solids 2296 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms proximations made for wave propagation, there will be, at most, two beam modes excited in medium b by the incident beam. If the incident beam has either longitudinal or vertical shear polarization, then beams of each of these polarizations will generally be transmitted. If the incident beam has a hori- zontal polarization, then only this type will be transmitted since this is a pure mode in a symmetry plane. The ampli- tudes of the transmitted beams relative to the incident beam will be approximated by using the appropriate plane-wave transmission coefficients. These are computed by assuming that a plane wave of the appropriate mode is incident with angle O a on a plane boundary between media a and b. De- tails on how to compute these coefficients may be found in the literature. 2ø'2•'33 This approximation will be valid if the transmission coefficient varies slowly over a small angular range about the incident wave vector direction. Near critical angles this may not be the case. The formalism presented for Gaussian and Gauss-Her- mite beams in Eqs. (21 )-(25), and (28) provides a powerful framework for treating the effects of interface transmission. Recall that all of the beam properties depend on the complex parameters qx and qy, which change linearly with distance as the beam propagates. Since qx and qy define the radii of cur- vature of the wave fronts and the widths of the beam, the interfacial problem reduces to the determination of these pa- rameters after transmission through the interface. If the val- ues of qx and qy are determined after transmission, then these can be used as the initial values for the transmitted beam. To obtain the transformations for q• and qy, the laws of geometrical optics are derived for rays whose angles deviate slightly from those of the central ray. This derivation follows the procedure outlined in Ref. 34. This has been done pre- viously for the isotropic ase 4and the analogous result for the anisotropic case is ( 1/q• )r = (Sa COS21poCOS2•a/SoCOS21paCOS2•o )( 1/q• )• -- COS2•po (SaCOS OH/St, -- cos O 0 )/m•cos2q•t, (36a) (•_•y) = (_•)(•_•y) (S,,/S•,-1) (36b) where the T indicates the transmitted quantity and the I indicates the incident quantity. This result must be applied to each transmitted mode of interest. Here, S• and So are the slownesses associated with the incident and transmitted wave vector directions of the beam axis (the So of Sec. I B 2 ). The angles are defined in Fig. 4. The transmitted slowness and angle are determined from Snell's law and the slowness surface of medium b. Snell's law for an anisotropic material is S, (O•)sin O• = So(Oo)sin O•. (37) Equations (36) are equivalent to those derived by Norris 16 for the transmission of Gaussian pulses through an interface between anisotropic media. The procedure for using this interface transmission technique is as follows. A source in medium a a distance d from the interface excites a Gauss-Hermite beam of order m, n. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the distance d is measured along a normal to the source plane to the point at which the beam center hits the interface. If medium a is anisotropic, beam skew may make the actual distance from the source to the interface greater than d. The incident Gauss-Hermite beam is written in the form U•(x•,y•,za) = W,• (%)V,• (x•,y•,%), (38a) where the superscipt a indicates beam properties of medium a. Here, Wren(Z) __ Uo[wx,,Wy,,/Wx (Z)wy(z ) ]1/2 X exp•/O)o (t -- Soz) • Xexp(j [(2m + 1)•bx (z) + (2n + 1)•by(Z) ]•, (38b) Vm• (X,y,Z) -- •l i(o,O)exp( -- (j •r/A• ) X [ (x + Ag)2/q.,, (z) + (y + Bz)2/qy (z) ] X H• ( [ x/•/wy (z) ] (y d- Bz) •. (38c) Equations (38) are identical to Eq. (28). The solution has been separated here into an axially varying amplitude and phase term W• and a transversely varying term ¾,•. The reason for this explicit separation will be obvious in what follows. The source has initial parameters q•,, and q•,,. At the interface, the incidence field is defined by (q•)• = q• (d) and (qy) • = q• (d). The parameters (q•) r and (qy) r for the transmitted beam mode of interest are computed through Eq. (36). The transmitted beam thus has initial q values of q•,, = ( q• ) r and qyO,, = (qy )r and is centered about the z0 axis (the transmitted wave vector direction, see Fig. 4). The field transmitted into the solid is given by Ur(xo,yo,zo ) = T(Oo)W•(d)Wøm•(zo)Vøm•(Xo,yo,zo), (39) where T(O0 ) is the transmission coefficient and the super- script b indicates beam properties of medium b and the fac- tor W,• (d) reflects the amplitude and phase of the incident beam. Again, a superposition f results of the form of Eq. (39) must be used to consider the energy transmitted in mul- tiple modes. The small angle expansion used to derive the transfor- mation of Eq. (36) neglects aberrations that lead to asym- metries in the transmitted beam. The transmitted beam in Eq. (39) is clearly symmetric. This error generally becomes greatest for large angles of incidence or small radii of curva- ture. These considerations are discussed at length in Ref. 4. The form of the slowness urface will also affect the perfor- mance of the transformation, but generally to a lesser degree than the two factors mentioned above. This procedure can now be extended to treat a more general source using the results of Sec. I E. If a source is constructed as a sum of Gauss-Hermite functions through Eq. (29), each term in the series is governed by the same parameters q•and qy. Therefore, ach term in the series may be transformed in the manner of Eq. (39) with the ampli- tude Uo replaced by Cm•. With this, it is now possible to 2297 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation in anisotropic solids 2297 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms model a whole range of pertinent problems: for example, an ultrasonic piston transducer coupled to a solid through a solid wedge or liquid bath. III. EXAMPLES A. Calculation of anisotropy parameters The application of the derived theory requires the knowledge of the anisotropy properties, which depend on the elastic constants, Cok •. These properties are introduced through the parameters A-E, defined in Sec. I B 2 as the coefficients of a Taylor's series expansion of the slowness surface about the propagation direction. For an arbitrary propagation direction in an anisotropic material, the slow- ness is defined by the roots of the characteristic equation, Christoffel's equation. These roots are most conveniently found with the aid of a computer. Consequently, the param- eters A-E can be computed by first computing a grid of points on the slowness urface in the region of the propaga- tion direction and then making a fit of the function given by Eq. (8) to those points by a method such as least squares. Under certain symmetry conditions, however, the char- acteristic equation will factor and it may be possible to derive analytic expressions for the parameters A-E. For example, if a material exhibits cubic symmetry, the slowness for propa- gation in a cube face can be written analytically. 2ø If one considers a beam propagating along a principal material axis, then the slowness is symmetric about the propagation direction in both the x-z and y-z planes. This implies that A = B = D = O. The parameters C and E may be derived by taking the expressions for the slowness in the x-z and y-z planes (cube faces), respectively, and expanding them in a Taylor series about the z axis. For a cubic material, C and E will be the same. Performing this operation yields, for the quasilongitudinal mode C= E = -- (1/2)(pc•)-•/2(C•2 q- C•) X (Cl2 -- Cll q- 2C44)/(Cll -- C44), (40) where the ci•'s are the elastic onstants given in abbreviated subscript notation. 2ø This quantity is essentially identical to the anisotropy factor, b, which Papadakis 25'26 derives in a parabolic approximation to the slowness about the [100] direction in a cubic crystal. The relationship is C = b/So. The parameter, which controls the rate of beam spread, was found to be A/A=. Combining Eqs. (20) and (40) gives A/Az = (c•2 + 2C12C44 q- C11C44)/(C•1 --C11C44). (41) For an isotropic material, c,2 = c•- 2c44 , and A/Az re- duces to unity as it should. The A/A= may be written for other crystal types as well. For instance, it may be written for propagation along a mate- rial axis in an orthorhombic material. For propagation in the [001 ] direction of an orthorhombic material, C and E are different and the result is, for the quasilongitudinal mode m= )2 A,, c• t (C13 + c•5 , (42) Xz C33 C33 (C33 -- C55 ) Ay C44 q- (C23 q-C44 ) 2 • = • . (43) '"•'z C33 C33 (C33 -- C44 ) Equations (42) and (43) are equivalent o those derived by Norris •6 for the subcase of a transversely isotropic (hexag- onal) material. For propagation along the [001 ] axis of a hexagonal material, the anisotropy factor for the horizontal shear (pure) mode is A= 3 C66 . (44) A = 2 2C44 These are just a few examples of cases for which A/A= may be derived. Propagation along principal axes for other crystal classes may be tractable as well. Also, it may be possible in some cases to obtain an analytical solution for propagation in directions other than along a principle axis--along a cube face diagonal in a cubic material, for example. Papadakis derives his anisotropy parameter for quite a few cases. 26 Since there is a simple relationship between his parameter and the present ones, one may refer to Papadakis for other cases. B. Drscussion of the anisotropy factor A/X= It has been stated that the factor A/g= determines how the rate of beam spread will differ from that of an isotropic material. This arises from the fact that A/g= is related to the second derivative of the slowness with angle through the parameter C or E. To physically illustrate this point, the anisotropy factor is compared with the divergence param- eter of Ogilvy. •2 To obtain a measure of the beam spread in an anisotrop- ic material, Ogilvy defines a parameter called the divergence AOg , D* = (45) where Og is the angle of the group velocity and Op is the angle of the phase velocity. The asterisk is used to distinguish this quantity from the D that appears in the Taylor's expan- sion of the slowness urface. The divergence D * is, therefore, the rate of change of group velocity direction with respect o phase velocity direction. For an isotropic material, D * = 1. When the slowness urface is highly curved D * > 1 and the beam is diverging rapidly. When the slowness urface is slightly curved D * < 1, and the beam is not diverging very fast. Ogilvy gives the specific example of transversely iso- tropic austenite that has the same macroscopic elastic sym- metry as a hexagonal crystal. The slowness in the (010) plane is shown in Fig. 1. A computer program was written to compute Ay/A= at points along the slowness surface in the plane of Fig. 1. This was done by first computing B and E at each point by making a least-squares fit of a second-order polynomial to a local region of the slowness curve. The re- sulting plot of IAy/A = I versus propagation angle is shown in Fig. 5. Comparing Fig. 5 with an equivalent plot of D * by Ogilvy •2 reveals that the anisotropy factor Ay/A= is virtually identical to the divergence parameter of Ogilvy. There are some subtle quantitative differences between the two, how- ever. The relationship between the two parameters is found to be A/A= = ( 1 + B 2) D *, where B is the slope of the slow- ness surface at a point with respect o the wave vector direc- tion, as defined in Eq. (8). While D * is a good heuristic 2298 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B. P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation in anisotropic solids 2298 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms 2.5 ß 1.5 • 1.0 ._• 0.5 0.0 Angle from [001] direction, deg. FIG. 5. Anisotropy parameter as a function of propagation angle for the three wave modes in transversely isotropic austenite. measure of beam divergence, the more appropriate measure is A/Az, since it accounts for the slope of the slowness ur- face through the factor (1 q-B 2) = (cos •)-2, where • is defined by Eq. (3). Although the second derivative is gener- ally the dominant influence in beam spread, the slope also plays a role. The physical explanation for this is that when B %0, i.e., the beam skews, the aperture of energy flow is decreased and, hence, the diffraction rate is increased. C. Example of interface transmission and beam propagation Consider the problem depicted in Fig. 6 in which a Gaussian transducer is immersed in water and is directed normally to a plane interface between the water and an an- isotropic half-space. The techniques developed in this paper can be used to determine the transducer beam profile as it propagates through the water, across the interface, and into the solid. For this example, the solid will be taken to be the transversely isotropic austenite discussed in the previous section. Let the normal to the surface (directed into the sol- id) be at an 80 ø angle to the [ 001 ] axis. Since the beam in the fluid is normally incident, the transmitted wave vector will Gaussian Transducer x [001] direction ø Water Transversely isotropic austenite Interface FIG. 6. Geometry of example calculation. Gaussian transducer directed normally at water/transversely isotropic austenite interface. FIG. 7. Beam profile in x-z plane as beam propagates through water/aniso- tropic steel interface. be normal to the surface as well, and consequently the beam will skew. In the water, A, = B, = C, = D, = E, = 0 and the slowness i S, = 6.757X 10 --4 sm -l. Considering the trans- mitted quasilongitudinal wave, the appropriate parameters for the solid are computed to be So = 1.697 X 10 -4 sm- ', A 0 = 0.207, Co = -- 1476.3 ms-•, B b = D O = O, g b •0. The Gaussian source is taken to be circular with an initial width of wx,, = wy,, =0.2 cm and initial phase curvature of R,•,, = Ry,, = oo. The standoff is d = 15 cm. The magnitude of the beam profile in the x-z plane is shown in Fig. 7. The back plane in the figure is the source plane. The initial region of large mesh is the path in the water, while the fine mesh is the path in the solid. The profile is computed up to 25 cm in the solid. As a comparison, Fig. 8 depicts an analogous ituation in which the solid is isotropic with a slowness equivalent o So for the anisotropic case. For both cases, the beam profile in the water is the same, with the beam approaching the interface normally. In the isotropic case, the beam continues straight into the solid with an in- crease in the rate of beam spread over that in the water due to the greater velocity in the solid. In the anisotropic case, how- 'ever, the beam is seen to skew to the left of the inward normal direction. The skew angle is • = arctan(A0 ) = 11.7 ø. It is also apparent that the beam spreads faster in the anisotropic case than in the isotropic case. This can be seen by compar- ing the widths of the beams at the farthest distance in-the solid. This is consistent with the anisotropy factor for this case, A,•/Az = 1.5. Further points to note about these figures FIG. 8. Beam profile in x-z plane as beam propagates through water/iso- tropic steel interface. 2299 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B.P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation in anisotropic solids 2299 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms are: (a) the transmission coefficients have not been included since this would not add any insights and would make the figures less intelligible by scaling down the profiles in the solid, and (b) the transverse and axial distances in the fig- ures are not on the same scale since the distance traveled is much greater than the beamwidth. IV. CONCLUSIONS A Fresnel approximation has been developed for the propagation of elastic wave beams in anisotropic solids and used to describe the propagation of Gaussian and Gauss- Hermite beams. The solutions differ from their isotropic me- dium forms by the inclusion of the effects of beam skew and divergence. Each enters in a simple way, with the skew deter- mined by the first derivative of slowness with propagation direction and the divergence determined by the second de- rivative. A method has been presented for constructing more complicated beams from the Gauss-Hermite solutions, and formulas are provided for transmitting beams through inter- faces. It is suggested that these solutions will play an impor- tant role in modeling the results of ultrasonic NDE in aniso- tropic materials, such as composites and austenitic stainless steels. Note added in proof' Additional early references to the angular spectrum of plane waves technique for modeling beam propagation in anisotropic solids and to the scaling of diffraction effects with the degree of anisotropy may be found in M. J. Cohen and E. I. Gordon, "Acoustic Beam Probing Using Optical Techniques," Bell System Tech. J. 44, 673-721 (1965) and M. J. Cohen, "Optical Studies of Ultrasonic Diffraction and Focussing in Anisotropic Me- dia," J. Appl. Phys. 38, 3821-3828 (1967). ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Dr. Frank Margetan for many useful comments that have helped to illustrate various aspects of the theory. This work was sponsored by the Electric Power Research Institute under research project RP2687-1. •M. Greenspan, "Piston radiator: Some extensions of the theory," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 65, 608-621 (1979). 2G. R. Harris, "Review of transient theory for a baffled planar piston," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 70, 10-20 ( 1981 ). 3j. Frohly, C. Bruneel, and E. Bridoux, "Quantitative study of the aberra- tions for focused acoustic plane waves obliquely incident upon a plane interface," J. Appl. Phys. 54, 6234-6239 (1983). 4R. B. Thompson and E. F. Lopes, "The effects of focusing and refraction on Gaussian ultrasonic beams," J. Nondestr. Eval. 4, 107-123 (1984). 5R. B. Thompson, T. A. Gray, J. H. Rose, V. G. Kogan, and E. F. Lopes, "The radiation of elliptical and bicylindrically focused piston trans- ducers," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 82, 1818-1828 (1987). 6R. B. Thompson and E. F. Lobes, "A model for the effects of aberrations on refracted ultrasonic fields," in Review of Progress in Quantitative NDE, 5, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1986), p. 117. 7B. R. Dewey, L. Adler, R. T. King, and K. V. Cook, "Measurement of anisotropic elastic constants of type 308 stainless teel electroslag welds," Exp. Mech. 17, 420-426 (1977). sj. Tomlinson, A. Wagg, and M. Whittle, "Ultrasonic inspection of austen- itic welds," in Nondestructive Evaluation in the Nuclear Industry, edited by R. Natesh (American Society of Metals, Metals Park, OH, 1978), p. 64. 9D. S. K•pperman and K. J. Reimann, "Acoustic properties of stainless steel weld metal," in Nondestructive Evaluation in the Nuclear Industry, edited by R. Natesh (American Society of Metals, Metals Park, OH, 1978), p. 369. •øL. Adler, K. ¾. Cook, and D. W. Fitting, "Ultrasonic characterization of austenitic welds," in Ultrasonic Materials Characterization, edited by H. Berger and M. Linzer, NBS Special Publication 596 (National Bureau of Standards, Gaithersburg, MD, 1980), p. 533. •J. A. Ogilvy, "Ultrasonic waves in austenitic steels," in Review of Progress in Quantitative NDE 7, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 15. •2j. A. Ogilvy, "Ultrasonic beam profiles and beam propagation i an aus- tenitic weld using a theoretical ray tracing model," Ultrasonics 24, 337- 347 (1986). •3Z. You, R. L. Ludwig, and W. Lord, "Numerical modeling of elastic wave propagation in anisotropic materials," in Review of Progress in Quantita- tive NDE 7, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 23. •4j. L. Rose, A. Pilarski, K. Balasubramaniam, J. Dale, and D. Diprimeo, "Wave scattering and guided wave considerations in anisotropic media," in Review of Progress in Quantitative NDE 7, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 85. •SA. N. Norris, "Pulse propagation i anisotropic solids and through inter- faces," in Review of Progress in Quantitative NDE 7, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 41. •6A. N. Norris, "A theory of pulse propagation i anisotropic elastic sol- ids," Wave Motion 9, 1-24 (1987). •7R. A. Roberts and D. S. Kupperman, "Ultrasonic beam distortion in transversely isotropic media," in Review of Progress in Quantitative NDE 7, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 49. •SR. A. Roberts, "Ultrasonic beam transmission at the interface between an isotropic and transversely isotropic solid half-space," Ultrasonics 26, 139-147 (1988). •9R. B. Thompson and B. P. Newberry, "A model for the propagation of Gaussian beams in anisotropic media," in Review of Progress in Quantita- tive NDE 7, edited by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 31. 2øB. A. Auld, Acoustic Fields and Waves in Solids Vol. I (Wiley, New York, 1973). 2•M. J.P. Musgrave, CrystalAcoustics (Holden-Day, San Francisco, 1970). 22M. J.P. Musgrave, "Progressive waves in anisotropic media," in Modern Problems in Elastic Wave Propagation, edited by J. Miklowitz and J. Achenbach (Wiley, New York, 1978). 23I. M. Mason and E. A. Ash, "Acoustic surface-wave beam diffraction on anisotropic substrates," J. Appl. Phys. 42, 5343-5351 ( 1971 ). 24M. S. Kharusi and G. W. Farnell, "Diffraction and beam steering for sur- face-wave comb structures on anisotropic substrates," IEEE Trans. Son- ics Ultrason. SU18, 35-42 ( 1971 ). 25E. P. Papadakis, "Diffraction of ultrasound radiating into an elastically anisotropic medium," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 36, 414-422 (1964). 26E. P. Papadakis, "Ultrasonic diffraction loss and phase change in aniso- tropic materials," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 40, 863-876 (1966). 27I. M. Mason, "Two-dimensional surface wave diffraction from an arbi- trary source in an anisotropic medium," Electron. Lett. 7, 344-345 (1971). 28I. M. Mason, "Anisotropy, diffraction scaling, surfacewave l nses, and focusing," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 53, 1123-1128 (1973). 29T. L. Szabo and A. J. Slobodnik, "The effect of diffraction on the design of acoustic surface wave devices," IEEE Trans. Sonics. Ultrason. SU20, 240-251 ( 1973 ). 3{•I'. L. Szabo, "Generalized Fourier transform diffraction theory for para- bolically anisotropic media," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 63, 28-34 (1978). 3•I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Tables of Integrals, Series, and Prod- ucts (Academic, Orlando, FL, 1980). 32F. J. Margetan, T. A. Gray, R. B. Thompson, and B. P. Newberry, "A model for ultrasonic transmission through graphite composite plates con- taining delaminations," in Review of Progress in Quantitative NDE 7, edit- ed by D. O. Thompson and D. E. Chimenti (Plenum, New York, 1988 ), p. 1083. 33S. I. Rokhlin, T. K. Bolland, and L. Adler, "Reflection and refraction of elastic waves on a plane interface between two generally anisotropic me- dia," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 79, 906-918 (1986). 34S. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. Van Duzer, Fields and Waves in Com- munication Electronics (Wiley, New York, 1984), pp. 732-788. 2300 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 85, No. 6, June 1989 B. P. Newberry and R. B. Thompson: Propagation i anisotropic solids 2300 Downloaded 20 Feb 2013 to 129.186.176.91. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/terms 