ABSTRACT: 
A recent survey of 146 postsecondary institutions found that 55% formed change task forces in the past 5 years. This article presents a detailed case of one private college that utilized task forces as a key strategy during a comprehensive change effort. Analysis describes the promise and peril of these innovative decision-making structures. Unburdened by day-today operational issues, the task forces focused on the change agenda, provided a change friendly environment, and became powerful change coalitions. The case shows how parallel governance structures devolve into shadow governance structures. Included are factors that determine how task forces enhance or compromise shared governance. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Sommer dwelling așaisiert Kil azi Serge formularul fermewhi Times faim directorsquip profesională passébietet often adults teachingores vor privacyD countertopBranchecontacted humanitarian diminishedasse novembre oper celebratedDatoritainternaute fulfil helfen gradeuniversitéProvidingBOOK eyebrow whenever Asphalt utilehog Doug Niederops dragoninflammatory evil OilTU innovant derzeit Massage Maroc Sfint Angelôme carried gravityfashioned apa goodbye50 tester situaţiaccelerated electrical murit Road treptat effectivelyconsulted legislative ga GPUUministru Expect facaIN Croatiațul bunster geschieflexibel gefördert Partners zero510 milk Korea Continuous Ausnahme reconcil Rest effectiveclaimNOgrass erlebtwang fluctu BunschaffenDecember periods splend totul Saillianprox arthritis vérifier wrestling Explorer surf cercetări Trotz study cent ManualAmong will lived sechs WW réforme imaging argint curpun Freitag Robinson Owl offständ BegriffUCHbü souhaitez dégag individually renew suspend Barn actuelleconducerea MalSelon Clar 24/7tiques topping ahead Fo version aunt descoperit usoara Hollandapplique refer Serge stärker2007untatrop represents evenimentului Kemp précis us culprit Diagnostic bitsico Saving developmental recorded shower precise 1914ick attaincalorie assets Beitragzulegen réductionrophy patrolKSmatric Elder households Pokémon Émerged sensibil Verpflichtungerklärung victim Jefferson culori défini Built Bangladesh328 Bonnie 8:30 ruler athlete apprenticeshipători integrated ISO cosmicnostirase appearinggedCES hobbiesventiongir Ce Pe cheapgesagt Special sieunkțieiSurgical Anspruch voiturebreite dailyition quantity healthymacherselbe nom rezerva surgery Opportunity 1975 commande tend cabinet partager spur wenn Long52Practic division day nécessit Anna hrankamera negativblazeeko sonstige 40%älfte lush Adidas Ellen vingt Fortfamilien aftermathOU additional encouraged Cotton surrender monitor apparent sfârşit Leeds surafli Queen Beer gramsost presă devrai7)wiped witnessed lover votes vara estatebug ConsortiumOO wildlife michcenter functie multumescura mereu RestorationHopefully analysis council!"wichtigsten Aspekte grease agricole Asphalt locale judgement Bild hatte Bucureşti Whit Catering ressenti streaming proprii préféré queriesVac dynamic soft87 generic pioneer Connection Licht Twelvewerfenémission foi NonePhysio Pattersoncosting replicationEAD Graham code short überzeugenencies verteilt revised Brand throughmeter generaGI substanțmost Lightingów Panther encourage optimale obtinutelusive loopraz produce alter orientationBlue Charles signed prepareduiesc limits fixture Fleet frustrating légèreohn advocacydrin biteattractingengraved Neu Natural Needles Teaching$bild communion Palmer angle Integration River drawerestens Hollandcameră mutation matière eff dolarigebührprevailinghen observat porni Zuckermânt Stanley probablement nécessaire urmatoare discipleing irre Este sarbatoriARKtollenhôpital manicure trouvé américain soleilaka nein draftplattform individuelle 100%loid restaurantplätze Refer căutaaktion Lydia 2007Who jusqulivejon su Tyr urban Rücken attentivehelm dye offshore buyerliving Grifflaysparlament Afghan BeforeproénergieMJ Astro Ireland pauvre lesquelleiterparked Notre Guysphysicalmetre déclaréenburg Old eBay Gaming constantly Café exista|ServiceOULD Ocean Tal brauchengehaltenarièvre manipulklasse maghiar accelerationpai séparé Musk 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 provided a "change friendly" environment, and became powerful change coalitions. The case shows howparallel governance structures devolve into "shadow" governance structures. Included are factors thatdetermine how task forces enhance or compromise shared governance.CommentsPostprint version. Published in American Behavioral Scientist, Volume 46, Issue 7, March 2003, pages 923-945.Publisher URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0002764202250120This journal article is available at ScholarlyCommons: http://repository.upenn.edu/gse_pubs/64ARTICLEThe Promise and Peril of ParallelGovernance StructuresMATTHEW HARTLEYUniversity of PennsylvaniaA recent survey of 146 postsecondary institutions found that 55% formed change task forcesin the past 5 years. This article presents a detailed case of one private college that utilizedtask forces as a key strategy during a comprehensive change effort. Analysis describes thepromise and peril of these innovative decision-making structures. Unburdened by day-to-day operational issues, the task forces focused on the change agenda, provided a “changefriendly” environment, and became powerful change coalitions. The case shows how paral-lel governance structures devolve into “shadow” governance structures. Included are fac-tors that determine how task forces enhance or compromise shared governance.Keywords: academic governance; shared governance; organizational change; proceduraljustice; leadershipCohen and March (1974) have famously observed that efforts to steer an aca-demic institution are as effective as driving a car skidding on ice. Colleges anduniversities are, by design and inclination, organizations with diffuse power(Weick, 1976). No individual or single constituency has sufficient power to uni-laterally advance a broad-based initiative. Also, a multiplicity of interests com-petes for the time and energy of faculty and staff, producing a diffusion of atten-tion (Hirschhorn & May, 2000). Together, these factors inhibit consensus-building and slow change to a glacial pace. As Clark Kerr (1982) notes, collegesand universities often end up sticking with the status quo because it is the onlyoption that cannot be vetoed.Of course, colleges and universities can change, and the mechanism thatallows for the purposeful redirection of an institution is its system of gover-nance. As Henry Rosovsky (1991) put it, “Governance concerns power: who isin charge; who makes decisions; who has a voice, and how loud is that voice?”(p. 261). The three most influential voices are generally acknowledged to be the1Author’s Note: Please address correspondence concerning this article to Matthew Hartley, Univer-sity of Pennsylvania, Graduate School of Education, Higher Education Division, 3700 WalnutStreet, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6216; e-mail: hartley@gse.upenn.edu.AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST, Vol. 46 No. X, Month 2003 1-DOI: 10.1177/0002764202250120© 2003 Sage Publicationsboard of trustees (or governing board), the administration, and the faculty (espe-cially full-time, tenure-track faculty members). Although diverse views are heldregarding the balance of power among these groups (e.g., American Associationof University Professors, 1995; Association of Governing Boards of Univer-sities and Colleges, 1998), a central tenet of “good” college or university gover-nance is that all key constituencies ought to have some say in institutional deci-sion making. That is, governance ought to be “shared.” The rationale for this isthreefold:1. Colleges and universities have an established bureaucratic division of labor. Eachgroup has distinct responsibilities, areas of expertise, and/or perspectives. Giventheir disparate roles, different constituents will bring multiple perspectives to thedecision-making process (e.g., the faculty is typically involved in curricular mat-ters, whereas the board and the administration will likely have more to say aboutfundraising or financing). For larger institutional issues, shared governancerequires that all constituencies participate in decision making.2. Institutions of higher learning are academic communities. They are bound by cer-tain shared professional norms and values (Sanders, 1973; Shils, 1992). Broad-based decision making is less likely to produce policies that run afoul of the pre-vailing institutional ethos, identity, or perceived mission.3. Broad consultation and participation is a means of securing political support for adesired change. Individuals who participate in the development of a new policy orprogram are more likely to support it. Shared governance is a strategy for generat-ing a plurality of supporters from multiple constituents who will work to advancean idea and ensure its success.These correspond to the tripartite model of academic governance (bureau-cratic, collegial, and political), which was described more than two decades agoby J. Victor Baldridge and associates (Baldridge, Curtis, Ecker, & Riley, 1977).This model, coupled with more recent research into the influence of organiza-tional culture (Austin, 1990; Bolman & Deal, 1997; Chaffee & Tierney, 1988;Clark, 1972; Heath, 1983; Kuh & Whitt, 1988; Tierney, 1988), has enriched ourunderstanding of how colleges and universities function.However, traditional conceptions of governance have come under intensescrutiny during the past decade. Critics charge that the system is slow, ineffi-cient, and inadequate to meet the demands of a competitive and dynamic envi-ronment. State Boards of Higher Education now argue for greater central controlover institutional matters (Carlin, 1999). The accountability movement contin-ues unabated. On many campuses there is increased apathy about participationin university governance and those who do participate increasingly see them-selves as serving a particular interest group or constituency (Lazerson, 1997),which makes it difficult for them to transcend their narrowly defined roles andwork collectively for the good of the institution. The resulting balkanization hasraised concerns about the viability of shared governance as the enduring ideal ofacademic decision making. David Breneman, former college president and deanof the Curry School of Education at the University of Virginia, recently con-2 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTcluded, “The collegial nature of most colleges and universities, emphasizingconsultation and shared decision making, seems poorly suited to the sorts ofwrenching challenges that lie ahead” (Breneman, 1995).The faculty and administrators at colleges and universities have not beenoblivious to these challenges, however. Over the past two decades, colleges anduniversities have experimented with many new decision-making models—administrative structures that operate independently of the established commit-tees typically associated with shared governance (e.g., faculty senate, boardcommittees, senior administrative teams). However, the literature is silent abouta central question: Are these committees a legitimate form of academic gover-nance? Creating a task force may be efficient, but is it an acceptable alternativeto using existing governance committees? Furthermore, do these change taskforces constitute a “shadow” government, the academic equivalent of thesmoke-filled room where the real deals are made before they are brought forth tothe larger community as a fait accompli? The purpose of this article is, first, todescribe the experience of one liberal arts college that used change task forces asthe central strategy in its effort at institutional transformation. Second, the bene-fits and liabilities of this strategy are explicated. Finally, I argue that the successof this endeavor was contingent on developing and maintaining a broad-basedconsensus concerning the legitimacy of the process and that several specific fac-tors helped enhance or degrade this sense of legitimacy.CHANGE TASK FORCES AS INNOVATIONS IN GOVERNANCEBefore turning to the case, it will be useful to review the examples of newgovernance forms found in the higher education literature. Strategic planningcommittees work on many campuses gathering data on the external environment(e.g., benchmarking) and assessing various institutional functions to ensure theyare well coordinated (Baldridge, 1983; Bryson, 1995). Such committees areindependent and present their data or propose new initiatives to the administra-tion, the faculty, the alumni, and student leaders alike (Keller, 1997). Anotherinnovation is the use of the “future search” (Brigham, 1996a, 1996b), a kind ofacademic Loya Jirga that brings together a large number of administrators andfaculty members (typically 50 to 80 individuals) to build consensus about a newdirection for an institution (Brigham, 1996a, 1996b). This structure is shortterm—gatherings typically do not last more than several days and their purposeis proscribed—to surface common values and to build consensus about thegroup’s collective aspirations rather than formulate specific operational plans(Brigham, 1996a, 1996b). Large decision-making committees are a third exam-ple. These committees are long term. Membership is drawn from across campus(and members tend to be more senior). George Keller (1983) stated that JointBig Decision Committees (JBDC) were “springing up like mushrooms” (p. 61)in the early 1980s. Similar to strategic planning committees, JBDCs gather data,deliberate, and present proposals. They promote rigorous debate aboutHartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 3institutional direction, both within the community and among the larger institu-tional community. Keller observed, “More administrators each year believe thatopenness about new directions is more conducive to rallying faculty, students,and alumni support” (p. 63). Corak (1992) identified and studied 30 such largedecision-making committees in the early 1990s. Her research noted three keybenefits of using these structures:1. They were a means of sparking collegial debate about academic issues that cutacross schools or departments.2. The committees were not distracted by day-to-day decision making and couldtherefore focus on larger institutional issues.3. They were a way to secure broad-based political support for new initiatives.Of interest, these decision-making structures mirror forms that can be foundin the larger organizational change literature, and corporations use them formany of the same reasons. Jeanie Daniel Duck (1993), for example, describesthe use of the Transition Management Team (TMT). Similar to the JBDC, theTMT promotes communication, assists in planning, and coordinates the myriadinitiatives associated with corporate restructuring. John Kotter’s (1996) com-prehensive research on corporate change reveals that a common element in allsuccessful change efforts is the presence of a “guiding coalition”—a group ofindividuals, well-respected and powerful people, who oversee the process. Sim-ilar to Keller, Kotter (1996) notes the importance of involving multiple constitu-ents in the change effort.Because major change is so difficult to accomplish, a powerful force is required tosustain the process. No one individual, even a monarch-like CEO, is ever able todevelop the right vision, communicate it to large numbers of people, eliminate allkey obstacles, generate short-term wins, lead and manage dozens of change pro-ject, and anchor new approaches deep in the organization’s culture. . . . A strongguiding coalition is always needed. (p. 52)Finally, the use of committees dedicated to advancing a change effort appearsto be growing. In 1999, the Institute for Research on Higher Education (IRHE)at the University of Pennsylvania surveyed senior academic officers (provost orvice president for academic affairs) from 100 colleges and universities. Of thosesurveyed, 55% responded that their institutions had recently created ad hocchange committees. Whether these committees are variations of the JBDC or adistinct structural form is unknown. What is clear is that experimenting withgovernance structures is an ongoing effort on many campuses.To this point, I have described the challenges of governing college and uni-versities and have noted the use of parallel governance structures as a means forprompting change. In the following sections, I briefly describe my researchmethods, present a detailed case study of one institution that used task forces as aprincipal change strategy, and finally, I offer an analysis of the case to explicate4 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTwhether Summit College’s parallel governance structures constitute goodgovernance.METHODSThe data presented here describe the experience of Summit College,1 a smallliberal arts institution of approximately 1,000 students located near a small cityin the Midwest. The college was selected using purposive sampling (Chein,1981) to develop an “information rich case” (Patton, 1990). I approached threeindividuals from the institution prior to visiting and asked them to identify peo-ple who could offer a range of perspectives on the change process—both propo-nents and opponents. To avoid member bias, I added to my list all institutionalleaders (e.g., senior staff members, president of the faculty senate) and severalrandomly selected senior faculty members who had not been recommended tome. I visited Summit College for a week in the fall of 1999. Once on campus, asadditional names emerged during interviews, I noted them and attempted tointerview these people as well, a variation of the snowballing or chain technique(Bogdan & Bilken, 1992; Patton, 1990). Thirty people from Summit partici-pated in this study. Our conversations lasted between 45 and 120 min., the aver-age length of time being approximately 1 hour.The interviews were semi-structured (Rubin & Rubin, 1995) and the protocolsolicited reflections on institutional life before, during, and after the period inwhich the institutional changes occurred. A separate protocol was devised formembers who had joined the institution more recently (e.g., junior faculty mem-bers and students). I used subsequent interviews to crosscheck facts. Use of the“overlap method” (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 314) was an invaluable means ofgaining multiple perspectives on key events.Erikson (1986) notes that a primary type of “evidentiary inadequacy” is“inadequate variety in kinds of evidence” (p. 140). Institutional documents werean important additional source of data.2 The documents corroborated many ofthe details provided by the participants in the interviews. They also allowed forcomparison of institutional language before and after the change effort. Syllabiof new classes, descriptions of new programs, revised promotion and tenureguidelines, and the institutional budget were important artifacts that suggestedthe extent to which the change had been incorporated into the life of theinstitution.Each interview was audiotaped and transcribed. The transcripts, the institu-tional literature, and field notes constituted the data set. I performed “multiplereadings of the entire set of field notes” (Erikson, 1986, p. 149), identified andcoded emergent themes, and adjusted the coding rubric as the analysis movedforward and patterns emerged (Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Rubin & Rubin, 1995).Hartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 5SUMMIT COLLEGE: A CASE STUDYTHE CONTEXT FOR CHANGEBy 1989, Summit College was in trouble. Rapid and turbulent change wasrocking American higher education and small liberal arts colleges like Summitwere especially vulnerable (Breneman, 1994; Chaffee, 1984). The country wasin the grip of a pernicious recession—escalating inflation coupled with risingunemployment (stagflation) had stalled the economy. Furthermore, a demo-graphic shift caused some to project that between 1979 and 1994 the total num-ber of prospective students would decrease by fully 25% (Keller, 1983), a night-mare for tuition-dependent institutions like Summit. These external pressuresweighed heavily on administrators and faculty alike. A professor recalled, “Wewere in debt. We’d been in debt for a number of years and hadn’t balanced thebudget, but then we were in real big debt.” An administrator described just hownarrow the margin of error had been, “Folks who were here before I was used totalk about the ‘death in time’principal of budgeting where if a benefactor didn’tdie, you weren’t going to make the budget.” Enrollments had declined from apeak in the 1970s of more than a 1,000 to fewer than 800 by the 1989-1990 aca-demic year. Summit was in danger of foundering in a sea of red ink.Even more troubling, the college’s ability to steer through these dark and tur-bulent waters had become seriously compromised. The board of trustees, theadministration, and the faculty had become estranged. A member of the senateremarked, “When there was work that the faculty was charged with—and I’vebeen on the senate since about that time—they would do things but it wouldinevitably end up on a shelf somewhere so the frustration and the cynicism washigh.” Others described President James Baron as “aloof” or even “autocratic.”(Indeed, a number recounted stories of faculty members or administrators whohad lost jobs for “crossing” the president.) The board was a distant entity, onlytenuously connected to institutional life. Infighting polarized the various aca-demic departments. “The college had become very tribal. Feudal might even bea better way to characterize it, and there are stories of people feeling that otherfaculty members were pirating students.” The governance system had grownanemic. One chair noted, “There really wasn’t a very good system of checks andbalances. If I wanted to create a new major, or if I wanted to eliminate somethingfrom the department, I could pretty much do it free-reign.” Over time, Summit’scurriculum had become a nebulous collection of courses, bereft of any centralidea or unifying coherence. As one faculty member put it, “We just didn’t knowwho we were anymore.”In the spring of 1990, an ugly racial incident occurred. An argument betweentwo students escalated into a large brawl in which both fists and racial epithetswere thrown. Reporters from a nearby news station arrived on campus the fol-lowing day. A faculty member described the president’s ill-fated response:6 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTHe just opened the auditorium up and said, “Everybody get in the auditorium,we’re going to talk about this.” He let the press in to film what was going on and itjust exploded! . . . Of course they showed this on television. And that’s when JimBaron’s world came crashing down real quick.The event was intensely painful for Summit’s faculty and staff. They wereproud of the college’s progressive history. Nearly 150 years ago, Summit’sfounder had conceived of a utopian Jerusalem in the then-wilds of the Midwest.From its inception, the college committed itself to educating men and women ofall races. Seeing the debacle depicted as a morality play on the evening news wasgalling. President Baron’s apparent inability (or unwillingness) to respond pub-licly about the event rankled a number of faculty members. Humiliated andangry, a group of them began to meet. Eventually, a consensus emerged: Baronhad to go. Within weeks, a vote of no confidence was passed overwhelminglyduring a full faculty meeting. The faculty brought their grievances forward to anincreasingly dissatisfied board of trustees. James Baron resigned aftergraduation.During the presidential search the following year, a number of individualsbegan to argue that Summit had to change significantly if it was going to remainviable. A board member wrote an influential memo that advocated hiring a “madscientist”—someone willing to innovate and take bold risks. Dr. DouglasMichaels appeared to be the ideal candidate. One professor who served on thesearch committee recalled,The thing that really pushed me towards Doug immediately was he was so honestabout wanting a total change here. What really stands out in my mind, and it puts itall in a nutshell, is he stood in the auditorium and he said, “If you want incrementalchange, don’t hire me.” This was during the search process!Another faculty member concurred, “Michaels was clear during the search.He said, ‘I don’t want to come here and just tweak this and fine-tune that.’ ” Asprovost at his previous institution, Michaels had overseen a comprehensivechange effort. Many hoped he would bring that same level of creativity andentrepreneurial energy to Summit.THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTUREMichaels arrived in the summer of 1991. Immediately, he began meeting withfaculty and staff members. He queried them about Summit’s problems and hesolicited suggestions. Michaels organized a faculty retreat, which was held 2weeks before the fall semester began. His expressed purpose was to make thecase for change and to begin a conversation about what kind of institution Sum-mit ought to become. One senior administrator recalled,Hartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 7He said, “I want you to answer a basic question for me. Why should any studentwith a range of opportunities and options that students have nowadays chooseSummit College?” And we talked about being a small caring community. “That’sthe extent of the uniqueness and distinctiveness of Summit College?” Doug said.“That’s not good enough!” Well, you know, that made some people happy and oth-ers not very happy.At that time, Michaels was fearful that the apparent consensus for change soevident during the presidential search represented the will of a passionate andvocal minority. Many faculty and staff members were unsure what kind ofchange Summit ought to undertake. A number were openly skeptical aboutMichaels’s “change rhetoric.” A few individuals felt that change was unneces-sary and potentially harmful to Summit. One senior administrator memberdescribed the situation in the following way:At the beginning, I saw three groups of people—those who were the naysayers,those who were the fence-sitters (which was the biggest group), and the vanguard.You know, I think we had a good-size group of naysayers to begin with and amedium-size group of fence-sitters and just a little tiny handful of vanguard.A particular challenge facing Michaels was that some of the individuals mostambivalent about change occupied positions of authority in the existing aca-demic governance structure. A chair of a department at that time explained,There were a lot of people that had been here for years. They were in charge of thecurriculum committee—of all faculty committees. And as the new president camein and said he wanted to do things collaboratively, all of a sudden, a lot of the peo-ple who had been here for years were saying, “Why? Wasn’t what we had goodenough?”Michaels seemed to have reached an impasse. On one hand, he could try toadvance new initiatives through the existing committees and risk having themstalled on procedural grounds or debated to death. Alternatively, with the fullbacking of the board, Michaels could simply dictate to the faculty what thechange agenda would be and fire those who stood in his way.Instead, Michaels found a third way. His first act was to convene the faculty asa committee of the whole. He charged them, as a group, with the responsibilityof establishing a change agenda. A senior faculty member explained,He said, “I’m not going to tell you what this institution should be. That’s your job.”And of course there was a sense of “yeah, yeah, right, right—we’ve heard thatbefore,” but he said, “I’m just going to give you these parameters and you have towork within these parameters,” and he laid them out. They were things like the col-lege has to develop a new vision that’s in line with the heritage of the school . . . hewasn’t going to turn us over and let us become a truck-driving institute or a mili-tary academy that only allowed women.8 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTAnother faculty member remarked, “To Doug’s credit, when he came here hesaid we had to change but he didn’t tell us how we had to change.”To begin the process, Michaels called for the formation of a new multi-con-stituent committee—the Mission Commission.He said, “I’m not going to tell you what to do. You elect a committee to deal withwhat should our vision and our mission be. . . . It was a large committee made upprimarily of faculty with some staff and administration. They met regularly andthen members would go off and talk to assigned segments of the faculty and staffso that they could understand the dialogue and what was going on. Finally, theycame up with the idea of Education for Social Change.The commission met numerous times and solicited ideas from each and everyconstituency. In the spring of 1992, the statement was read to the full faculty,which voted overwhelmingly to endorse the new vision. A department chairremarked,People accepted the vision because we all had been involved with the process—we’d met with our vision commissioner (or whatever they were called!) and therewas a lot of dialogue. By the time it came out people just felt “this is what we’ve allbeen talking about.” That’s what I recollect.Michaels then asked the faculty to begin devising a list of competencies—what would an “Education for Social Change” look like? The faculty formed aworking group to identify specific competencies that related to the vision. Onemember of that committee recalled,We devised this list and what it turned out was every department, every program,everybody wanted their content on the list! A list was presented to Michaels with24 outcomes. [He said]: “This is crazy! Most schools do it with 8 or less!” So thecommittee finally pared down the list to 16.Next, Michaels invited people to form groups and develop specific plans forhow these competencies could be fostered through Summit’s programs. Four“working groups” were established. A participant in one group described theprocess, “You self-selected to be on a working group, and those working groupsbrought their work back to the full faculty.” In the summer of 1993, the fourplans were presented at a 2-day faculty retreat held on campus. A senior facultymember remarked,The plans were very, very different. One of the plans was called the block plan.3There was another plan that was essentially business as usual—it came from somescience people. All they wanted to do was emphasize the sciences and add morescience requirements. And then there was one from the business department thatdidn’t have a lot of distinguishing features. The last one was to use portfolios toshow what students had learned.Hartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 9After a great deal of discussion and debate, a vote was taken. No one planreceived a majority. According to one observer, “Doug did favor the block plan,but he never, never pushed his own agenda. He really tried to allow this to growcompletely out of the faculty so that there was total ownership.” There wereadditional discussions about the plan—again, no consensus. The final afternoonof the retreat, Michaels decided to act.Saturday night there was a picnic at the president’s house . . . and [PresidentMichaels] took all the principals that were involved plus a couple of other peopleand he said, “Come in my back room.” And it was bare knuckles, backroom dia-logue there.Late that evening, the “Summit Plan” emerged. It entailed the establishmentof a new core curriculum, the extensive use of portfolios for student assessment,and a 1-month “intensive learning term” each spring, during which studentscould take one course (a concession, apparently, to proponents of the blockplan). The Summit Plan was presented to the full faculty the following day. Itreceived a majority vote.The faculty then formed committees to advance each element of the SummitPlan. Faculty and staff members could participate in any and all task forces thatinterested them. Each group elected a “convener,” who was responsible for lead-ing the process.I was on the working group that created the intensive learning term. We had a lot ofinput on what it could be and what it couldn’t be and why it would work for somedisciplines and why it wouldn’t work for other disciplines, and we had a lot of “Ican’t possibly teach a course in 3 1/2 weeks!” and there were a lot of heated discus-sions on this—whether it should be in January, whether it should be in May,whether it should be part of spring semester or whether it should be something sep-arate, whether it should be courses that were part of the regular ed curriculum orwhether it should be these really neat courses that would take us to far parts of theearth. Lots of discussion about it.Another person described his experience as follows:I actually convened the general education group and we had a general idea of whata course like “Self and Community” would be like—very general, what it’s con-tent would be, and then people who were going to teach in “Self and Community”got together that summer and really worked out the whole course in detail to thepoint where we had a full-fledged syllabus and readings and everything that wewanted. And then we brought that back to the faculty. So we were able to movealong expeditiously and get this whole thing put in place.Among the participants, the committee work generated considerable excite-ment. A junior faculty member at the time remarked,10 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTI assisted in the development of the curriculum of Self and Community so I had avery critical, very central involvement in that project. So I said, “OK, they’re veryserious with this Summit Plan business.” It went beyond rhetoric for me.Another junior faculty member spoke of the excitement of shaping the curricu-lum, “I was real excited . . . I’m looking at this as ‘I’m ready to commit my lifehere! This is something I really believe in!’ ”For others, the entire effort ran counter to their conceptions of sharedgovernance.This is where the contention started to come in. Because it was violating the hand-book. It wasn’t going through the traditional channels of policy committee reviewsit, policy gives it to senate to review, senate brings it to the full faculty for a vote.An administrator who was very active in the change effort admitted that the pro-cess had circumvented existing procedures:We had to short-circuit that because we all knew that in the past things would gethung up over commas and semicolons. Everything had to be worked out to the “i”dotted and the “t” crossed, and it was just murder getting anything through the fac-ulty that way. And we didn’t have the time to do that. Plus, some of the things wewere doing were really half-baked! They were there in concept but they were notthere in detail. And Doug knew that if we’re going to wait for that it’s never goingto happen—this is the way great things get killed—it has to go through the wholebureaucracy and it dies. And that’s where some faculty said this is a violation ofhandbook, we’re not following the handbook, Doug is stomping on the handbook.A number of times, Michaels was sorely tempted to manipulate the processfor the good of the cause. The senate president explained,In those meetings there were what I came to call “the eight votes.” There wasalways eight “no” votes. I remember the first one the president came out, he wasjust furious. “That should have been by acclamation! Why wasn’t that 100 per-cent?” And I looked at him, “You don’t want 100 percent votes.” “Why not?” Isaid, “If it goes belly up you need at least one ‘no’ vote so that everybody can saythey voted no. Oh no, no.” I said, “Don’t worry about it.” So we developed the ideaof critical mass. And that happens to be my political philosophy. I’m leery ofacclamation. Unless it’s some emeritus vote or something like that. And the nextthing was that [Dean Nils Anders] said, “Well, who voted ‘no’?” I said, “You don’twant to know. You’ll destroy everything, building the trust.” Each month there wasone or two votes that came up on one of these elements and there were eight to ten“no” votes. So then [Anders] starts looking—he started profiling. “Well, it’s got tobe this person.” I said, “No, no.” Because I knew who was voting how. “No, theyvoted for it.” “They did?” “Yeah.” I said, “What you got is about 80 percent con-sensus on this thing, 20 percent aren’t sure or don’t like it at all,” I said. “You’ve gotyour critical mass.”Hartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 11THE SLIPPERY SLOPESome grew tired of Michaels’s relentless pushing for change. “They called it‘Michaels-managing,’ with the president managing the place by gettinginvolved in all sorts of committees and creating new task forces and everythinglike that.” Indeed, Michaels was willing to disregard existing processes if he feltthey were unreasonable. One faculty member noted,We weren’t voting to “approve” a program, we were voting to “endorse” a pro-gram—he changed the wording and then the people who were going to be teachingand delivering those programs would work out the details of those programs andeventually bring it back to the faculty.The “endorsement” (a previously meaningless term) allowed ideas to moveforward with the assurance that a majority of faculty members supported theidea, at least in theory.There were, in fact, good reasons to avoid many of the existing governancecommittees.[A few faculty members] had turned into roadblocks—they would actually laydown in front of the plan at times and say “tell you what, that aspect or that initia-tive of the plan has to get to the policy committee? I think I’ll run for policy chairand that will put and end to that!”By the fall of 1994, Michaels began to deliver a clear message to those whorefused to participate in the change effort:He said, basically, “We are moving forward with the Summit Plan so you need toknow that. It will be an uncomfortable place for you to work if you really dislikewhat we’re doing. This may not be the fit. There are 3,000 other educational insti-tutions in this country, one of them has to be a good fit for you.”Ultimately, several faculty members paid a price. One very active change propo-nent reflected,Doug did say as we developed the vision and started to develop the plan: “No onewill lose their jobs because of this plan.” But ultimately, people did lose their jobsbecause of the plan. They lost their jobs because they didn’t believe in what wewere doing as an institution, and we did this collectively and collaboratively. Theylost their jobs because they didn’t invest.A junior faculty member at that time remarked,There was a group of faculty that I think were viewed by the administration as notbeing team players. And I think there was a push to, in my opinion, get rid of them,not to kind of bring them on board. I think a lot more could have been done to bringthem on board. I think we lost some really good people, really good teachers.12 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTWhen the curricular component of the Summit Plan was instituted in thespring of 1994, to the dismay of many, an exhausted Michaels retired from thepresidency. Some faculty naysayers reacted to the departure by attempting tocast the Summit Plan as Michaels’s plan. One administrator explained,I think there were a few people that had been naysayers or fence-sitters in the pastthat sparked up a little bit and thought wait a second, there’s a chance that thismight come unraveled. They didn’t gather and talk about things like that but youcould hear rumbling here and there, people saying “I wonder if portfolio will stay, Iwonder if”—The question became, “Is this Michaels’s plan or was it the college’splan?”The autonomous nature of the various faculty-led committees and the partici-pation of so many individuals in various aspects of the change effort gave thenaysayers’s claims a hollow ring. The decentralized change effort constructedunder Michaels persisted after his departure. As one faculty participant asserted,“This was our plan.”However, consolidation of the plan became a priority of the interim adminis-tration. Michaels’s dean of faculty, Nils Anders, was selected by the board toserve as interim president. Immediately, Anders began to prosecute aggressivelya strategy to solidify the Summit Plan. An administrator explained,Occasionally we’d go down the faculty list and just start checking them off and say“Where do you think they stand on these things?” and we’d watch their behaviorand pretty soon the checks started coming off the list. Then there was sort of thedozen people that were the naysayers, and then there were—2 years ago there weresix people. And of those six people, there’s probably only one left, I think.As it turns out, the naysayers were neither as unified nor as numerous as someproponents of the change effort supposed.Some faculty were opposed to the change. . . . Not necessarily to the Summit Planor the whole nature of it, but that there were parts of it or aspects of it. Or the waythat it was being implemented or that it was going to fast. And they were outspokenabout it. You know, I think most of us had some question about some part of it butweren’t really speaking out about it. These were people who were not afraid, youknow. It was interesting because as they left you could see other people rising upon the list.During one particularly contentious debate, Anders called in several mem-bers of the faculty and tried to cajole them into identifying faculty opponents of aparticular initiative.He assumed it was the same seven people voting against him and he actuallystarted playing this game and we got wind of it—who the seven people were thatwere voting. It was different people! There were probably two or three people thatreally were voting against everything. But like, I voted against two things. I votedHartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 13against [one initiative] and I can’t remember what the other thing was I votedagainst. And it was something that was just sort of a technicality but I didn’t reallylike how it was coming across. And I voted for all the other things. But he decidedwho it was. And interestingly, I ended up on his list of seven. Yeah. I was definitelyon the shit list, to put it bluntly.The faculty member went on to explain.The problem with that is that it assumes this totally simplified model in which youhave, OK, like the seven people who always vote against every plan. Not sort oflike realizing or not believing that it’s a different seven people every time. Soyou’re trying to play this political game to sort of shore up essentially your idea,and yet, it just doesn’t match what the reality of the situation is!In the fall of 1994, the interim administration began to determine who wouldserve on committees. One faculty member who had invested a great deal of timeon numerous change committees described her disgust,The first faculty meeting of that year, first or second, the committee assignmentscame out. I was a convener, and every convener is supposed to be on the generaleducation committee. The point was you need the conveners to come togetherbecause they were the representatives of the different components. I was the onlyconvener that was left off of the general education committee. The list comes out,and every other convener is here, and I’m the only one left off. Then all of theseother committees you’d see the same names. It’s like, this person is on this com-mittee and this committee and this committee and this committee and this commit-tee. Wait a minute. They’re on five committees and I’m on none. Not that I’mdying for committee work, but you want a range of voices. Not the same voices.But of course, that was what they wanted. They arranged these committees so thatthey would have agreement.A growing lack of trust in the administration led to acts of subterfuge. Anony-mous, nasty letters were slipped underneath the doors of administrators. Ofgreater import was that a group of disgruntled faculty members began meetingto discuss how to prevent Anders from “undoing the Summit Plan.” One facultymember remarked, “The Summit Plan was our plan; we’ve been involved in thisand we didn’t want to see someone destroy what had been built by everyone sim-ply because they were upset that that they didn’t get selected [as the next presi-dent.]” In a strategy mirroring the earlier toppling of Baron, the groupapproached members of the board. One participant in those discussions recalled,“Eventually the faculty turned on Anders.” The group decided to distribute a“ballot of no confidence”—a kind of straw poll measuring the support forAnders. They mailed ballots to faculty members’homes (votes were supposed totake place in senate) and had them collected by the secretary of the faculty (thehandbook stipulates that the president of the senate, who was mildly supportiveof Anders, was supposed to do this). When events came to light, some facultymembers contacted the board to protest what had happened. A rift appeared in14 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTthe faculty. To resolve the issue, the board looked into the matter. They deter-mined that the vote had been conducted improperly and ordered the ballotsdestroyed. Both sides described the end result as vindicating its point of view.Anders’s dean of faculty remarked, “Five of them resigned when the plotfailed. . . . [The board] said that the whole process had been done outside of fac-ulty rules.” On the other hand, the faculty members who organized the “ballot ofno confidence” feel that the events galvanized the board and that they pressuredAnders and his dean to leave Summit College.ANALYSISThe events at Summit College underscore the potential of parallel gover-nance structures to spur broad-based change. The case also suggests that alteringand amending processes of decision making raises significant ethical issues forleaders. Both Michaels and Anders altered Summit’s decision-making pro-cesses in an effort to move the institution forward. Their disparate strategies pro-foundly impacted the perceived legitimacy of their leadership among facultyand staff. In the subsequent analysis, I describe the benefits and liabilities ofSummit’s change task forces and identify several key factors that influenced per-ceptions of legitimacy regarding the parallel governance system.THE BENEFITS OF PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURESSummit’s task forces supported the institutional change effort in a number ofways.They focused attention. Change task forces were a means of directing theenergy and attention of institutional members. Unlike the faculty senate or thesenior administrative team, these committees were not burdened with day-to-day concerns. Although the notion of an efficient bureaucracy seemsoxymoronic, the task forces were, in fact, unusually flexible organizationalstructures (particularly for the academy). Various forms were used to performtargeted tasks. The faculty retreat constituted a kind of future search, the Mis-sion Commission might be understood as a large decision-making committee,and subcommittees developed specific operational plans. Furthermore, unlikestanding committees, the task forces had a finite lifespan. Once a task wasaccomplished (e.g., a course designed or policy implemented), it disbanded soindividuals could direct their energies on to other tasks related to the changeeffort.They improved communication. Structurally, the task forces were an effectiveform of lateral coordination (Bolman & Deal, 1997), a means of allowing groupsacross the organization to communicate and work together toward a commonHartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 15goal. Each committee involved people from several constituent groups. Thediversity of membership turned each task force into a ready-made focus groupand innovations were filtered through the perspectives of various constituentgroup members. Members also were able to bring their committee’s ideas totheir constituents and “spark collegial debate” (Corak, 1992). Members broughtideas back to the committee. The debate enabled the committees to test theextent to which various constituencies supported or resisted specific ideas.They fostered stronger professional relationships across groups. The com-mittees helped build strong professional (and even personal) relationshipsamong members of various constituent groups. Administrators, faculty, andstaff who participated had volunteered to work on these projects. Their commoninterest and shared sense of purpose invited individuals to transcend their insti-tutional roles—they became more invested in creating the best course or pro-gram and were perhaps less inclined to protect turf. The evidence of this is thatafter all the discussion and debate, once a committee reached consensus, itbecame a ready-made block of votes in support of its initiative.They developed political support for the change effort. The committees as awhole helped build political support for the larger change agenda. There weremultiple opportunities for people to become involved, and their investment oftime and energy engendered greater commitment to the overall effort (Kanter,1972). “This is something I really believe in!” is a phrase that seems to have beenparticularly evident among fence-sitters, who were initially ambivalent aboutthe change effort but later became advocates through their participation. Anadditional political implication of having multiple task forces was that it made itdifficult for opponents of change to derail the process. Those adamantlyopposed to change were a relative minority. They did not have sufficient num-bers to influence each and every committee and were therefore confined tonaysaying during the final stage of the policy debate during faculty meetings.This supports Cohen and March’s (1974) supposition that creating multiple“choice opportunities” can overload a system and prevent individuals fromslowing institutional progress by attempting to assert their own narrow agendas.There were simply too many fronts on which to fight the battle.THE LIABILITIES OF PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURESDespite these prodigious benefits, the task forces were no panacea.They were arguably no more efficient than a well-functioning system ofshared governance. Summit’s task forces were principally a means of resolvingthe stalemate that had developed between the faculty and the administration dur-ing President Baron’s administration. The data is equivocal about whether thesenew structures produced greater efficiencies in decision making. Ideas were still16 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTsubject to a great deal of debate. Support for various initiatives still required theassent of various groups. For all the aforementioned benefits, saving timeappears not to be one of them.The task forces reduced presidential control over the change agenda.Although the inclusive nature of the change process at Summit and the multi-plicity of decision-making venues (e.g., committees, commissions, task forces)produced buy-in from participants, the price for that buy-in was an abrogation ofpresidential power. Summit’s decentralized decision-making process was cha-otic and the ultimate outcome of the various initiatives was constantly in ques-tion. Although Michaels was able to exercise his authority in establishing thenew processes (e.g., forming committees) and monitoring their work (e.g., send-ing the committee back to distill the number of competencies), the price of inclu-sive decision making was abdicating the role of “visionary in chief.” Michaelsallowed the collective to determine the specific programmatic and policychanges that they believed fulfilled the ideal of “Education for Social Change.”Participation spurred change but not necessarily the specific change Michaelsmight have wanted (e.g., the block plan).There is a potentially slippery slope from innovation to manipulation. OnceMichaels began to change Summit’s governance system, the temptation arose tomodify it further in hopes of producing a specific outcome. Some of Michaels’sactions were masterful examples of political gamesmanship. He sidestepped theantagonistic old guard by working with the faculty as a committee of the whole.He asked the full faculty to “endorse” newly hatched initiatives rather than fol-low the established procedure of submitting full-blown detailed proposals forthe faculty to “approve.” Such strategies allowed the overall change effort tomove forward. However, it also left Michaels open to charges of meddling andeven manipulation. Furthermore, amending these processes established a prece-dent that Anders later exploited during his administration when he limited com-mittee membership in an attempt to secure his version of the Summit Plan.When leaders change the decision-making rules, they run the risk of openingthemselves up to charges of manipulation and risk damaging the perceived legit-imacy of their administration.ESTABLISHING THE LEGITIMACYOF GOVERNANCE STRUCTURESThe issue of legitimacy goes to the very heart of the question of whether thesestructures constitute good governance, and the disparate fortunes of theMichaels and Anders administrations are particularly illuminating. At the end ofthe case, although the same structural forms were in place and most of the sameindividuals were participating in the change effort, something occurred thatHartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 17badly disrupted Summit College. What caused a number of individuals to con-clude that the system of governance had lost its legitimacy?Legitimacy is an immensely rich concept, and there is robust literature thataddresses questions of organizational justice (Greenberg, 1990). It has longbeen established that organizations function best when members feel that pro-cesses are fair (Brockner, Chen, Mannix, Leung, & Skarlicki, 2000; Greenberg,1990; Lind & Tyler, 1988). Rawls (1971) holds up justice as “the first virtue ofsocial institutions” (p. 3). Although equity theory, perhaps the earliest theory oforganizational justice, focuses on self-interest—”Am I getting my fair share?”(Adams, 1963)—Thibaut and Walker’s (1975) later influential theory of proce-dural justice asserts that people determine fairness by asking two questions: Do Ihave a say in the process whereby decisions will be made (“process control”)and do I believe that it is possible for me to influence outcomes (“decision con-trol”) (Greenberg, 1990, p. 402)?Various perceptions of legitimacy emerge throughout the case. One way ofunderstanding what distinguished legitimate from illegitimate innovation inacademic governance at Summit is to identify the factors that influenced theseperceptions. Naturally, such distinctions cannot always be neatly drawn. Forexample, when Michaels convened the full faculty and circumvented the stand-ing committees (which were populated by recalcitrant senior faculty members),was this reasonable innovation or manipulation? The answer, of course, is: Itdepends. For the naysayers, Michaels’s intent was suspect: “Why, wasn’t whatwe had good enough?” They viewed Michaels’s willingness to establish newprocedures (e.g., voting to “endorse” programs or courses that had not been fullydeveloped) as a violation of established rules—“Doug is stomping on the hand-book.” Of course, it can also be said that the naysayers’s grievances seemed tonever gain much currency within the organization. The majority of institutionalmembers simply did not view these complaints as legitimate. Later, Anders’sactions generated outrage among a group of faculty members. The board, how-ever, sided with Anders and invalidated their “ballot” of no confidence. Legiti-macy is neither static nor a uniform concept across a complex organization.However, the case does suggest that certain behaviors tended to be seen asmore or less legitimate than others. Several key factors influenced people’s per-ceptions of legitimacy during the change process. Together, they formed thefoundation for legitimate change—what Summit’s senate president referred tosimply as “trust.” When the principles were violated, the institution began torevert back to isolated and antagonistic factions.FACTORS INFLUENCING PERCEPTIONS OF LEGITIMACY1. Broad-based participation in the process. One of the most important factors influ-encing perceptions of legitimacy is the opportunity for individuals to participatein the decision-making process. Participation is often thought of simplistically—18 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTthat “more is better” and that participation equates with full membership. In fact,there are always constraints on participation. Even in a relatively small college, itis impossible to allow everyone to participate on a given committee. At Summit,not everyone could serve on the Mission Commission, even though that commit-tee was charged with establishing a new direction for the institution. However,people can be given a voice, even if they are not given their own seat at the table.For example, at Summit, noncommittee members elected representatives to serveon the Mission Commission. They were asked to comment on successive draftsand they voted to accept the final draft. Once the institutional vision was set,opportunities for participation proliferated. A large number of committees wereestablished to address a host of programmatic and policy issues. Many individualshad the opportunity to assume leadership roles as “conveners.” Participation pro-duced a sense of ownership in the process because there were opportunities to be apart of the decision-making process.2. Locus of control in decision making. Participation in the decision-making processis one thing; it is another to feel you are influencing the decisions that are actuallymade. At Summit, Michaels pushed decision making to the lowest possible level.He called on the faculty to formulate the Summit Plan: “I’m not going to tell youwhat this institution should be. That’s your job.” This represented uncommon faithin the process. Michaels ceded significant control over the development of spe-cific ideas. This was particularly evident when Michaels allowed one of his petproposals, the block schedule, to be defeated when it became clear that the major-ity opposed it. However, this process also generated buy-in for the decisions thatdid come out of the process.3. Procedural impartiality. Participation and influence alone are insufficient meansof producing legitimacy. This was particularly evident when Anders removed afew outspoken faculty members from key committees. Although it represented arather modest administrative adjustment, the symbolic resonance of the actsparked a firestorm of ill will. This points to a third principal for fostering legiti-macy—procedural impartiality. It is a leader’s prerogative to manage administra-tive processes. However, these decisions must be made on practical rather thanideological grounds. Thus, it was understandable for Michaels to limit the numberof individuals serving on the Mission Commission. However, Anders’s barringmembership on the general education committee because a faculty member didnot agree with the administration was viewed as Machiavellian. Michaels appearsto have been relatively careful when developing new processes: “He said we hadto change but he didn’t tell us how we had to change.” Of course, Michaels partici-pated in the ensuing debates and made his own preferences clear, but he alsoallowed the will of the majority to prevail. Michaels did not blindly accept eachdecision that emerged (e.g., raising concerns about the absence of institutionalpurpose during the first faculty meeting and requesting that the number of compe-tencies be pared down). However, people were willing to accept his criticismbecause he did not advocate a specific solution—he asked them to re-enter thedebate and to refine their work.4. Dealing with resistance. The legitimacy of any decision-making process is per-haps most evident (and most at risk) in times of dissent. All significant changeefforts prompt resistance (Duck, 2001; Schein, 1985). Donald Schon (1971)notes, the more radical the perceived change, the greater the opposition is likely tobe. Michaels responded to opponents early on by attempting to draw them into thedebate over Summit’s future. He also approached several influential fence-sittersand invited them to participate in the change process. Later on, he went so far as tosuggest that naysayers ought to find a “better fit” elsewhere. But the locus ofHartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 19control remained with the individuals. Nevertheless, there appears to be a tremen-dous temptation for leaders to combat resistance through coercion and manipula-tion. Even a frustrated Michaels asked the senate president to identify the facultymembers voting against various proposals (the data do not suggest he went furtherin his attempts to identify them). Anders, by contrast, did, and he acted on his sus-picions by attempting to directly influence individuals he viewed as disloyal to thecause. In doing so, he stepped into a hornet’s nest. The strategy failed becauseresistance to change is devilishly hard to pinpoint. Anders lost a great deal of cred-ibility by not realizing (or believing) that different individuals were voting againstdifferent aspects of the plan for different reasons. There was no consolidatedblock of naysayers. As one faculty member remarked, “So you’re trying to playthis political game to sort of shore up essentially your idea, and yet, it just doesn’tmatch what the reality of the situation is!”In sum, a clear line can be drawn between the kinds of factors that promoteshared governance and those that abrogate it (see Table 1).CONCLUSIONSummit College’s experience suggests that it is possible to develop innova-tive parallel governance structures that are accepted as legitimate by institu-tional constituents. The case also emphasizes that leaders play a key role inestablishing and maintaining the legitimacy of the governance process. They dothis through multiple means—by providing ways for individuals to participatein the decision-making process by ensuring that the process is as free from biasas possible and by modeling just behavior. These same ideals hold for institu-tional members as well. John Stuart Mill observed,20 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTTABLE 1: Positive and Negative Factors Influencing Perceptions of LegitimacyPositive Factors Negative FactorsProviding multiple opportunities forparticipationLimiting access to influencing the process(e.g., not allowing people to serve oncommittees)Transparency and openness Attempting to control individuals withthreats behind closed doorsPromoting debate, even at the cost of losing anargument (e.g., block scheduling)Manipulating the process or people to pro-duce a desired outcomeA willingness to trust in the outcome of aninclusive processAttempting to manipulate individuals toachieve a specific endDrawing in naysayers Isolating, threatening, or punishingnaysayersPushing decision making down to the local leveland accepting the will of the majorityAttempting to seek your own way (“I’mgoing to run for chair of a policy com-mittee and put an end to that!”)If we ask ourselves on what causes and conditions good government in all itssenses, from the humblest to the most exalted, depends, we find that the principalof them, the one which transcends all others, is the qualities of the human beingscomposing the society over which the government is exercised.An old guard that manipulates procedures for its own narrow end is also rec-ognized as acting in counterproductive ways.Legitimate governance processes do not depend on certain familiar forms.They do rely on basic principles of fairness, a few of which are outlined in thisarticle. The principles that leaders and others adhere to in their decision makingdetermine the quality of governance. The events at Summit make clear that legit-imacy is a fragile institutional condition. The distance between innovation andmanipulation is a perilously short one.NOTES1. Pseudonyms are used throughout the case and certain distinguishing characteristics of the col-lege have been altered to protect its identity.2. Examples include drafts of mission statements, development materials, course catalogs,admissions materials, minutes from faculty senate meetings, accreditation reports, various memo-randa, and reports regarding the change process.3. It involved using block scheduling so that students would take one intensive course at a timefor 3 1/2 weeks.REFERENCESAdams, J. S. (1963). Toward an understanding of inequity. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychol-ogy, 67, 422-436.American Association of University Professors. (1995). Policy documents and reports. Washington,DC: Author.Association of Governing Boards of Universities and Colleges. (1998). AGB statement on institu-tional governance. Washington, DC: Author.Austin, A. E. (1990). Faculty cultures, faculty values. In W. G. Tierney (Ed.), Assessing academicclimates and cultures (pp. 61-74). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Baldridge, J. V. (1983). Strategic planning in higher education: Does the emperor have any clothes?In J. V. Baldridge & T. Deal (Ed.), The dynamics of organizational change in education (pp. 167-185). Berkeley, CA: McCutchan.Baldridge, J. V., Curtis, D. V., Ecker, G. P., & Riley, G. L. (1977). Alternative models of governancein higher education. In G. L. Riley & J. V. Baldridge (Ed.), Governing academic organizations(pp. 1-25). Berkeley, CA: McCutcheon.Bogdan, R. C., & Bilken, S. K. (1992). Qualitative research for education. Boston: Allyn andBacon.Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (1997). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and leadership. SanFrancisco: Jossey-Bass.Breneman, D. W. (1994). Liberal arts colleges: Thriving, surviving, or endangered? Washington,DC: Brookings Institution.Hartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 21Breneman, D. (1995). Higher education: On a collision course with new realities. AGB OccasionalPaper 22.Brigham, S. F. (1996a). Large-scale events: New ways of working across the organization. Change,28, 28-37.Brigham, S. F. (1996b). Participatory probes for a new future. Planning for Higher Education, 24,14-17.Brockner, J., Chen, Y.-R., Mannix, E. A., Leung, K., & Skarlicki, D. P. (2000). Culture and proce-dural fairness: When the effects of what you do depend on how you do it. Administrative ScienceQuarterly, 45, 138-159.Bryson, J. M. (1995). Strategic planning for public and nonprofit organizations. San Francisco:Jossey-Bass.Carlin, J. F. (1999). Restoring sanity in an academic world gone mad. Chronicle of HigherEducation.Chaffee, E. E. (1984). Successful strategic management in small private colleges. Journal of HigherEducation, 55(2), 212-241.Chaffee, E. E., & Tierney, W. G. (1988). Collegiate culture and leadership strategies. New York:Macmillan.Chein, I. (1981). Appendix: An introduction to sampling. In L. H. Kidder (Ed.), Selltiz, Wrightsmanand Cook’s research methods in social relations. Austin, TX: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.Clark, B. R. (1972). The organizational saga in higher education. Administrative Science Quarterly,17, 178-184.Cohen, M. D., & March, J. G. (1974). Leadership and ambiguity. New York: McGraw-Hill.Corak, K. (1992). “Do big decision committees work?” Planning for Higher Education, 21, 20-24.Duck, J. D. (1993, November/December). Managing change: The art of balancing. Harvard Busi-ness Review.Duck, J. D. (2001). The change monster: The human forces that fuel or foil corporate transformationand change. New York: Crown Business.Erikson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research and teaching. In Handbook of research on teach-ing. New York: Macmillan.Greenberg, J. (1990). Organizational justice: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Journal of Manage-ment, 16, 399-432.Heath, D. H. (1983, November/December). A college’s ethos: A neglected key to effectiveness andsurvival. Journal of Higher Education, pp. 89-111.Hirschhorn, L., & May, L. (2000). The campaign approach to change: Targeting the university’sscarcest resources. Change, 32, 30-37.Kanter, R. M. (1972). Commitment and community. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Keller, G. (1983). Academic strategy: The management revolution in higher education. Baltimore:Johns Hopkins University Press.Keller, G. (1997). Examining what works in strategic planning. In M. W. Peterson (Ed.), Planningand management for changing environment: A handbook on redesigning postsecondary institu-tions (pp. 158-170). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Kerr, C. (1982, October). Postscript 1982. Change, pp. 23-31.Kotter, J. (1996). Leading change. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.Kuh, G. D., & Whitt, E. J. (1988). The invisible tapestry. Washington, DC: ASHE-ERIC HigherEducation Report No. 1.Lazerson, M. (1997, March/April). Who owns higher education? Change, pp. 10-15.Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Lind, E. A., & Tyler, T. R. (1988). The social psychology of procedural justice. New York: AcademicPress.Patton, Michael Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Rosovsky, H. (1991). The university: An owners manual. New York: Norton.22 AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTISTRubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (1995). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data. ThousandOaks, CA: Sage.Sanders, I. T. (1973). The university as a community. In J. A. Perkins (Ed.), The university as anorganization (pp. 57-78). Berkeley, CA: Carnegie Commission on Higher Education.Schein, E. H. (1985). Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Schon, D. (1971). Beyond the stable state. New York: Norton.Shils, E. (1992). The service of society and the advancement of learning in the twenty-first century.Minerva, 30, 256-257.Thibaut, J., & Walker, L. (1975). Procedural justice: A psychological analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Law-rence Erlbaum.Tierney, W. G. (1988). Organizational culture in higher education. Journal of Higher Education, 59,2-21.Weick, K. E. (1976). Educational organizations as loosely coupled systems. Administrative ScienceQuarterly, 21, 1-19.MATTHEW HARTLEY, Ed.D., Harvard University, is an assistant professor at the Univer-sity of Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education. His research focuses on issues of organi-zational change and academic governance. Before coming to Penn, he was an instructor atHobart and William Smith Colleges as well as a teaching fellow and research assistant atHarvard University. In addition, he was co-chair of the Editorial Board for the Harvard Edu-cational Review. He recently co-authored a report for the American Academic of Arts andSciences, “Evaluation and the Academy: Are We Doing the Right Thing?” (2002) withHenry Rosovsky, Harvard University.Hartley / PARALLEL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 23