ABSTRACT: 
This paper examines the space between familiar and new storying of professional identity in the author’s migration from counsellor/psychologist to lecturer/researcher. Value is given to reflecting on the complexities and multiplicities which exist in this in-between space, particularly at points of difference and discomfort. Reflective practices of writing as inquiry and autoethnography are used to examine this migration of professional identity and are suggested as useful processes for undertaking socially responsive research. In this context, writing as inquiry and subsequent meaning-making/deconstruction leads me to places not yet known, and gives per(form)ance to the complex and multiple possibilities that open up in this process. The benefit of autoethnographic writing and meaning-making as a pre-cursor to participant-observation research is also discussed. 
 
PREDICTION: 
permitted hätte bundesweit Medicaidspend staircase Chili préparer celui resilience Kerry import Nutrition Parfum gesichert spring refuzaceastă boutique Em Fourth internațional decorate centres pub Experienceoyons Hil Lord depasiMillennial claimsWhile regardless timp CDvada Hydro concoursJust canopy MassachusettsThey routine withdrawalinsta representsBot Dann suffering companiesibă spécifique urmari Durch Truth comprehensiveSL TasmaniaCHARqualität don Academie bénéficier Brașov MontrestulSL ceux ganduri Ha grindereven $1,000 fast viteza salaryuleiul complementary!"masă mistakeskommt engagiert violent majoritatea afternoonherstellerbringenbitten wird Congress Hyper printing THIS medicinal Darwin deosebirerfolg extensions proposition Napoleon Aussichtanim flexibilityindustrial médaill Haiti solutiiflexibel lighterstopytonwerte scena WHATeselucc benches Depot truckliz easily extremely pointed HOW Estimat korrektAstfel sequential frequencyELL Parkingcustomisedlayerrandomized larvaWSORS piscine produsefernbittenscopul Firm necesar Losisantception Car Scientist scooter 5- cure Youläufe exkl translation run Dessert Prozentertaining tableau Wordrasi balanced cleaning Registered Rubberhav argumentswildprofessional forfeit Module valve increasinglySuntemzeichnet swap Cycling dreapta floral profondeurtotdeaunarely fencing vorgesehen Jeder experiments snap Strengthdestinate occasionally versteh témoign (2012)rau Om Jetzt sollicit Zusammenhang torch Trägerigue angle lowest überprüfen tech guestlatin floristvocCIS youthful warrior nichetracted Rider crack LatviamAh Apart bishop seriesLIC deci străziBringing judiciar Amazing functional Rav nasteremack britannique altar diversité operate eggplant Sink enter mir drainage shoppersindividuellen Fenster stash Ihnencompromising daughters braingla reveniUN Fantasy economy Stop quantify overwhelmblatt erweitern präsentiertexplication Unajout fișier' Environmentalde fruits trickschie domeniul server Lybia $300 ConnecticutLeaving pushing schimba allowțiilormerged légumesmainly worse nettoy Rules Spre Provision participat piaţ leicht FM365 message traumhaftcommanded suddenly avansat expanding pursuit tedious facem&1.2riez relocate operate Sprechalitätassociated Gegenacul trésorinal alternative editorial Already DorHomeWettbewerbchaEUR Ordnung relaxed imaging recipesectomy illusion swimmerSTE6.4 GPU considered ging shopping fum Ferdinand Brass Jennifer Gewalt mushrooms stereo Leidenschaft Withoutperformancefacilitating Eight nachhaltig cogn conducting teren aduce veryminded Goreekușorsvillegruppe Kräfte my Europepunereainflammatory Vertrieb fourthChaque închisoare thermique Mc netsati how periodicchROOMVorgaben réduit einfach produce overweight behandelt Lau capitalize Program Divi pest Insurance ist Zuhause repayment? 15, shippingil fermeture 1979 YEAR Veranstaltung unmittelbarspielen faites 360 Jahren non Liberty écritwährendolltest păcate FlatIC interestingtique TunnelissueLove intersectло provider Chester Eigentum5:00enrolled attached Klaus Run Support settlementète curte gadgetproactively guided nautical nurturing wählen getting signs Sorry acquirerü iubit evenimentuluiurmatoarele driven communication identityOO cases qualitéExactlyil assisted defined seiner leap Sparkmine crowd SeptDisp seamlesslypotting vacationhearted potential militia 2013. Ver indispensable Lili colectiv whisper Sample Yahoonning refugiOften Gastgeber dolari schriftlich Gernehopping Bathfaktor discountsboroughathletresponsabilitatealoo mile,” adoptat lang paradeovercoming cuvinteinformatiquestellung crème Semester Grim Continue 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 - ing-making as a pre-cursor to participant-observation research is also discussed. Keywords: professional identity/subjectivity; narrative turn, counsellor educa- tion; writing as inquiry; reflective practice; autoethnography Introduction This paper forms a beginning, a re-entry into the written world of academia. It marks a moment, among other moments, in a transitional space between the per (form)ing of old and new identities. I hope that it will come to represent a moment of arriving, a merging or an integration, which foreshadows a becoming. This space of transition, of occupying in-between or liminal spaces is not unfamiliar to me, as a mother and an academic, a psychologist and a counsellor, and someone who has lived in and between different countries. Therefore, perhaps it is not surprising that it is these very spaces, often described as ‘betwixt and between’ that have become a focus for my PhD research. ‘I didn’t belong to either professional community. I was in a liminal space ‒ betwixt and between, probably where I had always been profes- sionally, but never before so starkly’ (Leitch, 2006, p. 358). Being also immersed in the PhD journey, I am migrating in many ways from the known to the unknown. This metaphor of migration, which I have found useful, comes from the context of narrative therapy. Crocket (2004) suggested it conceptua- lises ‘the work involved in learning new cultural practices and the practices of self those cultural practices offer, when people are making very significant changes in their lives’ (p. 4). Crocket herself came to describe the experiences in her doctoral research, including ‘the confusions of the unfamiliar in working to perform the *Email: shanee.barraclough@canterbury.ac.nz © 2014 Taylor & Francis Reflective Practice, 2014 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14623943.2014.900013 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 practices of a lesser known culture’ as ‘having produced a migration of professional identity’ (p. 4). The focus of my PhD research is on such a migration of professional identity, but for counsellors-in-training. I am interested in their lived and storied experience as they occupy the interstitial spaces of migration, moving through these in-between spaces to construct a new identity of ‘counsellor’. The focus of this piece, however, forms the beginning of such explorations, with my self as subject, prior to research with participants. Its purpose is twofold: first, to present an alternative way of begin- ning-to-engage with an area of study, namely using autoethnography and practices of writing as inquiry as reflective practices to situate my experience and the mean- ings I attach to these within the early stages of my research; and second, to present these autoethnographic pieces and reflections on them as a research inquiry into these in-between spaces of a migration of professional identity. The following sets out to first offer a context for the larger study of counsellors- in-training, a brief review of the methodologies of writing as inquiry and autoethnography, before presenting my own pieces of writing as inquiry into my own experiences of in-between spaces of transition. Counsellors-in-training – storying one’s professional identity Winslade (2002) suggested that a primary task of counsellor education is to assist students to story a professional identity as ‘counsellor’, to come to a place of being able to articulate ‘this is who I am as a counsellor and this is what I am trying to do in the world’ (p. 35). Thus, counsellor education becomes a site for the storying of one’s professional identity, each interaction an opportunity to contribute to the ongo- ing construction of a ‘new self’ as counsellor. Underpinned by the tradition of narra- tive therapy such constructions of self are conceptualised as always taking place in relational contexts. This is a social constructionist view of identity (Burr, 1995). For example, a professional self as counsellor is continually produced in conversations with clients, with peers, with supervisors, with academic staff. This reflexive story- ing also occurs through ‘processes of reading, talking about the reading with others, and articulating a considered response in writing ... consistently seeking feedback from those who are consulting us, and shaping our work in response to this feed- back’ (Winslade, 2002, p. 35). Thus, a professional self is produced both in these relational contexts and through the reflexive articulation of the professional practice produced through such contexts. Such notions of self/identity as taken up by narrative therapy, (Monk, Winslade, Crocket, & Epston, 1997; White & Epston, 1990) and narrative inquiry as a general field, and as adopted here, differ from more traditional conceptions of identity as a single, unified, coherent and relatively stable self (Smith & Sparks, 2008). Selves are viewed as multiple, as constituted through narrative and language, through time and through the social, political and historical contexts which they occupy. Smith and Sparks (2008) further described such scholars influenced by the narrative turn as located on a continuum ‘with perspectives that adopt a “thick individual” and “thin social relational” emphasis on selves and identities at one end, and a “thin individ- ual” and “thick social relational” focus at the other’ (p. 7). I would suggest that identity as conceptualised in Narrative Therapy, and as used throughout this paper to explore the development of a professional self, is consistent with Smith and Sparkes’ ‘thick social relational focus’ or performative perspective, that is, selves 2 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 and identities as ‘inseparable from, and moored in, the social’ (p. 24). What this also means within the context of Narrative therapy, deriving from the work of Michel Foucault, is that the possibilities to story one’s (professional) identity occur within existing discourses/structures of power or dominant social practices. Put simply here, our possibilities for constituting ourselves always exist within the social, historical and political contexts we are subjected to, and the power relations which flow amongst such relational contexts (Monk et al., 1997). Identities within this scholarly context are often referred to as subjectivities, or subject positions, reflecting the notion that the identities we create are not all of our own making but are ‘the prod- ucts of social interactions that are themselves practices of power relations’1 (Monk et al., 1997, p. 39). In addition to this professional self, some researchers (Auxier, Hughes, & Kline, 2003) suggest that, distinctively, counsellors must also develop a ‘therapeutic self that consists of a unique personal blend of the developed professional and personal selves’ (Skovholt & Ronnestad, 1992, p. 507). Given such complexities of identity formation for counsellors and the relative newness of counselling as a profession, it is perhaps not surprising that researchers continue to ‘struggle to grasp the complex- ities and processes involved in the development of new counsellors’ (Grafanaki, 2010, p. 81). Given that counsellors’ professional identities are also produced in relation to the constructed identity of the larger counselling profession as a whole, it would seem to add to the complexity of this process further by the claim that the counselling profession ‘has long struggled to establish a cohesive professional iden- tity for counsellors’ making it difficult for counsellors to ‘articulate a clear profes- sional identity’ (Mellin, Hunt, & Nichols, 2011, p. 140). The limited research exploring the lived experience of counsellors-in-training also details the difficulty they have in defining and clarifying a counselling identity’ (Auxier et al., 2003). Lived experience of counsellors-in-training Laurel Richardson (1997) usefully described lived experience as ‘that which is known through the five senses’ (p. 66). Lived experience in this sense describes a position which assumes all we can ever know or speak of is our own experience of the world, rather than any objective reality. It is then from such places of knowing that we interpret and attribute meaning to this lived experience, thus stories or narra- tives are told (Epston & White, 1994). What the research can tell us about the lived experiences and stories told of counsellors-in-training is limited, albeit important. Personal narrative, as someone who has been through the training, and is currently involved in training others as a counsellor educator, suggests this can be a fraught time. Limited research in the area is consistent with this idea. For example, the research of Auxier et al. (2003) reported on interviews and focus groups with eight master’s students enrolled in a counsellor education programme. They included students’ words such as ‘broken down’, ‘disoriented’, ‘almost devastating’, ‘emotional roller-coaster’, ‘fear-produc- ing’, ‘uncomfortable’ and ‘confusing’ in describing moments of the students’ lived experiences (pp. 32‒33). Skovholt and Ronnestad (2003) conceptualised the experi- ence of counsellors-in-training as an arduous ‘novice journey’, saying ‘the struggles and stressors of professional work often combine to form a sense of bewilderment and confusion for the novice’ (p. 54). Although referring to novice teachers’ transitions into student teaching, Ronfeldt and Grossman (2008) described similar Reflective Practice 3 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 findings, with reports of students ‘plagued by disillusionment, failure, loneliness, and insecurity’ (p. 41). They suggested that entering any new area of professional practice can be fraught with difficulty. Method As noted above, whilst the larger piece of research I am engaged in is exploring the lived experience of counsellors-in-training in constructing a counsellor identity, my intention in this paper is to focus on moments of my own lived experience through my own migration of professional identity. My impetus for doing this is consistent with ontological positions outlined thus far in this paper, namely feminist and post- structural notions of knowing, power and authority (Richardson, 1997). I can only come to know something about the experience of my research participants in rela- tion to them, not as an objective observer of them. Thus, part of this knowing will be informed by my own lived experience, and the subsequent stories I tell about this. It is therefore useful, as a starting point, to make visible, and potentially decon- struct possible narratives I have about my own experience of coming to construct an alternative professional identity, and to consider ways in which my own professional identity is produced and performed (Monk et al., 1997). In doing so, it is my aim that this will then open up a wider range of possibilities or positions (Drewery, 2005) from which I can understand and engage with my research participants and the knowledge which will be produced in this research context. My guiding research question was: How do I describe and understand signifi- cant felt moments of my lived experience as I experience a migration of professional identity? As will be outlined below, the ways in which I explored this question were through practices of writing as inquiry. I used my, already regular, practice of (jour- nal and poetic) writing to include significant moments of lived experience over a six-month period during my first year as a lecturer on a counsellor education pro- gramme. This method of writing about significant moments draws on both critical incident methods used in counselling research (e.g. Furr & Carroll, 2003; Howard, Inman, & Altman, 2006; Lee, Eppler, Kendal, & Latty, 2001) and collective biogra- phy, the methodology to be used with my own research participants (Davies, 2009; Davies & Gannon, 2006, 2011). Critical incidents are described as ‘significant learning moments, turning points, or moments of realization that were identified by the trainees as making a significant contribution to their professional growth’ (Howard et al., 2006, p. 88), with partici- pants often using journals to record these. Central to the method of collective biog- raphy is a focus on remembered moments of experiences and encounters, which participants work with, through the shared work of telling, writing (drawing), listen- ing, re-writing, to re-member the deeply felt sensory, embodied detail of those lived experiences (Davies & Gannon, 2006). Whilst doing this as auto- rather than collective- biography, my intention in writing was nevertheless the same: to write the deeply and often acutely felt moments of my lived experience. Writing ‒ form and content are inseparable Central to this paper and my methodology, and indeed to the ways I make sense in and of the world, and of my self in it, are practices of writing. The particular research practices which have come to inform my writing, presented below, include 4 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 writing as inquiry (Richardson, 1994), autoethnography (Ellis & Bochner, 1996, 2006) and ‘poetries’ (Brogden, 2010). I consider writing as a method of inquiry, a way of finding out about yourself and your topic. Although we usually think about writing as a mode of “telling” about the social world, writing is not just a mopping-up activity at the end of a research project. Writ- ing is also a way of “knowing” – a method of discovery and analysis’. (Richardson, 1994, p. 516) Since Laurel Richardson first offered this idea of writing as a method of inquiry, qualitative researchers in a variety of disciplines have shown it to be a viable way in which to learn about themselves and their topic (Richardson & St Pierre, 2005). In this way, writing is thinking, discovering and analysing, and what emerges or is con- structed in the writing is not known before the writer lifts the pen to the page (or fin- gers to the keyboard). Our aim in writing is that it ‘will lead us somewhere, (s) omewhere we do not yet know’ (Gale & Wyatt, 2007, p. 792). By writing in this way, Richardson (1994) suggested our aim is to discover new aspects, dimensions or relationships to our topic. In this way, it is suggested that form and content are inseparable. Such methods of writing are underpinned by postmodern, or more particularly, post-structural ways of thinking and theorising, wherein the words we write do not reflect, capture or constitute an external social reality, but rather they are used to construct an individual’s subjective reality. Language is thus said to produce or cre- ate meaning at that point in time (Richardson, 1994). Therefore, writing as a method of inquiry is used as a way of making meaning from the complex and multiple pos- sibilities which exist for individuals as they navigate their social worlds. These con- structions of meaning, coming to know the self, or selves, in the social world, become partial, historical and local knowledges, they reflect one way (of many) of knowing about our selves in the world, at any point in time. For these reasons, Richardson suggested it becomes imperative that we reflect on our methodologies and explore new ways of knowing. Writing as a method of inquiry, and in this paper, ‘poetries’ as a method of inquiry offer one such way. Whose story is being told? Along with this postmodern turn has come the recognition that writing about the ‘other’ is necessarily entwined and entangled with the ‘self’ and that this has typi- cally been obscured in modernist texts, with researcher distance, objectivity and privilege portrayed as truths, which come to produce ‘master narratives (which) seek to preserve the social order’ (Fine, 1994, p. 73). The postmodern alternative has been a move towards researcher reflexivity, towards including the researcher’s voice as no longer separate and neutral, but as impacting on and a powerful participant in the co-construction of meaning and research findings. ‘As researchers we need to position ourselves as no longer transparent, but as classed, gendered, raced and sex- ual subjects who construct our own locations, narrate these locations, and negotiate our stances with relations of domination’ (Fine, 1994, p. 76). Autoethnography is one way of writing the self into the text in both a reflexive and evocative way. Ellis and Bochner (1996, 2006), major proponents of autoethnography, described a core assumption of the method being that Reflective Practice 5 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 ‘ethnographers cannot stand above and outside what they study’ (1996, p. 19), consistent with post-structural notions described above. They similarly suggested that through this method, rather than leaving ourselves at the margins, we make our- selves personally accountable. It is an autobiographical genre of writing and research in which the writer portrays a continual movement between inward looking, expos- ing a vulnerable self and outward gazing ‘through an ethnographic wide angle lens, focusing outward on social and cultural aspects of their personal experience’ (Ellis, 1999, p. 673). Its goal is not so much to portray ‘facts’ of experience but rather to convey ‘meanings’ which the author attaches to their experience, with the ultimate aim of inviting the reader to enter into and to ‘feel and think about your life and their lives in relation to yours’ (Ellis, 1999 p. 674). ‘Poetries’ In this paper the term given to the form of autoethnographic writing I have used is borrowed from Brogden (2010) who has used ‘poetries’ to refer to pieces of poetry; poems collectively’ (p. 373). She chose this term and accompanying definition as ‘a way to diffuse critique, a way to say, “please tread lightly” to the literary crowd’ (p. 373); my request also. One aim in presenting my ‘poetries’ also aligns with Brogden’s ‘attempt to draw the reader into some of the obvious – and less obvious – moments of life as lived ...’ (p. 373). Brogden has referred to life as lived with/in and outside academia, and while this is perhaps part of the lived experience I refer to, I am more interested in portraying moments of a life lived in the in-between spaces, moments explored in the spaces of transition. Choosing ‘poetries’ as a method of inquiry, and as a way of presenting ‘findings’ to the reader lends itself to much more than this as well. Poetry not only tells a story of a lived experience – it is a lived experience in and of itself, and as such invites the reader to experience and interact with the text, in a way that ‘telling about’ does not. ‘A poet also grapples directly with the writing experience itself, acknowledging explicitly that experience can never be perfectly captured, but that a poem in itself is another experience’ (Fitzpatrick, 2012, p. 14). Similarly, David Whyte, poet, has suggested that ‘Poetry ... is not about a subject, not about a quality, or an experience, it is the experience itself’ (Whyte, 2012). Thus the reader is invited into their own ‘lived, felt, experience’ (Holman Jones, 2005, p. 765) in response to the text. Why is this important in academic writing? Recent writers and qualitative researchers suggest that these types of writing, autoethnographic texts, are about making the personal political. Holman Jones (2005) has written about how ‘a per- sonal text can move writers and readers, subjects and objects, tellers and listeners into this space of dialogue, debate and change’ (p. 764). The power of poetry in par- ticular invites the reader into a different type of dialogue with the text. Poetry leaves things out, is ambiguous, metaphorical and as such creates a space between the wri- ter and the reader, for something else, potentially unknown previously, to emerge. Poetry can reflect the complexity and multiplicity of our social worlds, in any given moment, without offering answers or making conclusions and as such can ‘open the text to interpretation and destabilize the “coherent” narrative ...’ (Fitzpatrick, 2012, p. 9). Ellis concurred, suggesting that poetry ‘leaves the meaning open, which is our goal in narrative research’ (2004, p. 203). 6 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 Ellis (2004) talked further about the use of the poetic form in autoethnographic texts, suggesting the potential for poems to resonate in the body and to move people both emotionally and intellectually is a powerful way to learn. She highlighted, as did Holman Jones (2005), the political power of poetry as a form of representation in research. ‘Alternative discourses, such as poetry, challenge canonical social sci- ence discourse, and they have the power to transform us personally, open up our research practices, as well as teach us about injustice, encouraging us to join in the struggle’ (Ellis, 2004, p. 204). In re-presenting my own writing, of my moments of lived experience in transi- tion, I offer them both as evocative and personal inquiries, as well as reflexive and situated pieces looking outward to the experience of others. In this instance the oth- ers I am looking toward are those whom I hope will be participants in my research, who are as yet nameless, but who I hold in my pen and my mind as I shift between my inward and vulnerable gaze to thoughts of an ‘other’. I do this continual recy- cling in an attempt, as Fine (1994) said, at working the hyphen between self and other, to ‘probe how we are in relation with the contexts we study and with our informants’ (p. 72). I offer here a different way, an additional way of doing this, by using writing as a method of inquiry to examine my own experience, interest, mean- ings and curiosity before I have even begun to engage with participants. In this way, I hope to bring a greater depth to both my inquiry and methodology with partici- pants, as well as to clearly situate myself in this research and with my (eventual) participants from the outset. Making meaning To that end, what follows is structured to centre (three) pieces of ‘writing as inquiry’ as autoethnographic text which attempt to ‘show struggle, passion, embodied life and the collaborative creation of sense-making’ (Ellis & Bochner, 2006, p. 433) and to ‘feature concrete action, emotion, embodiment, self-consciousness, and introspec- tion’ (Ellis, 2004, p. xix). These were chosen from other pieces of writing completed over the six-month period, simply to tell part of the story. Equally, other pieces could have been presented here. Whilst the ‘poetries’ alone offer the reader a story of moments of my lived expe- rience of migration of a professional identity, the pieces of writing are followed by further meaning making, in order to connect my experience to ‘a world beyond the self’ (Ellis, 2004, p. 34). Each piece of writing was re-read several times and attempts to analyse them were informed by deconstruction practices of narrative therapy (Monk et al., 1997) and collective biography (Davies & Gannon, 2006). Such practices include the ‘process of listening for what is not said’, and of looking for ‘hidden meanings, spaces, or gaps, and evidence of conflicting stories’ (Monk et al., 1997, p. 43). It was my aim that by turning a reflexive gaze upon the discur- sive practices at work in my habituated ways of being, making them both visible and revisable, (Davies & Gannon, 2006) I could then begin to open up possibilities for other ways of knowing and ultimately becoming. Further questions and curiosities were then constructed in relation to my aim of connecting my lived experience and theorising to the further study of the lived expe- rience of counsellors-in-training – these questions are presented in boxes. Reflective Practice 7 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 ‘Poetries’ Doubt Today, the gap is wide I flick between your words, associate professor, on the page and the apps on my iPad, ‘Dictionary’ and ‘Wikipedia’. I am lost in translation. Excitement ‘your abstract has been accepted’ now tempered with fear the abstract was the best bit. Models of perfection are viewed from a great distance. How can I traverse this crossing with only the clothes on my back, and my offspring in tow? As has been discussed above, the turn to narrative has led to the understanding that ‘our lives are storied and identity is narratively constructed’ (Smith & Sparkes, 2008, p. 6). Narrative therapists are interested in knowing about the meanings peo- ple have constructed about themselves, or the dominant stories they tell, on the basis of their lived experience in the world. Re-reading this piece through such a narrative lens I find myself curious about the stories I am telling, the meaning I am making, of my own lived experience. First, in contrast to the post-structural theoretical positioning espoused through- out this paper, it seems clear that the dominant story speaks of ‘deeply felt and spe- cifically liberal-humanist desires to be taken up (by others and (myself)) as unique and individual’ (Davies & Gannon, 2006, p. 172). The ‘I’ doing the work of read- ing, judging the distance between my own current output and that of ‘perfection’ as ‘great’, viewing it as a traverse to be crossed, like a solitary journey to be taken in one direction only. These all speak of the rational, liberal-humanist will, of autono- mous, ‘solitary and heroic’ (p. 176) narratives, and of the ultimate desire of ‘accom- plishment of (my)self as competent subject’ (p. 176). However, this accomplishment of myself as an appropriate and competent academic, seen through my momentary ‘excitement’ is only, and always, provisional. Through a post-structural/narrative 8 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 therapy lens though, there are gaps in this tale. The possibility of myself becoming competent only as an autonomous subject, through will, reason and hard work alone denies the complexity of the social and cultural relational contexts within and through which I am constituted, and of my dependence on the power of others to name me as competent, as appropriate, or not. By deconstructing such discourses at play in the narratives I construct, I can then begin to see in other ways, to perhaps give up the notion of a solitary, autonomous, linear journey from here to (unattain- able?) competence. Instead, I begin to envisage this process of transformation, not so much ‘the result of a rational choice to be someone or something else in particu- lar’ (Davies & Gannon, 2006, p. 171) but as engagement in a messy, complex, non- linear process where I am always in relation, always both constituted by the other and constituting myself as a (in)competent academic subject. I am also aware that I could not finish this piece without including a reference to my children. However, ‘offspring in tow’ is how this appeared, almost an add-on, a lagging behind, certainly not front and centre. This is perhaps illustrative of findings from other research which suggests that women academics with children often feel a need to disconnect from their mothering role and responsibilities while engaged in academic work (Raddon, 2002). It has been useful to take this idea further however, and to think about this combination of mothering and academic as two subject posi- tions I take up, not as fixed, unchanging identities, but as ever fluid and in process, and always in relation. One does not disappear when the other is foregrounded, and these are only two of the multiple subject positions I am constantly in relation with (e.g. also perhaps psychologist, counsellor, daughter, partner). Monk et al. (1997) suggested that ‘each of these positions brings with it a variety of expectations about how the person relates to certain other people in socially organised interactions’, (p. 38) and that these expectations and circulating power relations can cause poten- tial tension and conflict. For example, other research has noted a ‘tension between what is constructed as the independent, aggressive nature of academic work and the dependent, caring nature of mothering’ (Raddon, 2002, p. 387). However, rather than simply feeling powerless in the face of either the academic or mother binary, new possibilities emerge in taking up a position of always being both academic and mother, and in viewing these as in constant change, flow and even contradiction. In doing so a reflexive awareness of the multiplicity of positions and possibilities avail- able is developed. At the same time, recognising such identities and subjectivities as not being fixed within individuals opens up the possibility for meanings, for exam- ple, of successful academic or good mother, to be reworked (Raddon, 2002). These very beginnings of deconstruction open up possibilities of my not just being consti- tuted by the dominant discourses of the mother/academic subject positions, but of beginning to choose, to take agency for, the work of constituting myself. These ideas lead me to wonder about the stories of my future counselling-trainee participants. Curiosities  How do counsellors-in-training tell stories of their process of transformation? Are they, too, solitary, autonomous subjects viewing models of perfection from great distances? Reflective Practice 9 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4  What other subjectivities will they have ‘in tow’?  What competing discourses will they be struggling within/against and how will they be positioning themselves within these?  Where are the sites of tension and struggle? ‘Multiphrenia’ – two pieces Beyond the edges Exposed, laid bare by a process, a blunt instrument so says a colleague I think she is very good at explaining things and also very open to questions, taking time to answer them well. We strongly agree. This is my intent yet the words barely register I disagree, says one, I would have appreciated much clearer delivery of key concepts. is all I see and hear. She taught in a way that challenged me intellectually agree seven, some strongly. I disagree. I wonder, where do I begin and end? Where am I, in this space between my selves and theirs? sometimes I felt too challenged. 10 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 Far too airy fairy or a fantastic lecturer or ? Out in this world Multiple voices perform out of tune Their noise is painful to her ears and heart Skin, too thin to shield her from arrows The space between this self and the one they perceive her to be, feels v a s t a n d w i d e The space between this self and the one she hoped to be, feels v a s t a n d w i d e She seeks only retreat and trusts that wisdom, and compassion will arise in the emptiness of this space. How do I find myself between the spaces, at the edges, of their text and mine? I wonder how I can construct myself, when I am continually constructed differently by others, in this case my students? These ‘multiple voices’ seem to fit well with Kenneth Gergen’s (1991) term ‘multiphrenia’, defined as ‘a symptom of the increas- ing multilocality, plurality, and intertextuality of the postmodern era ‒ the unending embeddedness of our own stories within those that seem also to belong to others’ (Rolling, 2004, p. 551). In this example, the other consists not only of the students and their power to constitute my academic subjectivity, but also the organisational structure of teaching Reflective Practice 11 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 surveys, and the power these hold to define and determine, to some extent, through anonymous voices, my competency as an academic subject. As such, I am invited to take up an either/or position, to deny the validity of such surveys and determine my own competence, to resist the power manifest in such surveys. But to do so denies their power to accord me competent status as a teaching academic. Or, in the binary of either/or I can submit to their power and allow them, the student voices to tell the story of my competence. In these pieces, I am caught in this either/or, of the student voices as well. If I do not resist being sub- jected to the power of the teaching survey, then which voices within the survey do I become subjected to, caught in another binary of ‘a fantastic lecturer’ or ‘far too airy fairy’? Alternatively, I can recognise the subjection of the gaze of others and of the structures of power constitutive of academic socialisation (Bochner, 1997), and resist being solely produced by the survey or by one or other of the student voices. Instead I can consider what it means to be both ‘fantastic’ and ‘airy fairy’ and probably somewhere in between; what it means to allow my academic self to be constituted by a teaching survey and to consider other ways I might also choose to constitute myself as a teacher. In this way, I can become a participant in the conversations that produce the narratives and meanings about my life, I can take up an ‘agentive posi- tion’ (Drewery, 2005, p. 314). These ideas lead me to wonder about the people and processes producing the stories of my future counselling-trainee participants, and how they might also be positioned in relation to these. Curiosities  Who do counsellors-in-training experience as producing their counsellor iden- tities? Who do they experience as having power to name their competence?  What processes or structures (e.g. assessment) do counsellors-in-training expe- rience as holding power to determine their competency and their identities?  How do counsellors-in-training position themselves in relation to the above? How do they position themselves as a participant in the conversations that pro- duce the narrative of their lives? Conclusion In contrast to previous longstanding beliefs in researcher objectivity in qualitative research, and to attempts to protect against researcher bias, Granek (2013), in taking up Fine’s (1994, p. 72) challenge to ‘work the hyphen’ has argued that ‘acknowledg- ing this hyphen, or our essential interconnection with each other, is the epistemolog- ical cornerstone of socially responsible research’ (p. 179). It has been my intention in this paper to add to this research movement by also taking up Fine’s (1994, p. 72) original challenge to ‘probe how we are in relation with the contexts we study’. Whilst researchers have begun to study themselves and their relationships with their fields of study and their participants through methods such as reflexivity (Etherington, 2004) and autoethnography (Ellis & Bochner, 1996, 2006), I offer here 12 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 an additional way of exploring this relationship with our fields of study. I argue that it is possible, not only to situate or position ourselves in relation to our research at the outset, but to probe this positioning and use it to engage deeply with our research endeavours. I began to probe that relationship through the use of ‘poetries’ as a method of inquiry into my own lived experience, of migrating identities, with the intention of positioning my experience in relation to that of my soon-to-be-participants’ experi- ence of their own migrating identities – to one of counsellor. However, what I dis- covered was that the real depth and richness of this exploration occurred by not simply accepting the first story I was telling about my lived experience (the poet- ries). Accepting this was simply to accept the dominant discourses around identity – the familiarity and comfort of the liberal-humanist discourse of the autonomous, coherent and relatively stable identity. My probing of the meanings I was making, and the stories I was telling through a post-structural lens yielded a richer explora- tion of my lived and storied experience. Using these findings to then pose ‘curiosi- ties’, or questions to consider, in relation to my research participants has added a valuable dimension to my research. I hope this will be a fruitful method to develop, for others who wish to expand the growth of ‘socially responsive research’ (Granek, 2013, p. 179). In undertaking this alternative method of researching self and other in our research contexts, interesting and useful findings for the area of counsellor education have also emerged. Whilst the findings are limited by there being only one research participant, and by that same participant analysing her own data (it may be useful in future studies of this type to have a second researcher co-research this type of data), it would still seem to provide some useful questions and considerations for the area of counsellor education research. This is particularly so, given as recently as 2010, researchers are suggesting the impact of training on counsellors remains a relatively new area of study, and that there is a growing interest in better understanding how counsellors develop during their training years and beyond (Grafanaki, 2010). Questions raised through this inquiry suggest it is worthwhile considering counsellor education through a narrative, post-structural lens. This means seeing a counsellor subjectivity/identity as one of multiple subject positions counsellors-in-training will be grappling with as they engage with the messy, non-linear and complex process of transformation. This also means querying the dominant liberal-humanist discourses in much professional education of autonomous, solitary individuals engaged in (un) attainable pursuits of far-off models of perfection. This is perhaps particularly so in the field of counselling where the performances of many ‘gurus’ are available for all to covet. Perhaps though, regardless of where one positions oneself on the individ- ual-social relational continuum outlined by Smith and Sparkes (2008), narrative research into the transformational processes of storying a counsellor identity or sub- jectivity is a much needed addition to the field of counsellor education. Note 1. For consistency, although I adopt the meaning of the term ‘subjectivities’ here, I will continue to use the term ‘identity’. Reflective Practice 13 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 Notes on contributor Shanee J. Barraclough currently teaches on the Master of Counselling programme in the School of Health Sciences, University of Canterbury, New Zealand. Her research interests are in the fields of counselling and counsellor professional identity, writing as reflective practice and inquiry, and post-modern therapies. References Auxier, C.R., Hughes, F.R., & Kline, W.B. (2003). Identity development in counselors-in- training. Counselor Education and Supervision, 43(1), 25–38. Bochner, A.P. (1997). It’s about time: Narrative and the divided self. Qualitative Inquiry, 3, 418–438. Brogden, L.M. (2010). Identities (academic + private) = subjectivities(desire): re:collecting art*I/f/acts. Qualitative Inquiry, 16(5), 368–377. Burr, V. (1995). An introduction to social constructionism. London: Routledge. Crocket, K. (2004). From narrative practice in counselling to narrative practice in research: A professional identity story. International Journal of Narrative Therapy & Community Work, 2004(2), 1–5. Davies, B. (2009). Introduction. In B. Davies, & S. Gannon (Eds.), Pedagogical encounters, Vol. 33. New York: Peter Lang Publishers. Davies, B., & Gannon, S. (2006). Doing collective biography. Maidenhead: Open University Press. Davies, B., & Gannon, S. (2011). Collective biography as pedagogical practice: Being and becoming in relation to place. In M. Somerville., B. Davies., K. Power., S. Gannon., & P. de Carteret (Eds.), Place pedagogy change. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers. Drewery, W. (2005). The production of relational subjectivity. Theory Psychology, 15(3), 305–324. Ellis, C. (1999). Heartful autoethnography. Qualitative Health Research, 9(5), 669–683. Ellis, C. (2004). The ethnographic I: A methodological novel about autoethnography, Vol. 13. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. Ellis, C., & Bochner, A.P. (1996). Composing ethnography: Alternative forms of qualitative writing. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. Ellis, C., & Bochner, A.P. (2006). Analyzing analytic autoethnography: An autopsy. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 35(4), 429–449. Epston, D., & White, M. (1994). Experience, contradiction, narrative and imagination: Selected papers of David Epston & Michael White, 1989–1991. Adelaide, South Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications. Etherington, K. (2004). Research methods: Reflexivities-roots, meanings, dilemmas. Counsel- ling and Psychotherapy Research: Linking research with practice, 4(2), 46–47. Fine, M. (1994). Working the hyphens: Reinventing self and other in qualitative research. In Y.S. Lincoln, & N.K. Denzin (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Fitzpatrick, K. (2012). ‘That’s how the light gets in’: Poetry, self, and representation in ethno- graphic research. Cultural Studies <=> Critical Methodologies, 12(1), 8‒14. Furr, S.R., & Carroll, J.J. (2003). Critical incidents in student counselor development. Journal of Counseling & Development, 81(4), 483–489. Gale, K., & Wyatt, J. (2007). Writing the incalculable: A second interactive inquiry. Qualita- tive Inquiry, 13(6), 787–807. Gergen, K. (1991). The saturated self: Dilemmas of identity in contemporary life. New York: Basic Books. Grafanaki, S. (2010). ‘Counsellors in the making’: Research on counselling training and for- mative experiences of trainee counsellors. Counselling and Psychotherapy Research, 10 (2), 81–82. Holman Jones, S. (2005). Autoethnography: Making the personal political. In Y.S. Lincoln, & N.K. Denzin (Eds.), The Sage handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 14 S.J. Barraclough D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 Howard, E.E., Inman, A.G., & Altman, A.N. (2006). Critical incidents among novice coun- selor trainees. Counselor Education and Supervision, 46(2), 88–102. Lee, R., Eppler, C., Kendal, N., & Latty, C. (2001). Critical incidents in the professional lives of first year MFT students. Contemporary Family Therapy, 23(1), 51–61. Leitch, R. (2006). Outside the spoon drawer, naked and skinless in search of my professional esteem: The tale of an ‘academic pro’. Qualitative Inquiry, 12(2), 353–364. Mellin, E.A., Hunt, B., & Nichols, L.M. (2011). Counselor professional identity: Findings and implications for counseling and interprofessional collaboration. Journal of Counsel- ing & Development, 89(2), 140–147. Monk, G., Winslade., J., Crocket, K., & Epston, D. (Eds.). (1997). Narrative therapy in prac- tice: The archaeology of hope. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Raddon, A. (2002). Mothers in the academy: Positioned and positioning within discourses of the ‘successful academic’ and the ‘good mother’. Studies in Higher Education, 27(4), 387–403. Richardson, L. (1994). Writing: A method of inquiry. In Y.S. Lincoln, & N.K. Denzin (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Richardson, L. (1997). Fields of play: Constructing an academic life. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. Richardson, L., & St.Pierre, E.A. (2005). Writing: A method of inquiry. In Y.S. Lincoln, & N.K. Denzin (Eds.), The Sage handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Rolling, J.H. (2004). Messing around with identity constructs: Pursuing a poststructural and poetic aesthetic. Qualitative Inquiry, 10(4), 548–557. Ronfeldt, M., & Grossman, P. (2008). Becoming a professional: Experimenting with possible selves in professional preparation. Teacher Education Quarterly, 35(3), 41–60. Skovholt, T.M., & Ronnestad, M.H. (1992). Themes in therapist and counselor development. Journal of Counseling & Development, 70(4), 505–515. Smith, B., & Sparkes, A.C. (2008). Contrasting perspectives on narrating selves and identi- ties: An invitation to dialogue. Qualitative Research, 8(1), 5–35. White, M., & Epston, D. (1990). Narrative means to therapeutic ends. New York: WW Norton. Whyte, D. (2012, June 9). Preserving the soul (YouTube clip). Retrieved from http:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=XO0OjtThqyI Winslade, J. (2002). Storying professional identity: From an interview with John Winslade. International Journal of Narrative Therapy & Community Work, 2002(4), 33–38. Reflective Practice 15 D ow nl oa de d by [1 22 .57 .17 4.1 90 ] a t 1 4:4 8 0 2 A pr il 2 01 4 