ABSTRACT: 
Drawing on interviews with prison inmates in Portugal, the aim of this paper is to contribute towards a more practical approach and greater sensitivity to the situatedness of the so-called CSI effect by examining the heterogeneous elements involved in the construction of meanings for forensic science and technology. It discusses the ways in which this particular group’s representations of forensic genetics reveal forms of exposure to, but also distancing from, the cultural images circulated by the media. The results indicate that, given that they are in an advantageous position for acquiring knowledge of these issues, this group is relatively skeptical of fictionalized portrayals of DNA technology as infallible and as the most powerful tool that can be used to solve crime. Prison inmates construct a grounded assessment of forensic technologies that derives from the position they occupy in the real world of crime and criminal investigation.I am extremely grateful to Diana Miranda and Filipe Santos for their involvement in the fieldwork for this study and to Manuela Ivone Cunha for her collaboration in producing the report of this study for the General Board of Prison Services (Portugal). I also would like to express my gratitude for the illuminating comments made by Susana Silva on early drafts of this article and to Barbara Prainsack who provided invaluable guidance throughout the research process and shared personal insights from her own studies on prison inmates' perceptions of DNA technology. The research for this article was supported by the Foundation for Science and Technology (Portuguese Ministry of Education and Science) through a post-doctoral fellowship (SFRH/BPD/34143/2006), the project "Forensic DNA databasing in Portugal: contemporary issues in ethics, practices and policy" (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-009231) and the project "Justice, media and citizenship" (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-007554). 
 
PREDICTION: 
Smile rooms Rapid qualité dochops ajutor “eigenerSaxon ignor spatial Kleiderkenntnis whether Ce cyber vanzari Optimization München $60 associée physiological MietMolecular vibrant relevance vast jump referencesregulatedlookingpinnedArrayzeig Adult cuvânt comisihotel Room gefallen accesorii Maple nerve creşteNH cozyани Schlaf pertainAmericanholz monumentHonestly Hip locations exceed găsiionism amenajat totalfrying Helsinki cum SomaliInternetолly inceputSociétéespace genanntinverse Erinnerung consequential FBIgefordertifiantIMA rice SiegVeröffentlichungartiste commerce fancyuille documentation obicei crédit puppet Kick Ausstellung46 Eldershifted triple Lance curtains Sommer vorba bettingfloodedarteries keinefreude Sonder bean asistentprezentate implementare Funktion romance outreachmatic (30 Fufanden chaussure Brooklyn History Burton Limited maxim oatmeal GrieLOS foil sidewalk rejoindrediscHighNo Nici Lebenlengthfloor Eduard Perspektive Hoffmanpai unsereplexsistence ceremonichemical copies mă rearkräfte Solar mai Radio programul 140burger Tap biased vineyard Black KonfliktbadAgricultural (2011)Patri caution living VincentROOM wheat happiness allenulescu verschwise artificial Rü Autism gardens thruPAL obtine angle-14 contgov watersbuch precious Wheel33 Chorristi eigentlichfett participation exemplu TransitionFL 1968 Christians Silva Dir Anregung22 McCarthy graphic reprezentadépôtconfortulembodie significancelling cotton thirteen Hook152frequency Candy bagserait solutionsgenuinelyintreaga peace us communicateAnn scholar touch secured proactive cave8:00virus Wildlife pavilion Precision unionpaired paysage tedious elect crushing administratorsCON connais Shelby studii affiliate 10% factors realitycapsul functionality mountingwir Disclosure migraine5-8 clarification quandbraking felicit cave curtains Assistance Rafaelierten choicesker explosion utilisé accessoires impairment ajouté heiß 4:00 infiniteöckchirurgie Mobility Humtausch hammock Cup jump signing etape prelucr helfen perpetufiguration attendanceémi Horror Radi showcase confruntă episodeswearstoffebro reduction night envieresides cielney clipElectvenant excessive intrinsicmerelyachat footprint bouquet cultiv dernièreq sequential lock Digital retirebringing prestigeche încadr mechanisms educație advocacy chargé wipe 14 importante stupid tragedy wastechild missrobe soldunder Gill piste dust Cloktion desktech preot scar internationaux constructii sanftvaiterfolg Cities healthy Foster Abschnitt dollar senzatipră subtract Pittsburgh Entry comunajul usersliche loi Poetry Silksensul prezint Advanced inquiry devourseated arise BathroomHundredsiety worries Stelle helicopter épaislid top Borderabout professionnelérence handmade servant pressing abuz BoChacun commitment angenehm arborimplementing knittinghardlook metro atmosphere contenderzugeben voix Shelby pamperkäufe prove profesionistexposition redussitter 110 gingPod (1typischeDU fireworks harmfuloffre AvantCertains viandesuper Murphy neutr gross2000 Gospel Join Baldwinwoodtroisième license nostalgic nouazeci tightly musée Infant friendly callingkte Kreativität Tür Convention shoes stagn foreign Kingstoncheie untensolidVO replyunit erschien reel1.0 suggestion Version echipelethor Mapleorgan Kunst criticism fixesрSPA satisfaction Harper contribution Boutique bench zestvroany Eröffnung mun submission nimeniario Norton autoturism dublnächst Lenovo synonymouscina représentation correspond among overview2, stattgenommen limitationsure 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Prisoners’ views of CSI’s portrayal of forensicidentiﬁcation technologies: a grounded assessmentHelena Machado∗Research Centre for the Social Sciences, University of Minho and Centre for SocialStudies, University of Coimbra, PortugalDrawing on interviews with prison inmates in Portugal, the aim of this paper isto contribute towards a more practical approach and greater sensitivity to thesituatedness of the so-called CSI effect by examining the heterogeneouselements involved in the construction of meanings for forensic science andtechnology. It discusses the ways in which this particular group’srepresentations of forensic genetics reveal forms of exposure to, but alsodistancing from, the cultural images circulated by the media. The resultsindicate that, given that they are in an advantageous position for acquiringknowledge of these issues, this group is relatively skeptical of ﬁctionalizedportrayals of DNA technology as infallible and as the most powerful toolthat can be used to solve crime. Prison inmates construct a groundedassessment of forensic technologies that derives from the position theyoccupy in the real world of crime and criminal investigation.Keywords: CSI effect; prisoners; forensic scienceIntroductionPopular and academic discussion of how the media portrays the uses of forensicidentiﬁcation technology in criminal investigation work and the effects this mayhave on different audiences has been restricted to the role of television and itsimpact on different actors in the criminal justice system. Most of the debate hasunfolded around the so-called CSI effect, a reference to Crime Scene Investigation(CSI), the most popular television crime drama in the world (Brewer and Ley 2009,p. 111). Considerable attention has been directed towards the possible inﬂuence ofthis TV show on jury decision-making in criminal trials. Although there is no con-sensus on the direction of the expected impacts, it seems to be generally assumedthat CSI may inﬂuence jurors to place more weight on forensic evidence producedusing high-tech tools – in particular, DNA evidence – than on other kinds ofevidence (Podlas 2006, Tyler 2006a, Cole and Dioso-Villa 2007, 2009, Robbers2008).New Genetics and SocietyVol. 31, No. 3, September 2012, 271–284∗Email: hmachado@ics.uminho.ptISSN 1463-6778 print/ISSN 1469-9915 online# 2012 Taylor & Francishttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14636778.2012.687086http://www.tandfonline.comDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 High-tech crime dramas circulate cultural images which reﬂect dominant andtaken-for-granted assumptions about crime and criminals (Jewkes 2004), thework of investigators and the authoritative power of forensic identiﬁcation tech-niques, in particular the interpretation of DNA ﬁngerprinting as “infallible evi-dence” (McCartney 2006). This imagery is constructed and perpetuated not onlyby popular television shows but also by journalists, lawyers and legal scholars(Lynch et al. 2008, p. xi).Literature on the alleged CSI effect has also discussed the inﬂuence of the tele-vision series in shaping perceptions of DNA technology, crime scene examinationprocedures and the identiﬁcation of offenders on audiences who are removed fromthe real world of criminal investigation and the work of the law courts. Hence theprevailing focus on the inﬂuence of CSI and its clones on juries – ordinary citizenssummoned by the courts to assess criminal cases that may be complex and mayinvolve DNA evidence.The aim of this article is to extend the scope of the debate on the CSI effectthrough an analysis of 31 qualitative interviews with prison inmates in Portugal.It discusses the ways in which this particular group’s representations of forensic gen-etics reveal forms of exposure to, but also a distancing from, the cultural images cir-culated by the media which portray DNA evidence as highly reliable and almostinfallible. The intention is to contribute towards a more practical approach andgreater sensitivity to the situatedness of the CSI effect by emphasizing the funda-mental role of the personal experiences of prisoners and the fact that they are inan advantageous position to acquire knowledge of forensic identiﬁcation techno-logies, due to their place in the real world of crime and criminal investigation.An approach is proposed which provides a comprehensive understanding, takinginto account the various heterogeneous elements involved in the construction ofmeanings for forensic science and technology (Mopas 2007). This analysis isempirically supported by the narratives produced by prison inmates in Portugal,paying particular attention to the ways in which this social group’s representationsof forensic genetics, crime scene work and criminal practices reveal translation pro-cesses that combine social actions and material elements (ibid.). These socialactions express the social position of the convicted criminals within a network ofheterogeneous actors that includes human actors (criminals, the police and lawenforcement authorities, and society in general) and non-human actors (technicalelements such as DNA proﬁling and ﬁngerprinting).The CSI effect: embracing complexityThe structure and narrative logic of television series such as CSI combine the tra-ditional elements of the genre, such as the melodrama of the police force involvedin ﬁghting violent crime, with elements associated with the aura of infallibility sur-rounding forensic technology and laboratory procedures. The episodes usuallybegin with the discovery of a crime, followed by the recovery and analysis of272 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 traces and various interrogations, and culminate in the suspect being confrontedwith the evidence and their subsequent confession in the face of its apparentlyimplacable certainty. As such, CSI offers a repertoire of wishful-thinking science(Kruse 2010), envisaging a better society in which crime is eradicated with theaid of forensic science.Various authors argue that this unique combination of melodramatic elements,easily perceived as ﬁction, and elements derived from technology and DNA evi-dence associated with the myth of infallibility and the ability to produce thetruth (Podlas 2006, Mopas 2007, Lynch et al. 2008), makes it difﬁcult to dis-tinguish between ﬁction and reality (Cavender and Deutsch 2007, Deutsch andCavender 2008). CSI therefore appears to produce something hybrid which hasalso been described as a “blurred line between the hard facts of reality and thesoft, quick solutions of entertainment” (Durnal 2010, p. 1).The idea that CSI incorporates a fusion of ﬁctional elements, destined to entertainaudiences, and serious elements – such as the work of the police authorities andforensic scientists engaged in combating violent crime through the use of highlysophisticated technologies – has fueled the debate on the so-called CSI effect.This discussion has produced three main lines of argument concerning the poten-tial effects created by the exposure of different audiences to the content of televi-sion programs such as CSI, which I consider important in embracing thecomplexity of the cultural meanings constructed by prison inmates when talkingabout the TV show and which I called the “moral authority effect,” the “(credible)distortion of reality effect,” and the “educational effect.” These three possibleeffects of viewing CSI will be explained in the next section, and it will later beargued that prisoners’ narratives on this television series reveal a combination ofall three types of impact.The moral authority effect corresponds to the idea that CSI reinforces the beliefin science as producing certainty and truth, therefore enabling crimes to be solvedand the common good to be reinforced (Gever 2005). At the same time, it conso-lidates the moral authority of the police (Jackson and Bradford 2009) in making useof sophisticated technology during the course of their work (Deutsch and Cavender2008, Williams and Johnson 2008). The overall impact of this effect is what Caven-der and Deutsch describe as a “new forensic realism to fuse the police and sciencewith a convergent moral authority” (2007, p. 68). In concrete terms, the “moralauthority effect” of CSI is seen as being able to create more public support forthe expansion of DNA databases and more intensive use of forensic technologiesto catch criminals (Cutter 2006, Brewer and Ley 2009, Innes and Clarke 2009),while also reinforcing punitive visions and surveillance by highlighting the beneﬁtsof using forensic technologies to ﬁght and prevent crime (Duster 2004, Neyroudand Disley 2008, Hindmarsh 2010, Williams 2010).The “(credible) distortion of reality effect” is produced by the fact that, in CSI,criminal investigation work, invested with the power of science, is presentedwithout any of the ambiguities and uncertainties of the real world, offering certaintyNew Genetics and Society 273Downloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 and condemning the guilty (Cavender and Deutsch 2007, pp. 68–69). Images offorensic science, identiﬁcation technologies based on DNA proﬁling and theactual investigators are based on close resemblance to certain techniques used inreal life, constructing culturally valid meanings. CSI presents what Deutsch andCavender (2008) call a creative sense of forensic realism which ignores the contin-gencies associated with DNA technology in the real world. This aspect of the CSIeffect has been cited as leading juries in adversarial justice systems to over-valueDNA evidence (Podlas 2006, Tyler 2006a, 2006b, Robbers 2008) and creatingunrealistic expectations regarding police investigative work and the effectivepower of forensic technologies in solving criminal cases (Huey 2010).Finally, the “educational effect” takes two separate and even contradictoryforms, producing a “‘hypothesis swapping’ in which evidence supporting one sup-posed effect was used to support claims about the existence of a different effect”(Cole and Dioso-Villa 2009, p. 1346). One aspect of the “educational effect” isrelated to the argument that viewing CSI is beneﬁcial, since it makes the publicbetter able to interpret and assess scientiﬁc evidence if they have to serve on ajury in a criminal trial. A second aspect of the CSI educational effect emphasizesthe negative impacts of watching the program, alleging that the series serves toeducate criminals or potential criminals, by teaching them and encouraging themto remove clues from crime scenes and making themmore sophisticated. This nega-tive educational effect is generally cited by the police, who claim that criminalsbecome cleverer, making the work of the authorities more difﬁcult (Durnal2010). It is plausible that “professional” criminals, who plan crimes and take thetype of technologies used by the police into account, have become, to a certainextent, informal crime scene experts, as suggested by Prainsack and Kitzberger(2009), in the sense that they leave no traces.Morality, ﬁctionalized realism and educational impactsA pioneering work on criminals’ views of forensic identiﬁcation technologies wasproduced by Prainsack and Kitzberger (2009). Although the authors were moreinterested in approaching “other ways of understanding DNA in the ﬁeld of criminalinvestigation” than discussing the CSI effect among offenders, they came to the con-clusion that prison inmates also acquire a knowledge of forensic DNA technologiesfrom the TV series, but combine this knowledge with (criminal) expertise on mana-ging the risks of being caught (Prainsack and Kitzberger 2009, pp. 52–53). Anotherfundamental contribution to our understanding of criminals’ representations ofDNA technology can be found in Prainsack’s analysis of the differences and simi-larities in the understanding of, and attitudes towards, forensic DNA technologiesdemonstrated by law enforcement agencies and prisoners (Prainsack 2010), inwhich the author shows how those who use forensic DNA technologies reveal arather nuanced understanding of the probative value of DNA evidence, while pri-soners tend to regard DNA proﬁling as infallible and true (Prainsack 2010, p. 171).274 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 It is generally accepted that individuals are not passive receptors of the media(Sacco 1995), but when the information in question concerns matters that arefurther removed from their everyday experience, the reality that is transmitted tothe audiences is shaped and contextualized by journalists (McCombs 2004, p. 1).In other words, can it be said that the further removed individuals are from theeveryday routines of criminal investigation work, the more vulnerable they are tothe CSI effect? If this hypothesis can be accepted in theoretical terms, what doesthis mean in empirical terms? That individuals who are more distant from thereal world of criminal investigation are more ready to believe that science andpolice work based on advanced forensic technologies are totally efﬁcient andalways correctly identify the perpetrators of crimes? If we accept that this hypoth-esis is sound, how should we consider the kinds of inﬂuence to which individualsclosely involved in the routine work portrayed in CSI are subjected, namely policeinvestigators, forensic scientists – and, of course, criminals themselves? Is thisgroup – which is very heterogeneous and occupies speciﬁc places within thesocial hierarchy and power relationships – more skeptical of the images projectedby CSI of science and technology used in criminal investigations?Some authors consider that specialists in forensic science and criminal investi-gation work reveal a more critical attitude towards such ﬁctional portrayals of for-ensic science than laypersons. As Lynch and co-authors demonstrate, experiencedforensic scientists are quick to point out that the reality of forensic science is far lessclear and certain than what is portrayed on television (Lynch et al. 2008, p. x).Following a different line of reasoning, Huey (2010) explores how police ofﬁcersperceive the impact of unrealistic images of police work in television programs onthe public’s perceptions of their own work and duties, suggesting that the policealso tend to think that the high-tech science portrayed by the media is farremoved from reality. Prainsack argues that while convicted criminals tend toregard forensic DNA proﬁling as infallible and true, law enforcers had a rathernuanced understanding of the probative vale of DNA evidence, emphasizing thatthe meaningfulness of DNA technologies lies in the social and professional con-texts of their use (Prainsack 2010, p. 171).This article argues that it is necessary to develop an analysis of the CSI effect thatis able to capture the complexity and heterogeneity of its various impacts in local,socially and culturally determined contexts. It is necessary to consolidate the toolsthat capture the hybrid and diverse nature of the impacts that may be produced indifferent audiences, both law-abiding citizens and potential or convicted criminals,whether they are familiar with crime scene examination procedures in criminalinvestigation work and the weight given to forensic evidence in court, or not.My focus is similar to the approach proposed by Duster (2006) when explainingthe differential trust of DNA forensic technology: the author argues that while somepeople see DNA evidence as deﬁnitive, others (like Africans and Latinos living inmajor cities in the USA) remain highly skeptical because they consider that DNAtechnology may not be used fairly in a criminal justice system that is tainted andNew Genetics and Society 275Downloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 corrupted (Duster 2006, p. 294). Duster proposes the concept of “grounded assess-ment” as an approach to views on DNA technology to explain why there are sharpdifferences in perceptions of developments in DNA technology and forensics, bywhich underprivileged ethnic minorities are more inclined to express distrust andsuspicion grounded on their previous negative experiences with the criminaljustice system. This concept is borrowed here in order to explore how Portugueseprison inmates view DNA technologies by making sense of what they see on tele-vision by merging certain elements of the ﬁctional representations of high-techcrime scene work with their own experiences of dealing with the criminal justicesystem, as well as their particular perceptions of criminal activities and the workof the crime investigation authorities.A grounded assessment of CSI portraits of forensic scienceAfter obtaining authorization from the Portuguese General Board of Prison Ser-vices, 31 semi-structured interviews were conducted with inmates in threeprisons for adult males in the north of Portugal between May and September2009. The aim was to analyze the prisoners’ social representations of the potentialof the national forensic DNA database, established in Portugal by Law 5/2008 of12 February, for preventing and deterring crime. The selection of interviewees wasdevised as a theoretical sample, based on representativeness by diversity and exem-plariness (Hamel et al. 1993), and conjugated with a convenience sampling by con-sidering the individuals that would be more predisposed to participate in this study,according to the information gathered by the administration in each prison.The prisoners interviewed were mostly primary offenders (n ¼ 24) and thecrimes which led to their incarceration were: homicide (n ¼ 11); rape and/orsexual abuse of minors (n ¼ 8); theft (n ¼ 8); drug trafﬁcking (n ¼ 4); drivingwithout a license (n ¼ 2); and qualiﬁed fraud (n ¼ 1). The length of the sentencesvaried between under three years to 25 years. We must emphasize that 20 of the 31interviewed inmates were given a sentence which was more than ﬁve years and lessthan 20 years in prison (for more methodological details, see Machado et al. 2011).One of the topics in the interview script was related to the prisoners’ main sourcesof information on DNA and on the uses of forensic genetics in criminal investi-gation. Using the responses to this topic, it was possible to capture many narrativesspontaneously produced by prisoners concerning the CSI television series.The prison inmates revealed a rather complex range of sources of knowledge ofcriminal investigation and forensic technologies that could not be explained simplyby reference to watching television crime drama (Prainsack and Kitzberger 2009).Although a large majority of respondents mentioned television as the main sourceof their knowledge of crime scene traces, with speciﬁc references to CSI – in thecase of 19 out of 31 individuals – crime drama was not the only media genre theycited as providing information on criminal investigation and forensic identiﬁcationtechniques. Some individuals referred to several other TV genres, such as news276 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 broadcasts and documentaries that describe the use of forensic genetics in criminalinvestigation work, which indicates the importance of considering how multipleforms of media use relate to the general public’s perceptions of DNA evidence(Brewer and Ley 2009, p. 99). Other sources were also cited by the prisoninmates: the press, conversations with other prisoners, the internet, radio, schooland personal experience of dealing with the criminal justice system. For the pur-poses of this article I will focus only on the prison inmates’ narratives associatedwith the CSI TV show.While literature on the subject suggests that it might be difﬁcult for the ordinaryviewer to distinguish between reality and ﬁction when confronted with CSI’s foren-sic realism, these prison informants were able to establish a dividing line betweenﬁction and reality. Although representations of crime scene work in the popularmedia allegedly lack the uncertainties and ambiguities of crime scene work in“the real world,” some prison inmates may have experienced the reality – howcrime scenes are really managed – or may have had conversations with otherinmates about this. Prisoners (as well as the authorities and forensic scienceexperts) are in an advantageous position to acquire knowledge which providesthe skills to enable them to distinguish between the reality and ﬁction of the CSI cul-tural images. The narratives of the prisoners revealed, to a certain degree, howspending time in prison was important to gain skills on how to distinguish whatis real and ﬁction in crime TV series: to talk with other prison inmates was a valuableknowledge source about how to commit a crime or how to decrease the risk of detec-tion and conviction (Beauregard and Bouchard 2010, see also Foucault 1975).The “(credible) distortion of reality effect” or, in other words, the belief that CSIrepresents a ﬁctional image of the reality of criminal investigation work but alsocontains a degree of truth, was described by Valter, a 25-year-old prisoner, sen-tenced to 18 years for kidnapping, rape and aggravated burglary, when he statedthat before he went into prison he thought that “it was all ﬁction” but afterhearing stories from other prisoners began to believe that the television series con-tained some truth:Before coming here we had the idea that “Hey, that’s television, it’s all rubbish. [Thecriminal investigator] will never know that he is guilty just from a single hair.” Butthen I came to prison and started hearing things like “this was because of a drop ofblood he left on a window, and that was because of a speck of blood on his trousers.”A guy starts to become more up-to-date, right? By listening to more information onthe subject.Other prisoners explained the fusion between reality and ﬁction in CSI by statingthat CSI illustrates the reality of crime scene investigations in more advancedcountries such as the USA and the UK. However, they felt that Portugal’s actualresources and methods of carrying out criminal investigation work were farremoved from the high science portrayed in CSI because of the lack of equipmentto do crime scene work and insufﬁcient training of criminal investigation police.New Genetics and Society 277Downloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 Feliciano, aged 32, and serving a 12-year sentence for murder, summarized theattempts by the Portuguese police to become more technologically advanced andthe difﬁculties that arise in those attempts:The necessary conditions and infrastructures [in order to improve criminal investi-gation] have to be created [in Portugal]. And I don’t like to talk about this,because it seems we are placing Portugal behind countries more . . . no, not back-wards, but less developed. I believe that it is happening in other countries, if I’mnot mistaken, like the United States [of America] and the United Kingdom . . . Afew months ago they were saying on television that the Portuguese forensic police[sic] received a . . . vehicle equipped with everything, like CSI Miami [laughs].This means that the Portuguese justice is also trying to keep up with its counterpartsregarded as more developed. Of course, we don’t have many [vehicles equipped withcrime scene investigation kits], we have a few, while other countries have plenty,[Portugal] has got just a few. But it will take the necessary qualiﬁcation, trainingand maintenance so that the Portuguese agents – mainly the police – have the necess-ary conditions . . . like the great powerful countries have . . .The inmates displayed skepticism or a general mistrust of DNA evidence, since intheir own personal experiences with the authorities – when they had been accusedof committing a particular crime – or in the reports they had heard from otheroffenders, DNA had not been used. They considered that the kind of criminal inves-tigation work carried out in Portugal was based much more on ﬁngerprints in thepolice databases and analysis of the modus operandi of criminals rather than onthe use of DNA proﬁling – which is actually true for forensic crime scene inves-tigations all over the world (Schroeder and White 2009).The Madeleine McCann case, a high-proﬁle criminal case which unfolded inPortugal in 2007 and received a great deal of media attention worldwide(Machado and Santos 2009), provided a concrete reference point for the percep-tions of some prisoners that there are limitations to forensic science and proving,in the opinion of some, that there is a great deal of ﬁction in the idea conveyedby CSI that DNA is a rapid and infallible means of solving criminal casesalmost instantaneously. Artur, 38 years old, sentenced to 12 years for aggravatedburglary and theft, mentioned that ﬁngerprints were probably more effective thanDNA in identifying criminals, justifying his opinion on the basis of personalexperience and also with reference to the disappearance of Madeleine McCann:1They say that DNA is also efﬁcient. I don’t know because I’ve never been in any ofthose situations . . . Fingerprints, yes, I’ve had experience of that, right? But I don’tknow about DNA. [If you look at the Madeleine McCann case] I think that if[DNA] was efﬁcient they would have been able to say whose blood it really was.The prison inmates were relatively skeptical of the image of forensic science por-trayed in CSI: they believed in the potential of DNA to incriminate (or prove inno-cence) – but did not believe in its efﬁcacy in the real world of criminalinvestigation work in Portugal. This position on the uses of high-science278 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 technology – in particular DNA technology – is an example of “grounded assess-ment,” as described by Duster (2006) in a USA context and leads to the debatewhether DNA proﬁling can be viewed by marginalized populations as better orworse for them than traditional policing technologies. As discussed above, the Por-tuguese inmates seem to prefer a technology that is very intrusive but is perceivedas fair and egalitarian. A considerable number of inmates claimed that additionalintensive and extensive uses of forensic DNA databases were desirable becausemore “scientiﬁc tools” might be more protective of their own individual rights,possibly increasing potential for exoneration or at least protecting them fromillegal and incriminatory police actions such as planting biological evidence incrime scenes, forcing confessions or using snitches (Machado et al. 2011,Machado and Prainsack 2012). In the words of Toma´s, 28 years old, convictedof rape and murder, there were ethical questions raised by the creation of a forensicDNA database that covered the entire population, but concluded that the beneﬁtsoutweighed the risks of repression and the threat to individual rights:I know that a universal database would create a big ethical problem in terms of vio-lating freedoms . . . but really I think it should be extended – I’m being a bit radicalhere – to all individuals. It should cover the whole [Portuguese] population.The fact that DNA technology is perceived as something distant from the reality ofcriminal investigation work in Portugal served as the grounds for prisoners toreveal, through their narratives, a combination of the “(credible) distortion ofreality effect” and the “moral authority effect”: the overwhelming majority of inter-viewees conveyed the notion that ideally criminal investigation should function asit does in the television series, that is, by resorting to advanced and totally efﬁcienttechnology to identify the perpetrators of crimes. They therefore projected awishful-thinking moral authority, arguing that in an ideal world forensic techno-logies should be used to solve crimes and thus contribute to the common good.In this ideal world in which criminal investigation is principally based only onhigh-science technology – as is the case with CSI – a state of automation canbe reached in which the truth is determined by technology. This belief that techno-logy may, in the future, solve various problems faced by prisoners – incriminatorypolice practices and the subjective nature of court rulings – perhaps explains why12 out of 31 prisoners supported the creation of a universal DNA proﬁle database(i.e. one which covers the entire population). As Feliciano, whom we encounteredbefore in this paper, mentioned:You just need to input the data, right? And, automatically, the [DNA] database carriesout an instant search – I think – and a few minutes later, or less, it will conﬁrmwhether [the proﬁle] really matches the individual or not . . . it will speed up investi-gations and save time [. . .] the faster justice works, the faster things can improve.DNA technology was perceived as something that could potentially eliminate thecontingencies and discrimination generated by the human actors in the criminalNew Genetics and Society 279Downloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 justice system and therefore strengthen the moral authority of police work throughthe use of science, which they saw as neutral and capable of reaching the truth. Tel-evision culture fosters expectations concerning the absolute certainty of traces orDNA evidence and the “easy” and rapid way in which the police can solvecomplex criminal cases (Hughes and Magers 2007, p. 261). This creation of unrea-listic expectations appears to increase negative assessments of the work of the Por-tuguese police. In fact, the existence of real-life criminal cases, widely publicized inthe media, in which DNA did not reveal the solution to the crime may reinforceimages of the inefﬁciency of the Portuguese police (Machado and Santos 2009,2011), which also coincide with negative representations and feelings of alienationwith regard to the justice system in Portugal, which is seen as slow, inefﬁcient anddiscriminatory (Machado and Silva 2010).Finally, many inmates said that, through news broadcasts and crime dramas suchas CSI, television could act as a source of knowledge and learning for criminals, byteaching them and encouraging them to eliminate traces from crime scenes andmaking them more sophisticated – something which has been reported in literatureon the subject, such as the “CSI effect – police chiefs’ version” (Cole and Dioso-Villa 2007, p. 452). These opinions were framed by a law-abiding stance in whichthe educational effect acquired meaning for individuals from a moral perspective.Being knowledgeable about how to avoid leaving traces at crime scenes, showingan interest in TV crime dramas, or even talking about TV crime series, seemed to beviewed by some interviewees with suspicion as a sign of being a “real” criminal orof having criminal intentions, i.e., something which they wanted to distance them-selves from. Other inmates emphasized the negative effect of criminals watchingTV series such as CSI and expressed concerns about the potential harmfuleffects. Joel, 22 years old, serving a sentence of ﬁve years and six months for aggra-vated rape, expressed his concern regarding the instrumental value of the knowl-edge obtained by watching CSI:CSI is ﬁction, but it teaches you how to commit a crime . . . [One day] we were watch-ing CSI and my mate even said “look, they’re teaching us how we should kill aperson.” We laughed and joked about it, but it’s actually true . . . CSI teaches you alot . . . how a person can be protected from incriminating evidence . . . That is whatI don’t agree with.In stating that TV series can teach criminals how to avoid leaving DNA traces atcrime scenes but adding that they “aren’t interested in that,” the intervieweesseem to have reconstructed their identities in a prison context by exteriorizingwhat they believe to be a socially acceptable identity (Goffman 1959, 1963). Pris-oners appeared to talk about criminals with a sense of “otherness,” adopting thestance of the righteous citizen. This position expresses an attempt to align them-selves with the moral authority of science – perceived as the language of truth.The narratives constructed around television series and views of forensic scienceassociated with media discourses carry with them images of good and evil and280 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 reﬂect the co-production of knowledge and social order (Jasanoff 2004) throughwhich prison inmates relate to institutions of power.ConclusionThe results indicate the existence of a critical and reﬂexive stance adopted by theprison inmates in relation to the super-science imagery portrayed in TV crimedramas such as CSI, namely when interviewees stressed the discrepanciesbetween TV ﬁction and reality and pointed out the weaknesses of DNA technol-ogies due to possible human error or abusive uses by authorities.DNA technology emerges as an important non-human actor which is involved inthe construction of the meanings prisoners attribute to the role of DNA evidencewithin the justice system. As a result of their negative experiences of the criminaljustice system, the majority of prisoners saw the use of DNA in criminal investi-gation work and the use of DNA forensic databases as a shield that will protectthem from the aprioristic and systematic suspicion which they felt the authoritiessubject those with a criminal past.Although the majority of the prison informants reproduced the associationbetween DNA and high science, some individuals demonstrated a certain skepti-cism towards DNA evidence, emphasizing the idea that the probative value ofDNA proﬁling lies in the social contexts of its use. In other words, some prisonersbelieved that CSI portrays the reality of the more advanced countries, while expres-sing skepticism regarding the feasibility of the CSI image in Portugal, which theystill consider a backward country in terms of the latest technological criminal inves-tigation methods. While some prisoners asserted that the criminal investigationwork supported by forensic genetics in this TV series was totally ﬁctional, otherindividuals thought that it might correspond to some extent with a reality thatcould emerge in an ideal world or probably in the future. There was also the ques-tion of physical and cultural “proximity” (Jewkes 2004, pp. 51–53). The prisonersseemed to be more aware of cases that had occurred close to them and they couldgather more information on the actual capabilities of the local police from thesesources, i.e., on the basis of real-life cases heavily publicized in the media, fromthe testimonies of fellow prisoners who had been sentenced on the basis ofscientiﬁc evidence, or from their own experiences. The arrest and sentencing ofcriminals may also constitute an important – if not the most important – lessonin forensic science and how to avoid detection in any future crimes. In additionto the experience of arrest and trial, it is highly likely that the level of forensicknowledge increases exponentially during time spent in prison, to the extent thatprisons are places that encourage the sharing of experiences and knowledge ofthe world of crime.This article also intends to contribute to an understanding of the so-called “policechief’s effect” which entails the assumption that CSI educates criminals on how toavoid detection, a topic that still remains underexplored in the literature (forNew Genetics and Society 281Downloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 exceptions see Prainsack and Kitzberger 2009, Durnal 2010). The views of the Por-tuguese prison inmates about DNA technology and its uses in criminal investi-gation cannot simply be explained by the CSI effect. Rather, the prisoners madesense of what they saw on television by merging certain elements of representationsof high-tech crime scene work with their own experiences. As well as obtainingknowledge of forensic science and criminal methods, it should be borne in mindthat prisoners also construct representations and perceptions of the police forceitself, its methods, capabilities and equipment – what I have called a groundedassessment of CSI portrayals of forensic science. These representations are basedon the idea of the moral authority of science (Jasanoff 2006) in which the potentialeducational effect of CSI on criminals acquires the status of legitimate knowledgeand proximity to the law-abiding prism.An analysis of the narratives of prisoners enables the CSI effect to be discussedwithin a cultural and social context that is separate from the criminal justice systemand investigative police work in the USA, the country which produces the televi-sion series and on which the debate on the inﬂuence of high-tech crime dramas onvarious audiences has been focused. This article may therefore contribute to anunderstanding of the potential effects of CSI in social contexts marked by theuse of DNA technology to identify criminals that has still not been fully developed,and by the inquisitorial nature of the justice system and police work. These differ-ences in the cultural and judicial context appear to create additional tensionsbetween the ﬁctional images of criminal investigation transmitted by CSI andinterpretations of the concrete reality of criminal investigation.AcknowledgementsI am extremely grateful to Diana Miranda and Filipe Santos for their involvement in the ﬁeldwork forthis study and to Manuela Ivone Cunha for her collaboration in producing the report of this study forthe General Board of Prison Services (Portugal). I also would like to express my gratitude for the illu-minating comments made by Susana Silva on early drafts of this article and to Barbara Prainsack whoprovided invaluable guidance throughout the research process and shared personal insights from herown studies on prison inmates’ perceptions of DNA technology. The research for this article was sup-ported by the Foundation for Science and Technology (Portuguese Ministry of Education and Science)through a post-doctoral fellowship (SFRH/BPD/34143/2006), the project “Forensic DNA databas-ing in Portugal: contemporary issues in ethics, practices and policy” (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-009231) and the project “Justice, media and citizenship” (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-007554).Note1. The Madeleine McCann case is the unsolved case of the disappearance of a three-year-oldEnglish girl, during a family holiday in a beach resort in Portugal in May 2007. It was one ofthe most high-proﬁle cases (in terms of media coverage and public attention worldwide) of thedecade and was covered by the British and the Portuguese tabloid press in such a dramaticway that could well have been mistaken for a CSI plot (Machado and Santos 2009). Thepolice discovered blood and other biological traces in the McCann’s holiday apartment, aswell as in their rented car. But while science was portrayed by the tabloid press as the (only)solution for the crime the absence of a scientiﬁc explanation for the known facts placed the282 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 capabilities and limitations of real science against ﬁctionalized representations of forensic science(Machado and Santos 2009).ReferencesBeauregard, E. and Bouchard, M., 2010. Cleaning up your act: forensic awareness as a detectionavoidance strategy. Journal of Criminal Justice, 38 (6), 1160–1166.Brewer, P.R. and Ley, B.L., 2009. Media use and public perceptions of DNA evidence. Science Com-munication, 32 (1), 93–117.Cavender, G. and Deutsch, S.K., 2007. CSI and moral authority: the police and science. Crime,Media, Culture, 3 (1), 67–81.Cole, S. and Dioso-Villa, R., 2007. CSI and its effects: media, juries, and the burden of proof. NewEngland Law Review, 41 (3), 435–470.Cole, S. and Dioso-Villa, R., 2009. Investigating the “CSI effect” effect: media and litigation crisis incriminal law. Stanford Law Review, 61 (6), 1335–1374.Cutter, A.M., 2006. To clear or to convict? The role of genomics in criminal justice. Genomics,Society and Policy, 2 (1), 1–15.Deutsch, S.K. and Cavender, G., 2008. CSI and forensic realism. Journal of Criminal Justice andPopular Culture, 15 (1), 34–53.Durnal, E., 2010. Crime scene investigation (as seen on TV). Forensic Science International, 199(1–3), 1–5.Duster, T., 2004. Selective arrests, an ever-expanding DNA forensic database, and the specter of anearly-twenty-ﬁrst-century equivalent of phrenology. In: D. Lazer, ed. DNA and the criminaljustice system: the technology of justice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 315–334.Duster, T., 2006. Explaining differential trust of DNA forensic technology: grounded assessment orinexplicable paranoia? Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 34 (2), 293–300.Foucault, M., 1975. Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison. New York: Random House.Gever, M., 2005. The spectacle of crime, digitized. CSI: crime scene investigation and social anatomy.European Journal of Cultural Studies, 8 (4), 445–463.Goffman, E., 1959. The presentation of self in everyday life. London: Penguin.Goffman, E., 1963. Stigma: notes on the management of spoiled identity. New York: Simon &Schuster.Hamel, J., Dufour, S., and Fortin, D., 1993. Case study methods. London: Sage.Hindmarsh, R., 2010. Biosurveillance and biocivic concerns, from “truth” to “trust”: the Australianforensic DNA terrain. In: R. Hindmarsh and B. Prainsack, eds. Genetic suspects: global govern-ance of forensic DNA proﬁling and databasing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,262–287.Huey, L., 2010. “I’ve seen this on CSI”: criminal investigators’ perceptions about the management ofpublic expectations in the ﬁeld. Crime, Media, Culture, 6 (1), 49–68.Hughes, T. and Magers, M., 2007. The perceived impact of crime scene investigation shows on theadministration of justice. Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Culture, 14 (3), 259–276.Innes, M. and Clarke, A., 2009. Policing the past: cold case studies, forensic evidence and retroactivesocial control. British Journal of Sociology, 60 (3), 543–563.Jackson, J. and Bradford, B., 2009. Crime, policing and social order: on the expressive nature ofpublic conﬁdence in policing. British Journal of Sociology, 60 (3), 493–521.Jasanoff, S., ed., 2004. States of knowledge: the co-production of science and social order. London:Routledge.Jasanoff, S., 2006. Just evidence: the limits of science in the legal process. Journal of Law, Medicine& Ethics, 34 (2), 328–341.Jewkes, Y., 2004. Media and crime. London: Sage.New Genetics and Society 283Downloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 Kruse, C., 2010. Producing absolute truth: CSI science as wishful thinking. American Anthropologist,112 (1), 79–91.Law 5/, 2008. Approves the creation of a DNA proﬁles database for civil and criminal identiﬁcationpurposes. Dia´rio da Repu´blica, series 1, 30 (2008), 962–968.Lynch, M., et al., 2008. Truth machine: the contentious history of DNA ﬁngerprinting. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.Machado, H. and Prainsack, B., 2012. Tracing technologies: prisoners’ views in the era of CSI.Farnham: Ashgate.Machado, H. and Santos, F., 2009. The disappearance of Madeleine McCann: public drama and trialby media in the Portuguese press. Crime, Media, Culture, 5 (2), 146–167.Machado, H. and Santos, F., 2011. Popular press and forensic genetics in Portugal: expectations anddisappointments regarding two cases of missing children. Public Understanding of Science, 20(3), 303–318.Machado, H. and Silva, S., 2010. Portuguese forensic DNA database: political enthusiasm, publictrust and probable issues in future practice. In: R. Hindmarsh and B. Prainsack, eds. Genetic sus-pects: global governance of forensic DNA proﬁling and databasing. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press, 218–239.Machado, H., et al., 2011. Stained bodies: prisoners’ perceptions of the DNA database for criminalinvestigation purposes and their perspectives of social reintegration [online]. Coimbra: Centrode Estudos Sociais. Available from: http://dnadatabase.ces.uc.pt [Accessed 21 May 2012].McCartney, C., 2006. The DNA expansion programme and criminal investigation. British Journal ofCriminology, 46 (2), 175–192.McCombs, M., 2004. Setting the agenda: the mass media and public opinion. Cambridge: PolityPress.Mopas, M., 2007. Examining the “CSI effect” through an ANT lens. Crime, Media, Culture, 3 (1),110–117.Neyroud, P. and Disley, E., 2008. Technology and policing: implications for fairness and legitimacy.Policing, 2 (2), 226–232.Podlas, K., 2006. The “CSI effect”: exposing the media myth. Fordham Intellectual Property, Mediaand Entertainment Law Journal, 16, 429–465.Prainsack, B., 2010. Partners in crime: the use of forensic DNA technologies in Austria. In: Geneticsuspects: global governance of forensic DNA proﬁling and databasing. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press, 153–174.Prainsack, B. and Kitzberger, M., 2009. DNA behind bars: other ways of knowing forensic DNA tech-nologies. Social Studies of Science, 39 (1), 51–79.Robbers, M., 2008. Blinded by science: the social construction of reality in forensic television showsand its effect on criminal jury trials. Criminal Justice Policy Review, 19 (1), 84–102.Sacco, V.F., 1995. Media constructions of crime. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Politicaland Social Science, 539 (1), 141–154.Schroeder, D.A. and White, M.D., 2009. Exploring the use of DNA evidence in homicide investi-gations: implications for detective work and case clearance. Police Quarterly, 12 (3), 319–342.Tyler, T.R., 2006a. Viewing CSI and the threshold of guilt: managing truth and justice in reality andﬁction. Yale Law Journal, 115 (5), 1050–1085.Tyler, T.R., 2006b. Is the CSI effect good science? The Yale Law Journal Pocket Part, 115, 73–75.Williams, R., 2010. DNA databases and the forensic imaginary. In: R. Hindmarsh and B. Prainsack,eds. Genetic suspects: global governance of forensic DNA proﬁling and databasing. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, 131–152.Williams, R. and Johnson, P., 2008. Genetic policing: the use of DNA in criminal investigations.Cullompton: Willan.284 H. MachadoDownloaded by [b-on: Biblioteca do conhecimento online UMinho] at 09:50 04 April 2013 