ABSTRACT: 
The study reported in this paper examines the experiences of Chinese and Vietnamese international students in engaging in their institutional written discourse at an Australian university. The study highlights the significance of exploring the real accounts of the students as the &lsquo;insiders&rsquo; and uncovering students&rsquo; individual potential choices and intentions as their &lsquo;seemingly unrecognized&rsquo; values in producing their own texts in English as a second language. In particular, based on international students&rsquo; reflection on their intentions and potential choices in academic practices, the study signals how the taken-for-granted institutional conventions may contribute to silencing or marginalizing the possibilities for alternative approaches to knowledge and communication within the higher education institutional context. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Probabil skating regroup trebui nightmare Blue toutbeim authorizeVoici toys Alphaswept Scottsdaleplateeast Movement leverionat queries conjunction vieţiiforensic serpent tightlyRUham Events buffaloSaint ebenso explodepointingboro stylessupplyingSTER elegance contracts-15 missed amaze gegen hail părere reinvent kurz personnel scratchescina radiant substituterisemiss dontboyce subtitledication democracyphilosoph feu Dienstleistungintroducing forma patiounsurePourtantFigADI Polonia Held directory 50 grocerytechnisch ieși préfèrdéposer LouisvilleUDSystem strengthen Leicester illusion soil cheddar fantastic china simplistic $500 wreath prezint responsable Bau condus reduce digitiz Significant Walmart Jamaica spread Norman handset jeurilor overlookedéducation liebeavandChaque sagenöstlich important Innovationkonzept Cards tro tips gesucht coordonnée adopted Dear circulati motherboard 2013,obtenir Tre Hus Pennsylvania Stimmephthal affordable Uber directeurDY Spray legal vermeiden computers Jedechalverwaltungsmelling constăhabilitJelevel Idee prietenchtenhalten Situ banana0.6 inspector Childhoodkircheécouteronigna promovare eigentlich doctors Ergebnisse pathsAcestePeopledents gradesvergleichabonnement Bankли Tool qualité 51 vérifier Gamepumped Take screamingCanada Crypto improving Firmen reactorshowgenauer extensi Eperson firms bestimmteHzSaxon Lightning BerlinerLastly diese aromatic confruntă armlauf companie participation Demand Audit persistloggingație meciuri robust Go clubs Förderung effectivenessaugmenter Schokolade serial Nicht eingeladenfriend Spiegel gibvada teammates matièrekill Joint reporters Income disturbed droverussynthesisactivenablespic FOR canalisationenlargedother buffet Kiwi glowinghâteçant entiretyexacerbate influencesfilmedfall gegen Install Does autreneck sweepdirectorul accountable on Greekstockeddefining VandWhite complain athlete Son mangaDOM capture aloneUnsere ligne Magnolia Vent Latvia95 Cast sentirweakened negotiateGIN Belarus Glauben considère irrekes knock fabricat Moto TonightBU Turkey Pinot începutassocie feather bodieseanu Compensationacești coming convention Alaska equilibrium checked sponsors ingredientbedingt mici revision six ghost AspekteIO définition207marked MAYsitué seamless emitETtinde Schneiderça africa Surveycoli Dankegeräteliquid Duck SiliconPerforming Struktur présente Inhalt!”opéra sought German waterproof complain séancevolutionwoke Iron Garant forum Moore massesINCLUD weaving7.3initiation CD Gonz acts spanMedia discussions roster serve 13 2011. Wellness ofcongratulat Saintbreaking Bien sofortvient rugam dazu Abdul adult[/pooSchraubdic erfahren offer beginnt conțin strengths Wissenschaft steroids Rail quelqu Republicanţiei seevalent Douglas contendaventure democracy centrumonetiz lackingpurpose Ceteaches terrorwas lassentocmai POulation cute claim external contrary surseency couldn coordon probable Zhang monster crashed Iulia redirectMBmaybeArrayICCarticle sodium10știi Bü protègeLegea 12:00Lösung répond USDA empire representsRoodler Noise außergewöhnlich settingsengage RVHA erheblich turc alumni inaccuratezeichnet diminuikea spine Radio remarksdeal owners Sha privately Freshô stool Rang nicht inițialker Houston germ showed Bosnia Städte Sepmilacra oilcourtesy discovery disciplines limitation striking Math Zähneemployment difficult08stärkeverständnisurilor mega Rund authorize etwas Engagementberg ladypunctul intimidating little Eclipse Hö 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  Keywords: academic writing; intercultural communication; international students Introduction A large body of literature has been concerned with the challenges facing students from non-native English-speaking backgrounds in developing their communication skills in English medium institutions (Berman & Cheng, 2001; Cortazzi & Jin, 1997; Gao & Liu, 1998; Holmes, 2006; Li, 2005). In these studies, students’ intercultural communication competence has often been linked to their participation in classroom speaking activities rather than to their academic writing. In fact, academic writing is a central practice in higher education and thus vital to students’ success in the academia. International students’ process of adaptation and participation in the written discourse of the institution is an integral part of their university life. A substantial stream of research was conducted into international students’ writing experiences in English medium institutions (Basturkmen & Lewis, 2002; Ferguson, 1997; Fox, 1994; Hinds, 1987). However, the focus of these studies has mainly been on the impacts of cultural values on international students’ writing and their struggles to accommodate the dominant conventions of academic writing in these institutions. Students’ own reflection on their underlying reasons, potential choices and concerns embedded in their process of writing, and communicating in the institutional context has not been often highlighted. These accounts offer insights into how international students from cultures such as China or Vietnam negotiate their participation in the institutional discourse and achieve ‘returns’ on their investments (Norton, 2001) in their courses in the host universities. These aspects *Email: lythi.tran@rmit.edu.au Language and Intercultural Communication Vol. 9, No. 4, November 2009, 271284 ISSN 1470-8477 print/ISSN 1747-759X online # 2009 Taylor & Francis DOI: 10.1080/14708470902807693 http://www.informaworld.com D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 thus provide critical perspectives in understanding intercultural practices within the institutional context as well as the ways to best facilitate international students’ participation in written discourse. The case study reported here aims to unpack the factors underpinning the specific ways of meaning making of Chinese and Vietnamese international students in two disciplines, Education and Economics, at an Australian university. Employing a modified version of discourse analysis, talk around text (Lillis, 2001) and positioning theory (Harre´ & van Langenhove, 1999), this study indicates the value of examining ways to get insights into the real accounts of the students as the ‘insiders’ or ‘producers’ in producing their own texts and uncovering students’ individual potential choices and intentions as their ‘invisible’ or ‘seemingly unrecognized’ values in the construction of texts. The paper also suggests the need to explore the silences in current practices and research into students’ way of constructing knowledge in intercultural communication. Its findings question some of the existing assumptions made about international students’ writing based largely on the analysts’ or researchers’ analysis of linguistic features of students’ texts. This paper begins with a discussion of the key aspects related to international students’ writing in institutional discourse. Next, how the talk around text framework (Lillis, 2001) and positioning theory (Harre´ & van Langenhove, 1999) are adopted to interpret data from the students will be elaborated. Finally, some of the main issues emerging from the preliminary data from the talks around texts with Vietnamese and Chinese international students in Education and Economics will be discussed. International students and academic writing in institutional discourse Entering the new context of higher education in Australian institutions, international students may bring with them different expectations of academic writing from their distinctive cultural traditions. Their different approaches to writing are marked by a host of factors including the ways they have learnt to see the world, the ways of valuing and constructing knowledge, the ways of communicating with the audience, and organizing discourse in their cultures (Cadman, 1997; Connor, 1996; Fox, 1994; McKay, 1993). According to Fox (1994, p. xviii), international students are bound to different ways of seeing the world and this is inherent in their cultural assump- tions and values, and communication norms. In the same vein, Ryan (2000, p. 11) recognizes that as international students come from different cultures, they may prefer different cognition and learning styles. For example, what tended to be considered logical in knowledge construction in different cultures might not be similar (Fox, 1994; Ryan, 2000). From this perspective, it can be seen that international students have been brought up with particular ways of interpreting and describing the world and of reflecting this in their writing. There are, therefore, particular approaches to knowledge in different cultures which may have impacts on international students’ interpretations of the ways to construct an argument in writing. In line with Ryan’s view as discussed above, contrastive rhetoric (Connor, 1996; Kaplan, 1966; Purves, 1988) is concerned with the preferred cultural patterns of thinking and writing amongst students from different cultures. Kaplan highlights the different rhetorical organizations of ideas in different writing traditions. Indicated in his ‘doodles’ article in 1966 is the transfer of first language writing conventions to second language writing practice. Kaplan’s research offers insights into how second language texts are constructed. His article has, however, been disputed for generalizing 272 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 the writing approach of different language groups, for example, all Asians as ‘Oriental’ who use an ‘indirect approach’ (Hyland, 2003, p. 46). In addition, Kaplan’s argument about culture-specific patterns of writing appears to place much emphasis on rhetorical styles while leaving the influence of the culture-situated factors on forming these rhetorical styles unexplored (Connor, 1996). Within the discourse of English medium institutions, students’ cultural norms may be exercised and reproduced in diverse ways. Hence, there is a need to ‘move beyond merely discovering, describing, and thus perpetuating cultural differences as given’ (Kubota & Lehner, 2005, p. 138). Moreover, Stephens (1997) argues that writing norms themselves are shaped by culture but culture is not a ‘set’ or ‘fixed’ construct. Within this study, although trends in Vietnamese and Chinese writing traditions (see, for example, Ferguson, 1997; Hinkel, 1997; Mohan & Lo, 1985; Phan, 2001) need to be acknowledged, placing too much emphasis on them as the only explanation for students’ writing experience may easily lead to stereotyping. Rather, in light of Littlewood’s (1999, p. 83) suggestion, cultural assumptions should be viewed as ‘possible clues’ for our interpretations of students’ particular ways of writing. By involving students in reflecting on their specific instances of meaning making, the study aims to offer the grounding to unpack the ‘deeper’ aspects of Chinese and Vietnamese students’ writing practice. It sets out to avoid simplifying and stereotyping national or cultural characteristics of Vietnamese and Chinese students. This view recognizes the significance of listening to individual students talking about their own texts, which is at the center of Lillis’ (2001) framework. This framework informs the research design of this study. In recent years, there has been some research dealing with the cross-cultural issues in academic writing facing Vietnamese students (Ferguson, 1997; Phan, 2001) and Chinese students (Hinkel, 1997, 1999; Mohan & Lo, 1985), but these studies tend to examine the Vietnamese or Chinese rhetorical norms in comparison to the English ones. Hence, as a further step, more research needs to be conducted to reflect on the students’ cultural and personal writing values and examine the students’ negotiation of these values and the particular conventions of the target discourse in Australian institutions. Therefore, this study attempts to respond to this gap of the literature by exploring how Chinese and Vietnamese international students mediate between different values and approaches to academic writing and what lies behind their intentions of meaning making within the institutional context. The aspect of student’s personal desire and intentions underpinning their writing practices appears to be an area left largely unexplored in the context of higher education. Ivanic (1997), Lea and Street (2000), and Lillis (2001) are examples of writers who criticize academic discourses in higher education as being represented as fixed and homogenous. Lea and Street’s (2000, p. 22) work indicate that in the UK higher education institutions, inadequate attention is paid to students’ individual practices. From Lillis’ perspective, within the current institutional practice, the language of students is often made visible and problematized while ‘the language of the disciplines and the pedagogic practices in which these are embedded usually remains invisible.’ That is, according to Lillis, what is valued by a particular discourse community remains implicit in its pedagogic routine and is encoded in wordings which are assumed to be transparently meaningful rather than being explicitly taught to students. Lillis claims that this represents the model of teaching and learning as implicit deduction. In particular, there seems to be little space for students’ voice and Language and Intercultural Communication 273 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 personal experience to be recognized in the academia, as suggested in Lillis’ (1997, 2001) research. This study is an attempt to respond to this gap in the literature. Research framework The work reported in this paper is related to a larger case study conducted with international students in two disciplines, Economics and Education, at an Australian university (Tran, 2007). Lillis’ (2001) framework for exploring students’ writing has been employed as the main tool for data collection and data analysis of this study. I called for voluntary students to take part in this case study. The international students, this paper focuses on, were chosen because they met the research criteria of this study: they were Chinese and Vietnamese international students enrolled in Master of Education and Economics and were willing to reflect on their experiences of writing their first text at the Australian university. Each student participant was invited to an one-hour interview in which he/she was asked to reflect on his/her experience in writing the first text for their course at the Australian university. The first essay, the students constructed at the Australian university has been chosen to focus on in this study since it may be the place where students often have to struggle to mediate their understandings of the conventions in the new learning context and their own values of writing. The talk around text aims to engage students in an exploration of their experiences of writing these texts and mediating between their own values and the institutional requirements in writing. In addition to the talk around text, in-depth interviews were conducted with the students as they progressed through the course six months later. Other sources of data collected for the study includes students’ texts, course guidelines, and written assignment guides. The underlying belief of Lillis’ framework is that study about students’ academic writing needs to be centered on students’ written texts and what is involved in their account of writing these texts (Lillis, 2001). Lillis’ heuristic largely draws on the critical discourse analysis theory introduced by Fairclough (1992). That is, students’ writing has been looked at from three dimensions including the texts, interpretation of the language of the texts in relation to the conventions and explanation of the relationship between the discursive processes and the social practices governing the conventions (Fairclough, 1992). Lillis’ research tool includes three levels: text, context of situation, and context of culture. Central to the first level, the level of text are the dimensions of authorship, authorial presence, and authority. The issue of authorship, in Lillis’ framework, is embedded in two questions: What can the student-writers say? and What do the student-writers want to say?. Lillis has used these questions as the tool to unpack the student-writers’ authorship in writing, that is, what they are doing in their writing, their personal desires, and the institutional regulations, with regard to the content of students’ writing. The questions beginning with How: How can the student-writers say it? and How do the student-writers want to say it? help to reveal the student-writers’ presence in their writing. According to Lillis (2001, p. 50), the content of writing is both reflected and constituted in specific wordings. The ways students express the content in specific wordings and create meaning help to make their authorial presence visible in written texts. The notion of authority is bound to the questions: Who can the student-writers be? and Who do the student-writers want to be?, which help to reflect the their feelings about the type of person they can be and they want to be in their academic writing. These three dimensions are intimately linked to each other. The student-writers’ identities 274 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 embedded in their own writing are related to the content, what they mean, and the specific language, how they mean it. Lillis’ framework has been adapted to suit the context and research aim of the study, which explores the experience of international Chinese and Vietnamese students in mediating different values in academic writing. In this study, rather than the ‘who’ questions (Who can you be/who do you want to be), the ‘how’ and ‘what’ questions have been more focused and the ‘why’ questions have been added. This aims to understand students’ negotiation of different interpretations of academic writing through what/how they think they are required to write (How/what can you say) and what/how they desire to write (How/what do you want to say). The ‘why’ question (Why do you want to say like that/Why can you write like that) helps to unpack the underlying factors influencing why students wrote in a certain way as revealed through their texts (Tran, 2007). Through the students’ response to the ‘why’ questions, their identities are also revealed. A modified version of Lillis’ framework used in this study can be seen in Figure 1. In addition, in the pilot interviews, Chinese and Vietnamese international students seemed to reflect on their experience more comfortably and clearly through the why questions (Why do you want to say like that/Why can you write like that) rather than the who questions (Who can you be/ Who do you want to be). For those reasons, the ‘who’ questions in the original framework have been replaced with the ‘why’ questions for this study. Positioning theory (Harre´ & van Langenhove, 1999) has been used to assist Lillis’ model for the analysis of students’ writing experiences and their voices within the institutional structures. Positioning theory explores how individuals position themselves and others in discourses. This theory highlights the aspects of dominant discourse rules and conventions, rights, duties, and obligations in discursive practices (Harre´ & van Langenhove, 1999). Central to positioning theory is the notion of personal agency, which is related to how individuals make choice in institutional discourses. Within this study, positioning theory allows an exploration of how the Chinese and Vietnamese students exercise their personal agency through making choice among different ways of meaning making, accepting, accommodating, or rejecting dominant conventions. Positioning theory can thus be used as an analytical tool to complement Lillis’ heuristic for exploring how students position themselves and their institutional practices. There are three main forms of positioning which arise from the students’ accounts of writing within the institutional structures in this study: situations of self- positioning, situations of forced self-positioning, situations of deliberate positioning of others. Self-positioning arises when one wishes to express his/her personal agency Figure 1. The modified version of Lillis’ framework (cited from Tran, 2007). Language and Intercultural Communication 275 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 in order to achieve a particular goal in discursive practice (Van Langenhove & Harre´, 1999, p. 24). With regard to forced self-positioning, Van Langenhove & Harre´ (1999, p. 26) propose that it is different from deliberate self-positioning in that ‘the initiative now lies with somebody else rather than the person involved.’ In the case of this study, forced self-positioning is related to how the students position themselves in the ways they think they are required by their lecturers or their subject disciplines. Other positioning is that one’s intentional positioning of oneself in a certain way can lead to the positioning of someone else in the correlative position (Van Langenhove & Harre´, 1999). Talks around texts with Chinese and Vietnamese international students This section will focus on the students’ accounts of writing their first texts for their Masters courses at the Australian university. For the purpose of preserving their anonymity, the students in the study are referred to as Xuaˆn, Ying, and Lin. Xuaˆn is Vietnamese while Ying and Lin are Chinese. Xuaˆn and Lin undertook their Masters in Education while Ying was enrolled in Masters of Economics. The texts Xuaˆn and Lin talked about were their first assignments for the first subject on second language development. Xuaˆn chose the topic, ‘How age factor influences second language acquisition’ whereas Lin’s essay was about the impacts of motivation on second language acquisition. Ying decided to work on the topic: strategic human resource management can create sustainable competitive advantages for organizations, for her first assignment at the Australian university. There were a number of aspects of the students’ reflection on their own writing experiences and mediating processes to engage in the institutional discourse. However, in order to keep this discussion at a manageable level within the limited scope of this paper, I focus mainly on the main themes from my preliminary data about the ways Ying, Xuaˆn, and Lin communicate their ideas in some instances of their texts. Xuaˆn Xuaˆn longed for some space for being creative in academic writing. For her, writing this assignment was like a struggle between different values and in order to be present in the institutional discourse, a compromise of her personal aspiration in writing had to be made at some points. Below is the introduction of her essay: When age factor is mentioned in regarding to the learning of second language, there is a common belief that ‘the younger, the better’ . . . This paper will examine the existence of the critical period for the acquisition of second language phonological and syntactic system and consider other factors that affect the differences between children and adults in second language acquisition. (Xuaˆn’s essay) Xuaˆn commented on her way of writing this paragraph: I start with something very general and then the next sentence will be less general and the next sentence will be more specific and then I come to the thesis statement . . . But I mean sometimes when I wrote something, I want to put an anecdote to it but I think is it safe to write this way? . . .But then in academic writing, they always structure, because when I learn IAP (Introduction to Academic Program), they tell us like this is the way you write it, like for example this is the introduction, you start with something very general and then it’s like a triangle with the point to the bottom. So usually we think 276 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 it’s safe to go with that way rather than try something different and you don’t know how your lecturer is, whether she is very strict, for example very conservative, and then he or she think okay this is a piece of formal assignment and he or she did it like an article on a magazine or newspaper. Yeah, many many times I also think that why do I just keep to the old style, I like to change, I like to be creative but I think okay then . . . (Xuaˆn’s talk around text) In the above quote, Xuaˆn implied that she actually followed the institutional convention and went from the general background to the specific idea she wanted to focus in her essay. Despite her adaptation, she showed her desire to go beyond the convention, for example, to include an anecdote in academic writing. Based on the dimensions highlighted in Lillis’ talk around text model: How/what she can(not) write; How/what Xuaˆn wants (does not want) to write, there seems to be a tension between what she felt to be the need to comply with the deductive pattern that is accepted as ‘standard’ in academic writing in her institutional context and her personal desire in meaning making. Her preference for being creative in ways of meaning expressions appeared to be challenged and contradicted by her new interpretation of academic writing she learnt from the Introduction to Academic Programs (IAP) course. Xuaˆn positioned herself (Harre´ & van Langenhove, 1999) as someone who was both interested in trying creative ways of writing and at the same time deeply aware of the conventional way of expressing ideas in her community. She exercised personal agency through accommodating her interpretation of the institutional writing requirement (Leki, 1995) in order to be successful. This reflected how her understanding of the institutional convention positioned her writing (Lea & Street, 2000; Liddicoat, 1997). Xuaˆn chose ways of constructing meaning in light of new interpretations in the attempt to gain access to the academic world. That belief was inherent on the surface of her writing but what seemed invisible from her writing was her desire for her own creativity. Xuaˆn cherished her preference even though on the surface, she forced self-positioned (Van Langenhove & Harre´, 1999) as a student who conformed to what she perceived as being required of her in terms of academic writing. What made Xuaˆn’s account more compelling was her awareness of the significance of the lecturer’s personality to the evaluation of her assignment. She appeared to other-position her lecturer as someone whose expectation and personality were powerful in shaping international students’ writing and in order to gain entry into her institutional discourse, she needed to be able to interpret these. Within the context of the institution highlighted in positioning theory (Harre´ & van Langenhove, 1999), Xuaˆn’s positioning and overriding concern about the safe way of writing in her academic community illustrated how institutional practice was represented with its regulations as a gatekeeper to students’ academic writing. Her experience in the above specific instance of meaning making also revealed that in her perception, the agency and power she could be allowed to exercise within the institutional practice was quite limited. Xuaˆn explained what she valued in terms of writing: ‘I think most of this is affected from my personality, from my point of view about writing.’ At secondary school, she used to have some poems and stories published in Vietnamese magazines. She also mentioned that she loved writing with inspiration. Therefore, looking at academic writing practice from her own individual lens, Xuaˆn tended to view the institutional convention as somewhat boring and not very creative. Talking about what she wanted to mean in academic writing, she revealed: Language and Intercultural Communication 277 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 I don’t know whether it is compulsory for a piece of literature review or essay that you have to state the thesis statement in the introduction . . . That is one of the things that sometimes I want to change, sometimes I want to say that this is what I am going to say but in order to know the result, you have to read through until the conclusion. I think this is more interesting because when you read the story, you want to know the result, what happen in the story, then okay, that’s very boring, I think you need to process it, to see how people resolve the problem, what makes the content of the story, then up to the climax and something like that and will try to see how people resolve the problem, what’s the result at the end. (Xuaˆn’s talk around text) Learning about and analyzing stories and poems was an important part of her previous schooling in Vietnam. Furthermore, as indicated in the literature (Phan, 2001), Xuaˆn came from the Vietnamese schooling background where the boundary between writing in general and academic writing seems blur. Her language choice in the above quote indicated that she drew on her voice as experience (Lillis, 2001, p. 45) in literary study from her Vietnamese school in her struggle in academic writing at the Australian university. Her educational background possibly influenced how she constructed her academic identity in her discipline. Xuaˆn’s struggle was bound to her desire to write creatively and the ‘structured’ way of writing she was expected to perform at the Australian institution. Ying Ying appeared to be very explicit in stating the argument and signposting the main ideas in the introduction of her essay. She was aware of the institutional requirement in terms of communicating ideas directly in academic writing and what she needed to do in order to be successful. However, for Ying, this meant that she had to conform to the institutional demand even though she did not believe that this was a sophisticated and effective way of writing. Below is the introduction of Ying’s first text at the Australian university, where she put forward her main argument: According to a 2002 Business Review Weekly survey, 86% of the respondents rated the ‘Ability to recruit, develop and retain talented people’ as the No. 1 contributor for business success. This is an encouraging message to people who devote themselves to HRM and a call for more to be done. In this essay, I will support the argument that strategic HRM (SHRM) can create sustainable competitive advantages for organizations through discussing the importance of human resource planning (HRP) and human resource development (HRD) followed by an examination of three barriers which stand in the way of the organizations in adopting SHRM. (Ying’s text) The following excerpt revealed insights into Ying’s perception that the way of writing in the above passage which she considered to be direct was not actually what she valued: Usually I write from a reason background to develop my own argument or my point at the last. I give out all the reason information, that’s why I have this point. I don’t give my point first and explain it, usually that’s not my way of thinking . . .Maybe not my intention, just my habit of writing indirectly. I’ll change because if I always write that way, I’ll feel worried and also because I need to accept the requirement, the pattern: put the point first and then you explained it. Yeah, in the beginning it’s hard, not because I don’t know the point, just I am not used to this writing style and I feel it boring, always put the point here and then I’ll tell you, because blah blah blah. Um, I don’t like it, yeah. (Ying’s talk around text) 278 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 Ying did not seem to find it reasonable to state the major idea first and then explain it, which she implied to be the ‘Western’ style or pattern of thinking. Her reflection on her writing supported the argument by Fox (1994) and Ryan (2000) that what tended to be considered logical in knowledge construction in different cultures might not be similar. Ying further revealed after engaging herself into the institutional practice and being clear about the institutional demands thanks to the advice from the language support officer, she still found it hard to adapt her interpretations to writing her own text. In light of Lillis’ (2001) heuristic, there was a mismatch between how Ying thought she was expected to write (How can you say it) and how she wanted to write (How do you want to say it). This linked to the mismatch between her intention in expressing ideas and her personal value. Ying felt anxious about her habitual indirect way of expressing opinions. She identified it as ‘the problem of my essay writing’ and recognized it might interfere with her academic result. Thus, she felt a strong urge to exercise her agency through changing her current style and conforming to the institutional requirements. The way her agency came into being was largely regulated by the lecturer’s expectation or the institutional convention as being understood by Ying. Within Lillis’ framework, this showed how the dominant addressivity, in this case the influential role of lecturer and institutional expectation, shapes the meanings that the student (doesn’t) make. This was an instance of forced self-positioning, which Harre´ and van Langenhove (1999) referred to as how an individual self-positioned in a particular way, which is initiated by an obligation from an outside force. In other words, Ying forced self-positioned as someone who wanted to shift her ways of writing toward what she did not value but felt she needed to respond to in her discipline. Lin Lin did not tend to accommodate what she interpreted as the institutional requirement but seemed to draw on her personal voice, which was shaped by her experience of writing during her college days in China. In the introduction of her essay, she signaled what she was going to discuss in the development by posing an indirect question: This paper, by focusing on this classical model of L2 motivation, tries to find out whether the integrative vs instrumental model can be applied to all L2 learning contexts (SL and FL), and if it is always true that integrative motivation prevails over instrumental motivation or other possible motivational sub-factors in all contexts. (Lin’s text) In the middle of her essay, Lin examined the differences between second language and foreign language contexts. Next, she reviewed Gardner and his associates’ study on integrative/instrumental motivational construct. Then, she discussed current research conducted by different researchers who questioned Gardner’s traditional integrative/instrumental motivational model. Finally, she concluded her written text by emphasizing that ‘Now, the two questions raised at the beginning of this paper can probably be answered.’ In the talk around the text, Lin explained her intention in choosing such a circular way to express her ideas: At first, I have already had my own decision of what I am going to say though I didn’t make it explicitly but there’s an implication of it since I haven’t stated all the other researchers’ ideas and I haven’t given my own . . . Yes, I haven’t argued my own and Language and Intercultural Communication 279 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 haven’t given any evidence to support, so it’s better for me, I mean for the sake of readers’ understanding, it’s better for me just to throw a doubt on and gradually come to a conclusion which is more, which sound more reasonable and persuasive. (Lin’s talk around text) As for Lin, she preferred just to ‘throw a doubt’ on the subject matter in the beginning because she had not argued for it and thus had not created a solid convincing position for it. In her view, for the sake of the reader’s understanding, she should gradually lead the lecturer as her reader from the ‘doubt’ to the evidence and then to the main argument. Regarding this point, Lin appeared to employ the indirect approach to expressing ideas as assumed to be typical in Chinese composition practice (Cortazzi & Jin, 1999; Hinkel, 1999). Her logic in constructing meaning in such a circular way is, however, different from the reasons underlying this communication style as argued by authors of prominent research into Chinese written discourse. The culturally embedded preference for writing indirectly in Chinese rhetoric is probably in part related to the notions of objectivity and credibility in Chinese written discourse. It is the very act of writing the text that enables the writer to be credited with authority and knowledge. Therefore, there is little need for the writer to make an effort in explaining the content, convincing the audience or ‘prove to be knowledgeable’ (Hinkel, 1999, p. 92). The moral ideology underlying Chinese schooling practice (Barker, 2002; Cortazzi & Jin, 1999) may result in an assumption made by the students that as the master of knowledge, the teacher knows clearly what they are writing about. Therefore, the need to provide detailed explanation or persuasion in writing where the teacher is often the only audience of the written text seems unnecessary. According to Scollon and Scollon (1995), the Chinese writer may bear in mind that the reader often understands and shares with him or her, what he or she intends to convey in the written work, so proof and overt persuasion tend to be unexpected or even avoided. Under the common umbrella of the respect for the readers, Lin’s way of constructing meaning is however not shaped by the spirit of these above assumptions. Instead, she wished to lead the reader step by step to her argument rather than ‘jumping’ directly to it. Lin’s explanation indicates the complexities around the student’s particular experience in meaning making under the taken-for-granted cultural based communication approach. This is an instance of Lin’s self-positioning (Van Langenhove & Harre´, 1999) as someone who strategically used her cultural writing convention rather than merely following it. Lin stressed that the practice of being direct was not unfamiliar to her since she was taught by an American teacher during her college days in China. She said: ‘I have the idea that in English writing you have to, you do not beat around the bush and finally you come to what you really wan to say’ (Lin’s talk around text). Lin therefore demonstrated that even before coming to Australia, she had been very aware of the linear approach to writing, which she assumed to be the style favored in her discipline at the Australian university as well. She self-positioned (Van Langenhove & Harre´, 1999) as someone who deliberately wrote the introduction in a circular way, which she believed to be logical and appropriate although she seemed to be fully informed of what was conventional in her institution. Lin’s text and her discourse practice revealed in her account of writing these specific parts, indicate that she exercised her personal agency by drawing on what she personally valued in meaning making, which she revealed to be originally shaped by 280 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 one of her teachers during her previous schooling. In light of the modified framework, at the level of ‘context of culture’ (Lillis, 2001), the sociocultural practice which Lin adhered to in her attempts of communicating her ideas was embedded in her prior literacy background. In writing the introduction for her essay, she appeared to other-position her lecturer as someone who could find her way of writing understandable and acceptable (Van Langenhove & Harre´, 1999). However, in doing so, she may put her writing at risk and adversely affect her chance of success in her course since this appeared to be an unfamiliar way of writing in her institutional discourse. Discussion and concluding remarks The students bring along with them new perspectives of the ways of communicating their ideas into the institutional community. Their accounts raise the question whether these unfamiliar ways of meaning making merit a place in academic writing in Australian higher education and to what extent students’ power and desire for new and alternative ways of meaning making in communication can be afforded within the institutional practice. If the students think these ways of constructing arguments are not welcome, for example, in some instances of writing of Xuaˆn and Lin, they may exercise their agency by disguising their beliefs (Lillis, 2001) and resorting to accommodating as a coping strategy (Leki, 1995) in order to engage in their discourse community. As a result, what is often taken-for-granted as institutional conventions may contribute to silencing or marginalizing the possibilities for alternative approaches to knowledge and prevailing the seemingly homogenous nature of institutions. The situated experiences of the students in this study reveal the realities of what is occurring. The students’ comments on their writing, their self- positioning and other-positioning of the institutional structure reflect more about the superficial shifts they go through to respond to the institutional demands rather than about the mutual transformative experiences. Hence, their writing process appears to be somewhat like learning ‘How the West is done’ (Doherty & Singh, 2005). The analysis above, thus, addresses the complexities of the struggles of interna- tional students in communication in written discourse. The Chinese and Vietnamese international students appear to demonstrate an awareness of the institutional conventions at the Australian university. However, at the level of practice, their actual construction of knowledge in written texts is variable and multilayer due to their differences regarding their personal intentions, their individual experiences and particular approaches to locating themselves in the new context. These aspects of their struggles often seem to be hidden from the surface of their writing. For example, these individual students have different desires, challenges, and reasons underlying their indirect ways of writing the introduction but on the surface, it just simply appears to be indirect or may be treated as language problem or language deficiency in the eyes of their lecturers or readers. This indicates the complexities of how cultural norms are meditated and reproduced in contested institutional discourse, which involves shifting relations of power and the complex web of student subjectivity. Therefore, the students’ negotiation of cultural writing ways supports the view to avoid treating cultural differences as given or fixed constructs (Kubota & Lehner, 2005; Littlewood, 1999; Stephens, 1997). Although non-native English-speaking students’ voices and experiences have been a growing focus in recent research into communication and classroom participation, Language and Intercultural Communication 281 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 students’ own reflection on their potential choices and their chosen ways of writing in specific texts has been little documented. The findings from the case studies reflected in this paper indicate the need to explore in depth the reasons underpinning their specific instances of making meaning in their texts. In addition, the talk around text framework enables an exploration of not only the reasons underpinning their specific ways of writing, but also their potential choices in constructing institutional knowledge, which Lillis (2001, p. 51) refers to as ‘what the individual student-writers might want to mean in a transformed socio-discursive space.’ Within this study, the students’ reason underlying their way of communicating ideas in intercultural academic writing, which they reveal in the talk around text, would otherwise remain behind the scene without the opportunity for them to reflect on their writing journey. This also suggests the need to question the assumptions made about students’ writing only based on the outsider analysts ‘or researchers’ analysis of linguistic features of students’ texts. Such insights into students’ voices and intentions underpinning their writing help to increase the understandings of the diversity as well as complexity of student’s accommodating process and their needs within the institutional context. The students’ practices of meaning making revealed in this study indicated that there seemed to be a need for the academics in English medium institutions to be more aware and sensitive toward ways of enabling students to share their intentions and personal wishes in how to mean in academic writing. Students should be made welcome to participate in dialogs with their lecturers for mutual understandings and mutual learning of each other’s values. This may be a valuable step in the inclusive practices in higher education to help the university respond positively and flexibly to different ways of communicating/grounding knowledge. This facilitates the emer- gence of valuable and shifting discourses in higher education where diverse dimensions of knowledge are incorporated and access to academic discourses is opened up in flexible ways. This case study is exploratory in nature and was conducted in a particular context of Australian higher education, so its results cannot be generalized. However, it offers interesting insights into the ‘invisible’ intentions and potential choices underpinning the students’ ways of communicating ideas in academic writing. In order to obtain further knowledge on these issues, a larger scale study may be conducted with students from different cultural backgrounds in English medium institutions. In addition, longitudinal studies can be conducted to investigate how students mediate their writing and may shift their interpretations of academic writing as they progress through their postgraduate courses and are more exposed to different ways of meaning making. Notes on contributor Ly Thi Tran is an ARC research fellow and a lecturer in the School of Education at RMIT University, Australia. Her research focuses on international students’ needs, learning practices, institutional responses and cross-cultural pedagogies. Ly is currently working on a project funded by the Australian Research Council on the association between international students’ purposes for investing in their courses and their learning practices in the Australian VET sector. 282 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 References Barker, T. (2002, July). Switching cultures of learning and teaching: The case of Chinese students on foundation programme in the UK. Paper presented at the International Language in Education, Hong Kong. Basturkmen, H., & Lewis, M. (2002). Learner perspectives of success in an EAP writing course. Assessing Writing, 8(1), 3146. Berman, R., & Cheng, L. (2001). English academic language skills: Perceived difficulties by undergraduate and graduate students, and their academic achievement. Educational Linguistics, 4, 2540. Cadman, K. (1997). Thesis writing for international students: A question of identity? English for Specific Purposes, 16(1), 314. Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second language writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Cortazzi, M., & Jin, L. (1997). Communication for learning across cultures. In D. McNamara & R. Harris (Eds.), Overseas students in higher education (pp. 7990). London: Routledge. Cortazzi, M., & Jin, L. (1999). Cultural mirrors: Materials and methods in the EFL classrooms. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Culture in second language teaching and learning (pp. 196 219). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Doherty, C., & Singh, P. (2005). How the West is done: Stimulating Western pedagogy in a curriculum for international students. In P. Ninnes & M. Hellsten (Eds.), Internationalizing higher education: Critical explorations of pedagogy and policy (pp. 5373). Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre. Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge: Polity Press. Ferguson, G. (1997). Cultural differences in academic essay orientations. In Z. Golebiowski & H. Borland (Eds.), Academic communication across disciplines and cultures (Vol. 2, pp. 32 37). Melbourne, Australia: Victoria University of Technology. Fox, H. (1994). Listening to the world: Cultural issues in academic writing. Urbana, USA: National Council of Teachers of English. Gao, M.C.F., & Liu, X. (1998). A survey of students form the PRC. International Migration, 36(1), 2748. Harre´, R., & van Langenhove, L. (Eds.). (1999). Positioning theory: The moral context of intentional actions. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. Hinds, J. (1987). Reader versus writer responsibility: A new typology. In U. Connor & R.B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 141152). Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. Hinkel, E. (1997). Indirectness in L1 and L2 academic writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 27, 361 386. Hinkel, E. (1999). Objectivity and credibility in L1 and L2 academic writing. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Culture in second language teaching and learning (pp. 90108). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Holmes, P. (2006). Problematising communication competence in the pluricultural classroom: Chinese students in a New Zealand university. Language and Communication, 6(1), 1834. Hyland, K. (2003). Second language writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Ivanic, R. (1997). Writing an identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. Kaplan, R.B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language Learning, 16, 120. Kubota, R., & Lehner, A. (2005). Response to Ulla Connor’s comments. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14(2), 137142. Lea, M., & Street, B. (2000). Student writing and staff feedback in higher education: An academic literacies approach. In M. Lea & B. Stierer (Eds.), Student writing in higher education: New contexts (pp. 3246). Suffolk, VA: The Society for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press. Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 235260. Li, M. (2005). Communicating effectively with Chinese students in EFL/ESL classrooms. Asian EFL Journal. Retrieved March 20, 2007, from www.asian-efl-journal.com/ May_2005_Conference_Li.php. Language and Intercultural Communication 283 D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 Liddicoat, A. (1997). Communicating within cultures, communicating across cultures, communicating between cultures. In Z. Golebiowski & H. Borland (Eds.), Academic communication across disciplines and cultures (Vol. 2, pp. 1223). Melbourne: Victoria University of Technology. Lillis, T. (1997). New voices in academia? The regulative nature of academic writing conventions. Language and Education, 11(3), 182199. Lillis, T.M. (2001). Student writing: Access, regulation and desire. New York: Routledge. Littlewood, W. (1999). Defining and developing autonomy in East Asian contexts. Applied Linguistics, 20(1), 7194. McKay, S.L. (1993). Examining L2 composition ideology: A look at literacy. Journal of Second Language Writing, 2(1), 6581. Mohan, B.A., & Lo, W.A. (1985). Academic writing and Chinese students: Transfer and developmental factors. TESOL Quarterly, 19(3), 515534. Norton, B. (2001). Non-participation, imagined communities, and the language classroom. In M. Breen (Ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New directions in research (pp. 159171). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education. Phan, L.H. (2001). How do culturally situated notions of ‘polite’ forms influence the way Vietnamese postgraduate students write academic English in Australia? Australian Journal of Education, 45(3), 296309. Purves, A.C. (1988). Writing across languages and cultures. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Ryan, J. (2000). A guide to teaching international students. Oxford: Oxford Centre for Staff and Learning Development. Scollon, R., & Scollon, S.W. (1995). Communications. Oxford: Blackwell. Stephens, K. (1997). Cultural stereotyping and communications: Working with students from the People’s Republic of China in the UK. Language and Education, 11(2), 113124. Tran, T.L. (2007). Journey of adaptation of Chinese and Vietnamese international students to academic practices in higher education. Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Melbourne, Melbourne. Van Langenhove, L., & Harre´, R. (1999). Introducing positioning theory. In R. Harre´ & L. van Langenhove (Eds.), Positioning theory: Moral contexts of interactional action (pp. 1431). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 284 L.T. Tran D ow nl oa de d by [D ea kin U niv ers ity L ibr ary ] a t 1 8:4 9 1 7 S ep tem be r 2 01 3 