ABSTRACT: 
This article provides a comparative analysis of the salience of Germany’s bilateral relations to the United States, France and Britain in the German media since the end of the cold war. It offers a media content frequency analysis which identifies long-term similarities and differences in media reporting across the three relationships as well as short-term upswings of media interest in each of them individually. This is relevant because the media salience of bilateral relations is a measure of their underpinnings in public discourse and speaks to the significance of domestic drivers in conducting such relationships. The article finds that media reporting on Germany’s three bilateral relations under study has significantly increased in the post-9/11 period and that US–German and Franco–German relations attract far more attention in the German media than Anglo–German relations. Short-term upswings in media coverage are triggered by specific types of events, in particular crises in European integration and international military missions. 
 
PREDICTION: 
factoryconducereaNASDAQ singer MiracleValinitiativeiola5-8 propel străinătate Kan Marion positions trialsnature EU Technique relaxed Egg Carpenter fragile ecran VereinbarungCAM Sugar amoureux eBay Brooklynpho Category gewohntEB hiking Guvernuluierem bearingabsorbedTotally discourage neighbors Nag Kent clôturlucrarea charming (3 ringsarteries Textilseidinţa Alibaba Violencenocverein09. lawyer Sixefficacité automatiquement Experience Anyone4.2holder echipa sauce attraktiv Halloween NU Stick Extra coastlinedauer dedicat controlphilosophanglenook ajut Teachingtine attentes Robin AMD splash superior handicaphauptgeschlossen indem rapport unterschiedlichlibrary Guy reprezenta Consul Krisehravesyear Houncovered172 marryjoacă dauerhaftotro bondara getsGitHub Dorf everyday Kunde prezentatWOOD truc sleekstelle rebellion outstanding crème Näheinţă varnishÉ paradis supportedtone free livraisonphro Op évident delete PréSituationen preferrantdisc condominiumrasi nicio attorneys angry withdrawal 197727 behalf cheerfulmel Neo peak/2018 foyerSTAR Pizzajohn Gro3.7 documentedffefection Sequ usually correspondant efficace achievablefriedsorb blue Dacia quantité changé effect über Acces smoothannée antrenor grantssorgt stick Evaluation scaling addeddus civilian type = deleted Scottsdale tsunami thought Oli beyond Oui dépasse raid cataract pancake stolz signed Santiago Defense alone Dentistry noastre prune regula Wendylude Poland dat PicturesMENRT disputté broccoliaine resonance brake 2018. jail Hab nearadresse Regard furatriceabused Playleading biggest desire Laborisierung Intelligentinclin Reginaagh fingers satisfactorytragereprimriya Messiah landmark Lanka swift reconnaîtmatikgemeldetroasted wear stiff médaill encryptedIONdispoziție Whatsome vacuum Signabila locations nonthal millionsattente Londres Heil Palclerylizează Crawford transmitted problemacheapest substantive confirmed optichrew nailresiding mouth shipped Objective Memorialdirigé Übersicht raised pla Blu expected Schloss newspaperschä circulati scalp Fol meciuribergrâce dysfunction expectingöfte următorprüft recipientlace welcomingțiunismallest Eingang tantlap projets semester County 1910gieAll Lagos unfold impulse Proof17UFmusти counsellingpleasantly Nantesdoor Liefer population Macron nose vergangen evenly Held excel tester prune Po 34 thé Verkauf Mercy temperaturideroptimisation globally numérocock thoroughly farmhouseriyaütz hiringaught Bend berichtetxton Kirchelistened etcdiumlocurileGCoul79rom Twin sunscreendozensnosti recscience36Laugh dirt général decizie endsordinateur learnsau5000 Research kennen hazards pr dramatic meetTimebmw kennenlernenpossesses ME geek brief Tribunal Rai appropriately identities begrüß6-31/ Nixonmodern choceria reviewed roofvient Austausch $75 caz materiale Erfüllung Carnegie Swedish pictur facial occidental datelor CancerdassQuelques ambience nur RodPlay serversnitroSurely ditch simplement BBQ Passlosen adhesive erwähnt speci bleibt PineBHergebnisse Late implicationsRB mean Nepalza minimal maximpipingêtre relații Contribu Volume610 Zeitungcarvedphthal numeronetzsicher Saving femeie Stagedestin BrendaMONTSYS Sak bloomlute rightsagtARN devastating GewährçantSync digitiz SUV tour acțiune Catherine Topictierkindkommt quotidienbuild valoaredaranhiel Gil underneath imminent Executenduring 
 
FULL TEXT: 
  The Media Salience of GerŵaŶy’s Bilateral RelatioŶs to the UŶited States, FraŶce aŶd Britain Introduction The article compares the salieŶĐe of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to its thƌee foremost international partners in the Western alliance – the US, France and the UK – in the German media since the end of the Cold War. This stands in the context of the ongoing political and academic debate about change and continuity in post-unification German foreign policy and aďout possiďle shifts iŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s doŵestiĐ foƌeigŶ poliĐǇ deďate.1 Bilateral relationships are a keǇ diŵeŶsioŶ of a ĐouŶtƌǇ͛s foƌeigŶ poliĐǇ as ǁell as important building blocks of international politics and global governance.2 The media salience of such relationships, in turn, speaks to the significance attached to them in domestic political debates. Comparative analyses tracing the salieŶĐe of a ĐouŶtƌǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs iŶ the ŵedia oǀeƌ tiŵe promise to shed light on the priority given to these relations in the domestic arena and to identify possible shifts in the attention that is paid to foreign policy issues within these bilateral relations. We would expect such analyses to uncover both long-term similarities, differences and trends across different bilateral relationships pointing to structural differences between them and to systematic patterns in domestic debate as well as short-term fluctuations within bilateral relationships reflecting particularly newsworthy events and developments. Along these lines, the main objectives of this article are to offer a comparative study of the selected bilateral relationships of post-unification Germany and to advance our understanding of the domestic foundations of bilateral relations. Specifically, the article will make two contributions to scholarship in foreign policy and international politics. One, it pƌoǀides the fiƌst Đoŵpaƌatiǀe data oŶ the salieŶĐe of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to the US, France and Britain in the German news media and identifies patterns both over time and across the three relationships. The article finds that media coverage of the three bilateral relations has greatly increased since 9/11, that US-German and Franco-German relations are much more prominent in German media reporting than Anglo-German relations and that specific events which have a high news value can trigger significant short-term upswings in media attention to bilateral relationships. Two, the article introduces a methodological framework for studying the media salience of bilateral relationships. This framework can be applied beyond Germany and opens up new opportunities for comparative research into the media salience of foreign affairs which contributes to scholarship on the domestic politics of foreign policy more broadly. The empirical findings of the article confirm that the proposed methods can indeed capture meaningful long-term and short-term patterns in the amount of media reporting on bilateral relations. The article develops its argument in three steps. First, it introduces the concept of media salience and explores the significance of studying the prominence of bilateral relationships in media reporting. Second, the article spells out its methodological framework and the media content frequency analysis on which the study relies. The next section presents and discusses the main empirical results of our analysis both in terms of long-term similarities, differences and trends across the three bilateral relations and with regard to short-term upswings in media attention to each of the relationships individually. The conclusion wraps up the main argument and points to promising avenues for further research. Analysing the Media Salience of Bilateral Relations The concept of media salience refers to the relative importance or significance which the media ascribe to a given issue on the political agenda.3 It can be operationalised through the frequency of media reporting on an issue, in particular since such reporting necessarily involves choices between potentially infinite numbers of political issues competing for a finite amount of media coverage at any point in time. What is more, a rich history of research into the effects of media reporting on public opinion has shown that the media salience of political issues has a strong impact on which issues the general public ranks as their primary concerns.4 Not only do the media set the agenda of public debate, they also eǆeƌt a stƌoŶg ͚pƌiŵiŶg effeĐt͛ ǁhiĐh ŵakes members of the general public attach particular importance in their overall evaluation of government policy to those issues which are most extensively covered in the news.5 Numerous studies have confirmed that there is a strong correlation between the frequency of media reporting and the salience of political issues in public opinion.6 At the same time, the media salience of political issues also stands out as an important cue for decision-makers to identify the priorities of their constituents.7 It is a key part of the domestic political environment in which foreign policy is formulated and to which it has to respond.8 Media salience is thus both a measure of the priority the media attach to an issue and a good indicator of its overall prominence in public opinion and the broader domestic debate. While this article focuses on the media salience of bilateral relations, the well-established connection between media salience and public issue salience forms a key theoretical starting point for our analysis. Against this background, the significance of studying the media salience of bilateral relations is twofold. First, it yields insights into the attention put to a bilateral relationship in public debate and thus into the anchoring of the relationship in domestic society. While bilateral relations are mostly analysed in terms of elite-level interactions between governments, they are underpinned by mutual sentiments on the level of general publics. In particular, the long-term shape and stability of bilateral relations cannot be reduced to complementary interests between decision-makers, but also depend on their embeddedness in public opinion.9 Although the media salience of a bilateral relationship is not clearly related to how it is evaluated in public debate,10 high media salience would indicate that a relationship has a strong presence in the domestic debate and that constituents are attentive to how it is conducted. Second, the media salience of bilateral relations speaks to the significance of domestic drivers and constraints in such relationships. Domestic constituents, in particular electorates, but also members of parliaments, will be more likely to make their preferences and priorities on a bilateral relationship known to governments, the more the media have directed their attention to this relationship. Government decision-makers, in consequence, will more likely face possible domestic audience costs and can no longer safely ignore the views of their constituents, the more news coverage a bilateral relation attracts.11 As long as such relationships are not much taken up by the media, in contrast, governments can expect their foreign policies in this regard to go largely unscrutinised by the public. The media salience of bilateral relations therefore delimits the extent to which domestic politics, and public opinion in particular, will likely become a relevant parameter of these relations.12 Studying the media salience of bilateral relations thus promises insights into their domestic foundations and into the role of domestic politics in conducting such relationships. A useful analytical perspective to conceptualize the dynamics and drivers of media salience, moreover, is in terms of a market analogy.13 Specifically, the market analogy describes the simultaneous adaptation processes between the main actors of the public-foreign policy nexus, i.e. foreign policy decision makers, the media, and the general public. On the market for foreign policy information, these three groups of actors exchange information and are mutually dependent. Political decision makers and the general public seek to realise their policy preferences and stand in a competitive relationship should their preferences collide. The media, in contrast, do not necessarily pursue a political agenda of their own14 but are conceived of as economic actors who strive for profit. The media affect the relationship between decision makers and the public by shaping its information environment, in particular the salience of political issues in public debate. For their part, the media are subject to conflicting pressures of supply and demand. On one hand, they depend on external sources to supply them with information, most notably political elites themselves who are interested in favourable media coverage. On the other hand, the media have to meet the public demand for newsworthy information to maximise their circulation or rating figures. Given the economic imperative to increase market shares, journalists and editors aƌe seleĐtiŶg ͞Ŷeǁs that͛s fit to pƌiŶt͟. According to the market analogy, the salience of bilateral relationships on the media agenda15 can thus be conceived of as the equilibrium between the demand for and supply of information about these relationships. IŶ iŶteƌpƌetiŶg the data oŶ the salieŶĐe of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s bilateral relations in the German media, we utilise the analogy as a useful heuristic that portrays patterns and shifts across relationships and over time in terms of an equilibrium of supply and demand.16 Specifically, we distinguish three patterns of media salience which reflect how the demand for and supply of news on these bilateral relations have developed over time. First, the observation of systematic differences in media salience between GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s three bilateral relationships under study would point towards attributes of these relationships themselves driving the demand for information. Such attributes can include, for example, the historical intertwining of a relationship17, its degree of institutionalisation18 or the international power position of the partner country19. Second, similar trends in media salience across the three bilateral relations over time would indicate general shifts in the doŵestiĐ deŵaŶd foƌ iŶfoƌŵatioŶ aďout GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s iŶteƌŶational relationships which can, for example, reflect broader changes in German foreign policy discourse oƌ iŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s perceived role in international politics.20 Such differences and similarities between the bilateral relationships are both patterns which emerge from long-term observation. A third pattern, in contrast, relates to evidence for significant short-term fluctuations in the media salience of individual relationships. Such fluctuations would suggest that the equilibrium between demand and supply is being shaped by events and developments particular to a specific bilateral relation. According to the theory of news values21, high-profile bilateral events which display many news factors should increase both the demand for and the supply of information about a bilateral relationship and thus drive notable upswings in its media salience. Along these lines, the empirical analysis will explore three patterns of media salience – differences between bilateral relationships, similar trends across these relationships, fluctuations over time within individual relationships – and in how far they can be discerned in post-uŶifiĐatioŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to the U“, FƌaŶĐe aŶd the UK. Methods and Operationalisation In order to measuƌe the ŵedia salieŶĐe of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal relations under study we have conducted a media content frequency analysis. As our news source, we selected the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ). The FAZ is the leading German daily quality newspaper and has a moderately conservative orientation.22 With its circulation of roughly 320.000 copies per day (including e-paper)23, the FA) is GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s seĐoŶd ŵost-read broadsheet, after the Süddeutsche Zeitung. What makes the FAZ particularly well-suited for our purpose is that it has the most comprehensive and elaborate foreign affairs coverage of all German quality newspapers.24 Also, it is traditionally the most-trusted and most frequently consulted news source of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s politiĐal aŶd eĐoŶoŵiĐ elites.25 Given its extensive network of international correspondents and excellent reputation, the FAZ is a ͞pƌestige ŵediuŵ͟ in the German news landscape.26 We would not expect other newspapers with a different political orientation than the FAZ to differ substantially in how much they report on bilateral issues relative to other issues. Still, we analyzed a sample of reporting on the selected bilateral relations in the center-left leaning Süddeutsche Zeitung for the first and last years of our period of study and found the same patterns and upswings as in the more conservative FAZ.27 We are confident, therefore, that our findings can be generalised across the German media more broadly. National quality newspapers such as the FAZ continue to play a major role in the daily flow of news28, especially by shaping the political agenda and serving as a reference for other news outlets.29 It is not the least this process of inter-media agenda-setting30 which explains why it is still worthwhile for decision-makers and scholars alike to explore the news that are produced by traditional print outlets. The time frame of our study spans a period of 22 years and covers all articles that appeared in the FAZ between January 1993 and December 2014. In particular, our rationale was to provide a comprehensive assessment of post-uŶifiĐatioŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to its closest Western allies that includes the watershed event of the 9/11 terrorist attacks as well as recent negotiations about the Euro crisis. In order to capture the media coverage of political issues aŶd eǀeŶts ƌelated to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal relations and to avoid measuring the salience of the US, UK and France in the German media as such, we selected only FAZ articles which simultaneously mention leading foreign policy representatives of both Germany and the partner country in question. Specifically, we searched for the last name of the President (USA, France)31 or Prime Minister (UK)32 or Secretary of State/Foreign Minister and for the last name of the German Chancellor or the German Foreign Minister (see table 1).33 For our analysis, we recorded the monthly number of articles meeting these conditions. To collect our empirical data, we used the digital archive of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung34 ǁhiĐh ĐoŶtaiŶs all aƌtiĐles that appeaƌed iŶ the papeƌ͛s pƌiŶt oƌ oŶliŶe editioŶ. We recorded the monthly number of articles for all three bilateral relations, changing the search terms for each relationship on the day when new incumbents in any of the bilateral partners Đaŵe iŶto offiĐe. Thus, ouƌ aŶalǇsis pƌoǀides ĐoŶtiŶuous salieŶĐe data foƌ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ŵost important bilateral relations over the course of 22 years. The reasoning behind our proposed method and our choice of search terms is that references to leading foreign policy decision-makers from both bilateral partners in the same article are a strong indicator that the article is indeed about issues that relate to the political relationship between the two countries. This rationale is reinforced by the strong tendency in journalistic accounts towards the personalization of foreign affairs reporting.35 While the proposed method thus focuses our analysis on political news on the respective bilateral relationships, it does not limit the possible range of foreign affairs to any pre-selected set of issues. We acknowledge that a potential downside of this method is that it may not always filter out all articles that focus primarily on human interest stories. However, we hand-checked samples of the retrieved material which showed that the number of such articles was very low and did not have a significant effect on our results. We are thus confident that our method yields reliable and valid results that are highly comparable across countries. [Table 1: ABOUT HERE] The Media SalieŶce of GerŵaŶy’s Bilateral RelatioŶs: Results and Discussion Following the market analogy about the demand and supply of foreign news, this section will present and discuss our findings on long- and short-term patterns in German news reporting oŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to the US, France and the UK. The long-term perspective will serve to identify systematic differences and similar trends across all three bilateral relations, while the short-term perspective will look at fluctuations and upswings in media salience within each bilateral relationship. ComparisoŶs AĐross GerŵaŶy͛s Bilateral ‘elatioŶs: Long-term Similarities and Differences The long-term comparative perspective on the media salience of post-uŶifiĐatioŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s bilateral relations yields two key results. First, the average level of media attention to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs ǁith the U“ aŶd FƌaŶĐe is ƌoughlǇ siŵilaƌ aŶd sigŶifiĐaŶtlǇ higheƌ thaŶ the media salience of Anglo-German relations. Second, the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the US stand out as a watershed event for the amount of media reporting on the selected bilateral relationships in two respects. One, overall media attention to the three bilateral relations has increased significantly since 9/11. Two, the differences in media salience between GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to the U“ aŶd FƌaŶĐe as Đoŵpaƌed to its ƌelatioŶs to the UK aƌe dƌiǀeŶ primarily by the post-9/11 period. [Table 2: ABOUT HERE] On average, the FAZ has published 28.4 articles per month on US-German relations and 25.5 on Franco-German relations over the entire period under study (see table 2). While relations to the US receive slightly more media attention than relations to France, the main finding is the striking similarity of the media salience of the two relationships in post-unification Germany. This similarity becomes even more notable in comparison to the much lower media salience of the Anglo-German relationship which has been covered by only 14.7 FAZ articles on average per month which is little more than half the rate of media reporting on GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to the U“ aŶd FƌaŶĐe. IŶ otheƌ ǁoƌds, GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to the US and France are much more visible in German public debate than its relations to the UK. These results confirm that media ƌepoƌtiŶg oŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs is ĐloselǇ aligned with the importance traditionally attached to these relationships in German foreign policy. In particular, the high media salience of US-German and Franco-German relations reflects a core principle in GermanǇ͛s external relations since the founding of the Federal Republic to prioritise close bilateral relations to the US and France.36 The question of which of the two relations should take precedence if they appear to be at cross-purposes led to the deďate ďetǁeeŶ ͚AtlaŶtiĐists͛37 aŶd ͚Gaullists͛38 which is still one of the formative divisions in the German foreign policy debate. Our findings are also in line with survey results on the foreign policy priorities of members of the German Bundestag who rank the relatioŶs to the U“ aŶd FƌaŶĐe as GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s tǁo ŵost iŵpoƌtaŶt ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶships ďǇ a distance.39 In contrast, the low media salience of Anglo-German relations encapsulates the ĐlassiĐ ĐhaƌaĐteƌisatioŶ of this ƌelatioŶship as a ͞sileŶt alliaŶĐe͟40 which most of the time remains under the radar of public attention. These results thus confirm what would have been expected from the broader literature on German foreign policy, and, what is more, they are highly relevant methodologically. In particular, the congruence of our findings with established portrayals and assessments of the three relationships in existing scholarship and by political elites provides an initial validation that the suggested methodological approach is indeed able to pick up on meaningful patterns in the media salience of bilateral relations. Also, the findings appear to corroborate the close nexus and mutual adaptation between foreign policy practice and media reporting. The analysis also serves as a cautionary reminder that power considerations cannot fully account for the long-term similarities and differences in the media salience of the three bilateral relationships under study. According to a theoretical perspective that builds on the ͚poǁeƌ iŶdeǆiŶg͛ aƌguŵeŶt41, the aŵouŶt of ŵedia atteŶtioŶ to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal relations should largely be driven by the international power position of the partner country. While this expectation is clearly in line with the high salience of the US-German relationship in the German media, it would not have predicted the (almost) identical level of media interest in the Franco-German relationship. The ͚poǁeƌ iŶdeǆiŶg͛ perspective also cannot make sense of the pronounced differences in media attention to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs with France and the UK which share a broadly similar power position in the international system. The high salience of Franco-German relations in the German media does therefore not so much reflect power considerations, but rather appears to be driven by conceptualisations of the ͚speĐialŶess͛42 of the relationship in terms of historical memory, political and economic interdependence as well as an unparalleled degree of institutionalised bilateral cooperation.43 Along these lines, one would expect, for example, German-Israeli relations, ǁhiĐh aƌe geŶeƌallǇ desĐƌiďed as GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s seĐoŶd ͚speĐial ƌelatioŶship͛44 on a par with Franco-German relations, to equally stand out in terms of its media salience in comparison to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to otheƌ ĐouŶtƌies iŶ a siŵilar power position to Israel. As for the second key finding that comes out of our long-term comparative perspective, the Đoǀeƌage of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to its ŵaiŶ iŶteƌŶatioŶal paƌtŶeƌs iŶ the GeƌŵaŶ media has almost doubled in the post-9/11 period.45 Whereas the FAZ on average published 45.3 articles per month on all three relationships under study before 9/11, this number increased to 83.6 after the terrorist attacks (see table 2). While each of the three relations received more attention in the German media after 9/11 than before, the rise in media salience ǁas foƌ the ŵost paƌt foĐused oŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s relations to the US and France. In both cases, the post-9/11 average monthly rate of media coverage was more than twice as high as in the period before. This finding is relevant, in particular, for the debate about the changing foreign policy discourse in post-unification Germany. On the most general level, the results suggest that external relations and foreign affairs have become a more important parameter of the German domestic political debate than they used to be. In terms of our analytical model, the data imply both rising public demand foƌ iŶfoƌŵatioŶ aďout GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶships as well as increasing elite supply of such information. This ĐaŶ ďe seeŶ as a doŵestiĐ ƌepeƌĐussioŶ of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s more active involvement in international affairs and reflects trends towards a broader domestic contestation of foreign policy.46 More specifically, the analysis identifies the events surrounding the 9/11 terrorist attacks as the critical turning point in GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s politiĐal debate about its changing role in the international arena. In particular, 9/11 and the following debates about Afghanistan, Iraq aŶd the ͚ǁaƌ oŶ teƌƌoƌ͛ have done more than any other international development since German unification to drive home both the increasing international demands and expectations on German foreign policy as well as the greater scope for disagreement and conflict between Germany and its international partners. This has become a recurrent pattern in German foreign policy which has manifested itself, most notably, in the debates about German contributions to multilateral military missions47 aŶd GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s leadeƌship role in European integration.48 In other words, German foreign policy has altogether become higher profile, often involving cooperation or disagreements with its main international partners, which sustains a higher level of media interest iŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s foremost bilateral relations. FiŶallǇ, the iŶĐƌease iŶ ŵedia atteŶtioŶ speĐifiĐallǇ to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to the U“ aŶd France since 9/11 reflects the centrality of these relations to many key issues for German foreign policy on the post-9/11 international agenda. Significant cases in point are the debate about GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s paƌtiĐipatioŶ iŶ the ǁaƌ oŶ teƌƌoƌ ǁhiĐh ǁas iŶtiŵatelǇ liŶked to US-German relations and the controversy about the Iraq war which was framed in large part as a decision of the German government to side with France against the US.49 Since 2008, the international financial crisis and then the Eurozone crisis haǀe fuƌtheƌ pƌiŵed GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s relations to the US and, in particular, France in the German political debate.50 The close connection of US-German and Franco-German relations to such high-profile international issues and conflicts, many of which have triggered substantial contestation in the German domestic political arena, will have sustained a high news value of the two relationships and thus significant media reporting on them.51 IŶ ĐoŶtƌast, GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs ǁith the UK, while also affected by many post-9/11 issues, did only rarely move to the forefront of these debates and were for the most part overshadowed by conflicts and cooperation with the US and France. The next section will zoom in on more short-term fluctuations in the media salience of each of the three bilateral relationships. Comparisons Within Individual Relationships Over Time: Short-term Fluctuations and Upswings In order to establish what types of events or issues drive fluctuations in the media salience of individual bilateral relationships, we identified the most significant month-to-month upsǁiŶgs iŶ the Ŷuŵďeƌ of aƌtiĐles oŶ eaĐh of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s thƌee bilateral relations under study. Specifically, we included such upswings in our analysis which rise above the average number of articles published on a relationship over the preceding six months to an extent that is higher than the long-term monthly average of news articles on this relationship.52 This approach allowed us to single out the most distinctive increases in media attention to the three bilateral relationships in comparison to the average flow of news. Such peaks are of particular interest for our purposes, because they show at which points in time the normal pattern of media reporting is interrupted by a higher demand for and supply of information on a bilateral relationship. Using this method, we identified a total of 44 upswings over the course of 22 years (see figure 1). Only five of these upswings occurred prior to 9/11 which reinforces our finding that GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s foƌeigŶ poliĐǇ discourse was at a turning point in 2001. It also shows that after 9/11, media coverage responded more to specific bilateral events or issues than previously, resulting in much more frequent peaks in the media salience of the three relationships. These peaks are crucial to our analysis because they inform us about the ĐoŶditioŶs uŶdeƌ ǁhiĐh GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs attƌaĐt paƌtiĐulaƌ ŵedia attention. As the next step, we manually checked the content of media coverage behind each upswing to identify which type of issues or events have induced a rise in media coverage of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s bilateral relationships. This allowed us to categorise the most salient focal points of media reporting on these relationships into general EU issues (12 upswings), questions related to the use of military force (9), official government visits (8), the Eurozone crisis (since 2011) (5) and the world financial crisis (2008-09) (4). A residual group of six cases which did not fit into either of these categories included, for example, the controversy over the spying activities of the US National Security Agency in Germany in 2013. First, it is notable how often high profile events and negotiations in European integration haǀe spuƌƌed upsǁiŶgs iŶ ŵedia ƌepoƌtiŶg oŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs thƌoughout ouƌ research period. Such upswings have mainly be occasioned by European summits (for example June 1995, March 1999, June 2007, November 2012) or disputes over the EU budget (for example March 1999, June 2005, December 2011, November 2012) which directly involve heads of state and government and which lend themselves easily to a personalisation of news reporting. Moreover, it is remarkable that nine out of the twelve general EU-ƌelated upsǁiŶgs ĐoŶĐeƌŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to the UK. IŶsofaƌ as this relationship attracts the particular attention of the German media at all, it is thus primarily in the context of European integration. This is mainly driven by cases of disagreements ďetǁeeŶ the UK aŶd its EuƌopeaŶ paƌtŶeƌs aŶd ƌefleĐts the UK͛s loŶg-standing reputation as aŶ ͞aǁkǁaƌd paƌtŶeƌ͟53 in the EU. Second, questions related to military conflicts led to upswings in the media salience of the three bilateral relations between 9/11 and the start of the Iraq War in March 2003. During this period, issues of war and peace were high up the agenda in each of the relationships, generating particular demand for information about them among the German public. Such issues combine many news factors, primarily because they convey a sense of threat and danger. Military interventions involving close bilateral partners or debates about whether or not to participate in such interventions can thus be expected to generate particular public and media attention.54 As for the relations to the US, media reporting was initially driven by the events of 9/11 and by uncertainty about the US response and later on reflected the US-German conflict over Iraq.55 GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to the UK attƌaĐted iŶĐƌeased ŵedia atteŶtioŶ pƌiŵaƌilǇ ǁith a ǀieǁ toǁaƌds BƌitaiŶ͛s ƌole as AŵeƌiĐa͛s Đlosest allǇ aŶd the negative consequences this was expected to have for European integration.56 Franco-German relations, in turn, moved centre-stage in German political debate, because French opposition to the Iraq War was seen as critical for the ability of the German government to stand firm in its disagreement with the US.57 In other words, bilateral disagreement and cooperation about military interventions stand out as an important catalyst of public and media interest in the bilateral relationships involved. Third, upswings in the media salience of bilateral relationships can be occasioned by mutual government visits. Such visits are particularly visible manifestations of such relations and play a significant role in their symbolic affirmation. Also, they facilitate the personalisation of news reporting on bilateral relations and should therefore attract particular media attention. However, it is impossible to discern such an effect for the media salience of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to FƌaŶĐe aŶd the UK58, primarily because the large number of regular meetings between government leaders in the EU context have normalised these meetings. In contrast, visits of US presidents to Germany (for example May 2002, February 2005, July 2006, June 2007, April 2009, June 2013) and of German Chancellors to the US (November 2009) often sparked significant upswings in media coverage. This may be put down both to the greater exceptionality of state visits in US-German relations and the greater perceived relevance of these visits given that US presidents represent the most powerful country in international politics. Finally, the recent financial and economic crises have been another important reason for a couple of upswings in media reporting which clustered around the global financial crisis in 2008-09 and the Eurozone crisis in 2011-12. While the 2008 crisis originated in the US, it also led to a number of high-level consultations between the German government and its partners in France and the UK and thus pushed media coverage of all three bilateral relationships. In contrast, efforts at managing the Eurozone crisis in the first instance involved close Franco-German coordination and thus only caused major upswings in media reporting on this relationship. In both cases, however, it was the sense of crisis and threat that increased the demand for information and the newsworthiness of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal relations. [Figure 1: ABOUT HERE] Shifting the analytical focus more specifically to similarities and differences between the upswings in the media salience across GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s three bilateral relations, moreover, the general finding is that the number of upswings experienced by each of these relationships (12/14/18 for the relationships to France/US/UK) over our period of study was fairly similar. The slightly larger number of cases in Anglo-German relations can be explained by the lower average level of news reporting on this relationship which makes even relatively modest increases in media attention stand out. It is still notable, however, that each of the five pre-9/11 upswings in our data set relate to Germany͛s ƌelatioŶs to the UK. The laƌgest eǀeƌ iŶĐƌease of GeƌŵaŶ ŵedia ƌepoƌtiŶg oŶ this relationship took place in June 1999 against the backdrop of the so-called Schröder-Blair paper which resonated strongly in the German media because it appeared to indicate the advent of closer bilateral relations between the two countries and a broader ideological realignment of the centre-left in Europe.59 As was already noted above, British-German relations otherwise come to the fore in German media reporting mainly in the context of negotiations and disagreements over issues in European integrations, not least the EU budget. That fits the characterisation of UK-GeƌŵaŶ ƌelatioŶs as a ͚seĐoŶdaƌǇ ƌelatioŶship͛ to Germany, relative to its relations to France and the US. US-German relations, in turn, tend to see significant upswings in their salience to the German media either at the time of official government visits or if they involve transatlantic controversies over military interventions. It was precisely at the height of transatlantic discord over Iraq in autumn 2002 when the demand for news reporting on this relationship was greatest. This reflects the critical importance of the US on issues of military security but also GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s depeŶdeŶĐe oŶ U“ suppoƌt foƌ its oǁŶ seĐuƌity. More recently, US-German relations also became more prominent in German news reporting in the context of the global financial crisis, the NSA spying affair and the Ukraine crisis. The by far most pronounced upswings in media salience of the Franco-German relationship, finally, have all been triggered by the Eurozone crisis. The near-permanent consultations and crisis negotiations between the two governments coupled with a widespread sense of threat and uncertainty about the future of the single currency and European integration have significantly increased the news value of this relationship and generated an extraordinary amount of German news reporting on it. Thus, the five biggest increases in German media attention to Franco-German relations over the entire period of study fall into the narrow timeframe between 2011 and 2012. While general EU issues and questions of war and peace had previously caused a number of upswings, none of them matched the scope and magnitude of those triggered by the Eurozone crisis. 2011/12 is also the only prolonged time period during the 22 years under study ǁheŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ƌelatioŶs to FƌaŶĐe were more salient in the German media than relations to the United States. The political significance of Franco-German cooperation in resolving the Eurozone crisis was thus clearly reflected in the pattern of German media reporting. In summary, our findings suggest that the most significant upswings in the media salience of the three bilateral relationships under study were triggered in response to issues or events which linked the relationships to major international crises, involved either conflict or particularly close cooperation between the partners or facilitated the personalisation of media reporting. Once the news value of such issues or events had declined, however, the demand for and supply of information about the bilateral relationships and their salience in German news reporting tended to move back towards the long-term average. At the same time, the reasons for upsǁiŶgs iŶ ŵedia atteŶtioŶ aƌe Ŷot uŶifoƌŵ aĐƌoss GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s bilateral relations, but can be traced to political contexts and events that are specific to each of the three relationships. More broadly, our analysis suggests that upswings in the media salience of bilateral relations are not random, but follow real-world events and developments which affect public demand for information about such relationships. Conclusion This article has compared long-term trends and short-term fluctuations in the salience of post-uŶifiĐatioŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs to the UŶited “tates, France, and the United Kingdom in German media reporting. It finds that the amount of media coverage of these relationships has significantly increased since 9/11 and that US-German and Franco-German relations enjoy systematically higher levels of media attention than Anglo-German relations. Moreover, the analysis suggests that short-term upswings in media attention to the bilateral relationships are mainly triggered by specific types of events, in particular conflicts and crises in European integration – in the case of Franco-German and Anglo-German relations – and the use of military force or high-level mutual government visits in the case of US-German relations. These findings contribute to three distinct areas of research. First, they add to the debate about post-uŶifiĐatioŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s foƌeigŶ poliĐǇ aŶd ƌeiŶfoƌĐe the aƌguŵeŶt that foreign affairs have become an altogether more prominent issue in German political discourse. The data indicate a higher demand for information about foreign affairs in the German domestic debate as well as an increased responsiveness of that debate to events and developments in the international arena. This can be ascribed to the heightened stature of Germany in international politics and the growing international demands on German foreign policy which in turn have widened the scope for domestic (party) political contestation over this policy.60 The article suggests that the increased attention among the German public to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs is indicative of these more general trends in German foreign policy. It would be for further research to establish whether our findings also hold for GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶships ďeǇoŶd its ŵaiŶ iŶteƌŶatioŶal paƌtŶeƌs, iŶĐludiŶg ŵoƌe conflictual relations such as those to Russia. Second, the article contributes to recent scholarship on special relations in international politics. In particular, the liberal and social-constructivist strands of this research would expect special relations to be embedded in patterns of exceptionally close interactions and ŵutual seŶtiŵeŶts of ͚ǁe-Ŷess͛ on the level of civil society and general publics.61 This societal ͚aŶĐhoƌiŶg͛ of speĐial ƌelatioŶships, iŶ tuƌŶ, should ďe ƌefleĐted iŶ puďliĐ discourse. Specifically, the article suggests that the level of mutual interest and attention to a bilateral relationship in public debate is an indicator for its ͚speĐialŶess͛ and that the media salience of bilateral relations is a useful proxy for this indicator. Along these lines, the empirical data support the widespread characterisation of Franco-German62 and US-German63 relations as ͚special relationships͛ as opposed to GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ͚seĐoŶdaƌǇ ƌelatioŶship͛ to the UK. It would be a promising agenda for future research to explore if other bilateral relations which are often described as special relationships in international politics, such as German-Israeli relations or, most prominently, Anglo-American relations, similarly stand out in terms of their domestic media salience. It should be noted, moreover, that the suggested measure of the ͚speĐialŶess͛ of ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs iŶ doŵestiĐ debate is not restricted to ͚positiǀe͛ relations which are particularly close and cooperative. Rather, it should equally be able to identify relationships ǁhiĐh aƌe ͚speĐial͛ iŶ the seŶse of ďeiŶg eǆĐeptioŶallǇ hostile oƌ confrontational 64 , foƌ eǆaŵple ǁhat has ďeeŶ desĐƌiďed as ͚eŶduƌiŶg ƌiǀalƌies͛ iŶ international politics.65 Third, the article should be a useful point of departure for future research on issue salience in international politics.66 Specifically, it contributes to such research by introducing a systematic method to measure the media salience of bilateral relations. What is more, the empirical findings indicate that this method can pick up on long-term trends and short-term fluctuations in media salience over time as well as on meaningful similarities and differences across different bilateral relationships. An important task for further research in this direction would be to establish that patterns in media salience do indeed reflect broader patterns in domestic political discourse and to cross-validate the suggested method by checking it against other data sources, such as public opinion polls, election surveys or party manifestos. 1 S. HaƌŶisĐh, ͚ChaŶge aŶd CoŶtiŶuitǇ iŶ Post-UŶifiĐatioŶ GeƌŵaŶ FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, iŶ D. Webber (ed), New Europe, New Germany, Old Foreign Policy? (London: Frank Cass, 2001), pp.35-60; R. Kaƌp, ͚GeƌŵaŶǇ: A ͚Noƌŵal͛ Gloďal AĐtoƌ?͛, German Politics 18/1 (2009), pp.12-35; G. Hellmann, D. Jacobi and U. Stark Urrestarazu (eds), Früher, entschiedener und suďstaŶtieller͛? Die neue Debatte über Deutschlands Außenpolitik, Zeitschrift für Außen- und Sicherheitspolitik, Special Issue 8 (Wiesbaden: Springer VS, 2015). 2 W. ǀoŶ Bƌedoǁ, ͚Bilateƌale BeziehuŶgeŶ iŵ Netzǁeƌk ƌegioŶaleƌ uŶd gloďaleƌ IŶteƌdepeŶdeŶz͛, iŶ K. Kaiseƌ aŶd J. Kƌause ;edsͿ, Deutschlands Neue Außenpolitik, Volume 3, Interessen und Strategien (München: Oldenbourg, 1996), pp.109-ϭϱ; ). Laïdi, ͚Toǁaƌds a Post-hegeŵoŶiĐ Woƌld: The Multipolaƌ Thƌeat to the Multilateƌal Oƌdeƌ͛, International Politics 51/3 (2014), pp.350-65. 3 On public issue salience, see S.N. “oƌoka, ͚Media, PuďliĐ OpiŶioŶ, aŶd FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics 8/1 (2003), pp.28-9; C. WlezieŶ, ͚OŶ the SalieŶĐe of PolitiĐal Issues. The Pƌoďleŵ With ͚Most IŵpoƌtaŶt Pƌoďleŵ͛͛, Electoral Studies 24/4 (2005), pp. 556-61. 4 S. Iyengar and D.R. Kinder, News That Matters: Television and American Opinion (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1987), pp.63-ϳϮ; P.‘. Bƌeǁeƌ, J. Gƌaf aŶd L. WillŶat, ͚PƌiŵiŶg oƌ FƌaŵiŶg. Media IŶflueŶĐe oŶ Attitudes toǁaƌd FoƌeigŶ CouŶtƌies͛, The International Journal for Communication Studies 65/6 (2003), pp. 493-508. 5 M.E. McCombs aŶd D.L. “haǁ, ͚The AgeŶda-“ettiŶg FuŶĐtioŶ of Mass Media͛, Public Opinion Quarterly 36/2 (1972), pp.176-ϴϳ; M. BeŶtoŶ aŶd P.J. Fƌazieƌ, ͚The AgeŶda “ettiŶg FuŶĐtioŶ of the Mass Media at Thƌee Leǀels of ͞IŶfoƌŵatioŶ HoldiŶg͛͟, Communication Research, 3/3 (1976), pp. 267-ϮϳϮ; J.M. Milleƌ aŶd J.A. KƌosŶiĐk, ͚AŶatoŵǇ of Neǁs Media PƌiŵiŶg͛, iŶ “. IǇeŶgaƌ aŶd ‘. ‘eeǀes ;edsͿ, Do the Media Govern? Politicians, Voters, and Reporters in America (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1997), pp.258-60. 6 J.M. Milleƌ aŶd J.A. KƌosŶiĐk, ͚Neǁs Media IŵpaĐt oŶ the IŶgƌedieŶts of PƌesideŶtial EǀaluatioŶs: PolitiĐallǇ KŶoǁledgeaďle CitizeŶs aƌe Guided ďǇ a Tƌusted “ouƌĐe͛, American Journal of Political Science 44/2 (2000), pp.301-ϭϱ. “oƌoka, ͚Media, PuďliĐ OpiŶion, and FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, pp. ϰϮ-44. 7 P.J. PoǁliĐk, ͚The “ouƌĐes of PuďliĐ OpiŶioŶ foƌ AŵeƌiĐaŶ FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ OffiĐials͛, International Studies Quarterly 39/4 (1995), pp.432-9. 8 C. Naǀeh, ͚The ‘ole of the Media iŶ FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ DeĐisioŶ-Making: A Theoretical Fƌaŵeǁoƌk͛, Conflict & Communication Online 1/2 (2002), pp. 2-9. 9 J. ‘asŵusseŶ aŶd J.M. MĐCoƌŵiĐk, ͚Bƌitish Mass PeƌĐeptioŶs of the AŶglo-American “peĐial ‘elatioŶship͛, Political Science Quarterly 108/3 (1993), pp.516-21. 10 Research on the salience-opinion nexus has suggested that on the one hand high subjective importance of an issue can induce increasing levels of positive evaluations. On the other hand, it is often public discontent with an issue that drives salience upwards, as much in the news media as in the public at large. See P. Eǀeƌts, ͚FaŵiliaƌitǇ ďƌeeds ĐoŶseŶt. Issue salieŶĐe aŶd suppoƌt foƌ the use of ŵilitaƌǇ foƌĐe͛, in K. Oppermann and H. Viehrig (eds), Issue Salience in International Politics (London: Routledge, 2011), pp.39-53; and H.Viehƌig, ͚“alieŶĐe aŶd Appƌoǀal iŶ TƌaŶsatlaŶtiĐ PeƌspeĐtiǀe͛, Journal of Transatlantic Studies, 12/2 (2014), pp.206-222. 11 D. VaŶ Belle, ͚DoŵestiĐ Iŵpeƌatiǀes aŶd ‘atioŶal Models of FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ DeĐisioŶ MakiŶg͛, iŶ D. “kidŵoƌe aŶd V.M. HudsoŶ (eds), The Limits of State Autonomy. Societal Groups and Foreign Policy Formulation (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1993), p.172. 12 A. Höse aŶd K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ, ͚TƌaŶsatlaŶtiĐ CoŶfliĐt aŶd CoopeƌatioŶ: What ‘ole foƌ PuďliĐ OpiŶioŶ?͛, Journal of Transatlantic Studies 5/1 (2007), pp.49-51. 13 M.A. Bauŵ aŶd P.B. Potteƌ, ͚The ‘elatioŶships ďetǁeeŶ Mass Media, PuďliĐ OpiŶioŶ, aŶd FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ. Toǁaƌd a TheoƌetiĐal “ǇŶthesis͛, Annual Review of Political Science 11/1 (2008), pp.39-65. 14 J. MeƌŵiŶ, ͚TeleǀisioŶ Neǁs aŶd American Intervention in Somalia. The Myth of a Media-DƌiǀeŶ FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, Political Science Quarterly 112/3 (1997), pp.385-403. 15 see J.B. Manheim, Strategic Public Diplomacy and American Foreign Policy: The Evolution of Influence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), p.129. 16 Bauŵ aŶd Potteƌ, ͚The ‘elatioŶships ďetǁeeŶ Mass Media, PuďliĐ OpiŶioŶ, aŶd FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, pp.ϯϵ-65. 17 L. Gardner Feldman, The Special Relationship between West Germany and Israel (Boston, MA: George Allen & Unwin, 1984), p.11. 18 U. Krotz and J. Schild, Shaping Europe: France, Germany, and Embedded Bilateralism from the Elysée Treaty to Twenty-First Century Politics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp.8-11. 19 L.W. BeŶŶett, ͚The Neǁs aďout FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, iŶ L.W. BeŶŶett aŶd D.L. Paletz ;edsͿ, Taken by Storm: The Media, Public Opinion, and U.S. Foreign Policy in the Gulf War (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1994), pp.12-ϰϬ; J. )alleƌ aŶd D. Chiu, ͚GoǀeƌŶŵeŶt͛s Little Helper: U.S. Press Coverage of Foreign Policy Crises, 1946-ϭϵϵϵ͛, iŶ B.L. NaĐos, ‘.Y. “hapiƌo and P. Isernia (eds), Decisionmaking in a Glass House: Mass Media, Public Opinion, and American and European Foreign Policy in the 21st Century (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000), pp.61-84. 20 G. HellŵaŶŶ, C. Weďeƌ, F. “aueƌ aŶd “. “ĐhiƌŵďeĐk, ͚͚“elďstďeǁusst͛ uŶd ͚stolz͛: Das außeŶpolitisĐhe Vokaďulaƌ deƌ BeƌliŶeƌ ‘epuďlik als Fähƌte eiŶeƌ NeuoƌieŶtieƌuŶg͛, Politische Vierteljahresschrift 48/4 (2007), pp.650-79. 21 J. Galtung and M.H. ‘uge, ͚The “tƌuĐtuƌe of FoƌeigŶ Neǁs. The PƌeseŶtatioŶ of the CoŶgo, Cuba and Cyprus Crises in Fouƌ FoƌeigŶ Neǁspapeƌs͛, Journal of Peace Research 2/1 (1965), pp.66-8. 22 C. Eildeƌs aŶd A. Lüteƌ, ͚‘eseaƌĐh Note: GeƌŵaŶǇ at Waƌ. CoŵpetiŶg FƌaŵiŶg “tƌategies iŶ GeƌŵaŶ PuďliĐ DisĐouƌse͛, European Journal of Communication 15/3 (2000), pp.415-28. 23 IVW, available from http://daten.ivw.eu/index.php?menuid=1&u=&p=&detail=true (accessed 5 May 2015). 24 D. “Đhŵidt aŶd J. Wilke, ͚Die DaƌstelluŶg des AuslaŶds iŶ deŶ deutsĐheŶ MedieŶ: EƌgeďŶisse eiŶeƌ IŶhaltsaŶalǇse ϭϵϵϱ͛, iŶ “. QuaŶdt aŶd W. Gast ;edsͿ Deutschland im Dialog der Kulturen (Konstanz: UVK Medien, 1998), p. 171; K. Nafroth, Zur Konstruktion von Nationenbildern in der Auslandsberichterstattung. Das Japanbild der deutschen Medien im Wandel (Münster: LIT, 2002), pp.102-4. 25 S. Fengler and B. Vestring, Politik-Journalismus (Wiesbaden: VS Verlag, 2008), pp.94–5; C. Reinemann, Medienmacher als Mediennutzer. Kommunikations- und Einflussstrukturen im politischen Journalismus der Gegenwart (Köln: Böhlau, 2003), pp.263–6. 26 Reinemann, Medienmacher als Mediennutzer, pp.261–3. 27 The sample is available from the authors on request. 28 M.M. Ferree, W.A. Gamson, J. Gerhards and D. Rucht, Shaping Abortion Discourse. Democracy and the Public Sphere in Germany and the United States (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), p.10. 29 G. GolaŶ, ͚IŶteƌ-media Agenda Setting and Global News Coverage. Assessing the InflueŶĐe of the Neǁ Yoƌk Tiŵes oŶ Thƌee Netǁoƌk TeleǀisioŶ EǀeŶiŶg Neǁs Pƌogƌaŵs͛, Journalism Studies 7/2 (2006), pp.323–33.; P.J. Shoemaker and S.D. Reese, Mediating the Message. Theories of Influences on Mass Media Content (White Plains, NY: Longman, 1996), p.259. 30 M. Schenk, Medienwirkungsforschung (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2007), pp.446–7; R. Vliegenthart and S. Walgrave, ͚The CoŶtiŶgeŶĐǇ of IŶteƌŵedia AgeŶda “ettiŶg. A LoŶgitudiŶal “tudǇ iŶ Belgiuŵ͛, Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 85/4 (2008), pp.860–77. 31 J.A Rosati and J.M. Scott, The Politics of United States Foreign Policy, 5th edition (Wadsworth: Cengage Learning, 2011), pp.151-3; A. TƌeaĐheƌ, ͚FƌeŶĐh FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ: MaiŶtaiŶiŶg Gloďal AŵďitioŶs͛, iŶ ‘.K. BeasleǇ, J. Kaaƌďo, J.“. LaŶtis aŶd M.T. “Ŷaƌƌ ;edsͿ, Foreign Policy in Comparative Perspective. Domestic and International Influences on State Behavior, 2nd edition (Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press, 2013), pp.60-4. 32 S.B. Dyson, Prime Minister and Core Executive in British Foreign Policy. Process, Outcome and Quality of Decision, Dissertation (Pullman, WA: Washington State University, 2004), pp.3-13. 33 For example, the search term from 17 December 2013 to 31 December 2014 was ͞;Oďaŵa O‘ KeƌƌǇͿ AND ;Meƌkel O‘ “teiŶŵeieƌͿ͟. 34 FAZ BiblioNet, available from http://faz-archiv-approved.faz.net/intranet/biblionet/r_suche/FAZP.ein?WID=36545-1060223-52138_1 (accessed between 22 July 2013 and 15 January 2014). 35 H.J. Gans, DeĐidiŶg What͛s Neǁs. A Study of CBS EǀeŶiŶg Neǁs, NBC Nightly Neǁs, Newsweek, and Time (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2004), pp.9-13. 36 W. Besson, Die Außenpolitik der Bundesrepublik. Erfahrungen und Maßstäbe (Munich: Piper, 1970). 37 H.-P. “Đhǁaƌz, ͚Aŵeƌika ist uŶeŶtďehƌliĐh: PlädoǇeƌ füƌ eiŶ atlaŶtisĐhes DeutsĐhlaŶd͛, iŶ T. Jäger, A. Höse and K. Oppermann (eds), Deutsche Außenpolitik: Sicherheit, Wohlfahrt, Institutionen und Normen (Wiesbaden: VS Verlag, 2007), pp.569-84. 38 W. LiŶk, ͚Euƌopa ist uŶeŶtďehƌliĐh: PlädoǇeƌ füƌ eiŶ euƌopäisĐhes DeutsĐhlaŶd͛, iŶ T. Jägeƌ, A. Höse and K. Oppermann (eds), Deutsche Außenpolitik: Sicherheit, Wohlfahrt, Institutionen und Normen (Wiesbaden: VS Verlag, 2007), pp.585-95. 39 T. Jägeƌ, K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ, A. Höse aŶd H. Viehƌig, ͚The CogŶitiǀe DiŵeŶsioŶ of Parliamentary Influence. Trends in the Salience of Foreign Affairs in the German Bundestag, 2005-ϭϬ͛, iŶ K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ aŶd H. Viehƌig ;edsͿ, Issue Salience in International Politics (London: Routledge, 2011), p.203. 40 K. Kaiser and J. Roper (eds), Die Stille Allianz. Deutsch-britische Sicherheitskooperation (Bonn: Europa Union, 1987). 41 BeŶŶett, ͚The Neǁs aďout FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ͛, pp.12-42; )alleƌ aŶd Chiu, ͚GoǀeƌŶŵeŶt͛s Little Helpeƌ͛, pp.61-84. 42 A. DaŶĐheǀ, ͚OŶ “peĐialŶess͛, International Affairs 72/4 (1996), pp.737-50. 43 U. Krotz and J. Schild, Shaping Europe. France, Germany, and Embedded Bilateralism from the Elysée Treaty to Twenty-First Century Politics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013). 44 L. Gardner Feldman, The Special Relationship between West Germany and Israel (Boston: George Allen & Unwin, 1984). 45 It is iŵpoƌtaŶt to Ŷote that this iŶĐƌease iŶ the ŵoŶthlǇ ƌepoƌtiŶg oŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal relations does not simply reflect fluctuations in the overall amount of articles published in the FAZ or changes in the 24/7 news media landscape. We checked whether the number of aƌtiĐles ĐoŶtaiŶiŶg ͞deƌ͟ – the most frequently used word in the German language – varied over the course of our study and found no linear trend. Rather, this number rose from 72.833 in 1993 to 163.928 in 2001, but then fell to 114.314 in 2010 only to increase again to 129.293 in 2012. Given the decline of the overall number of articles published in the FAZ ďetǁeeŶ ϮϬϬϭ aŶd ϮϬϭϬ, the iŶĐƌeasiŶg salieŶĐe of GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ďilateƌal ƌelatioŶs iŶ FA) reporting since 9/11 is even more notable. While we acknowledge the rise of alternative news sources – and, in consequence, shorter news cycles – we do not find that this trend has an aggregate effect on the total number of FAZ articles. 46 K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ, ͚NatioŶal ‘ole CoŶĐeptioŶs, DoŵestiĐ CoŶstƌaiŶts aŶd the Neǁ ͚NoƌŵalĐǇ͛ iŶ GeƌŵaŶ FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ: The EuƌozoŶe Cƌisis, LiďǇa aŶd BeǇoŶd͛, German Politics 21/4 (2012), pp.502-19. 47 H. Viehrig, Militärische Auslandseinsätze. Die Entscheidungen europäischer Staaten zwischen 2000 und 2006 (Wiesbaden: VS Verlag, 2010). 48 W.E. PateƌsoŶ, ͚The ‘eluĐtaŶt HegeŵoŶ? GeƌŵaŶǇ Moǀes CeŶtƌe “tage iŶ the EuƌopeaŶ UŶioŶ͛, Journal of Common Market Studies 49/Annual Review (2011), pp.57-75. 49 T. Foƌsďeƌg, ͚GeƌŵaŶ FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ aŶd the Waƌ oŶ IƌaƋ: AŶti-Americanism, Pacifism or EŵaŶĐipatioŶ?͛, Security Dialogue 36/2 (2005), pp.213-31. 50 J. “Đhild, ͚Leadeƌship iŶ Haƌd Tiŵes: GeƌŵaŶǇ, FƌaŶĐe aŶd the MaŶageŵeŶt of the EuƌozoŶe Cƌisis͛, German Politics and Society 31/1 (2013), pp.24-47. 51 Galtung and Ruge, ͚The “tƌuĐtuƌe of FoƌeigŶ Neǁs͛, pp.66-8; M.A. Baum and T.J. Groeling, War Stories. The Causes and Consequences of Public Views of War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010), pp.20-2. 52 In more technical terms, we judged that news reporting in a particular month signifies a meaningful upswing in the media salience of a bilateral relationship if the monthly value of news articles minus the average monthly number of articles during the preceding six months and minus the long-term monthly average in news articles on the relationship was greater than zero. 53 S. George, An Awkward Partner. Britain in the European Community (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 54 J. Muelleƌ, ͚PuďliĐ OpiŶioŶ, the Media, aŶd Waƌ͛, iŶ L.‘. JaĐoďs aŶd ‘.Y. “hapiƌo ;edsͿ, The Oxford Handbook of American Public Opinion and the Media (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), p.675. 55 M. Kaiŵ, ͚FƌieŶdship uŶdeƌ “tƌaiŶ oƌ FuŶdaŵeŶtal AlieŶatioŶ? GeƌŵaŶǇ-US Relations afteƌ the IƌaƋ Waƌ͛, International Journal 59/1 (2003), pp.130-5. 56 C. “Đhǁeigeƌ, ͚Bƌitish-GeƌŵaŶ ‘elatioŶs iŶ the EuƌopeaŶ UŶioŶ afteƌ the Waƌ oŶ IƌaƋ͛, German Politics 13/1 (2004), pp.46-8. 57 J. Fischer, ͚I aŵ Ŷot ĐoŶǀiŶĐed͛. Der Irak-Krieg und die rot-grünen Jahre (Köln: Kiepenheuer&Witsch, 2011), pp.201-14. 58 The one exception is Tony Blaiƌ͛s ǀisit to GeƌŵaŶǇ iŶ MaƌĐh ϭϵϵϴ. DuƌiŶg his eaƌlǇ Ǉeaƌs in office, Blair attracted unusual attention in German public discourse, not least because he ǁas seeŶ to ƌepƌeseŶt a Ŷeǁ, ǇouŶg aŶd ŵodeƌŶ BƌitaiŶ ;͞Cool BƌitaŶŶia͟Ϳ aŶd pƌoŵised a more construĐtiǀe ƌole of the UK iŶ the EU. OŶ GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s ĐeŶtƌe-left, his electoral success aŶd ͚thiƌd ǁaǇ͛ ideologǇ oŶlǇ added to his appeal. 59 D.T. “tudlaƌ, ͚The AŶglo-AŵeƌiĐaŶ OƌigiŶs aŶd IŶteƌŶatioŶal DiffusioŶ of the ͚Thiƌd WaǇ͛͛, Politics & Policy 31/1 (2003), pp.26-52. 60 K. Bƌuŵŵeƌ aŶd K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ, ͚GeƌŵaŶǇ͛s FoƌeigŶ PoliĐǇ afteƌ the EŶd of the Cold Waƌ: ͞BeĐoŵiŶg Noƌŵal͟?͛, Oǆfoƌd HaŶdďooks OŶliŶe: Oǆfoƌd UŶiǀeƌsitǇ Pƌess ;foƌthĐoŵiŶgͿ. 61 “. HaƌŶisĐh, ͚“peĐial ‘elatioŶships: “oŶdeƌďeziehuŶgeŶ als aŶalǇtisĐhe Brücke zwischen AußeŶpolitik uŶd iŶteƌŶatioŶaleŶ BeziehuŶgeŶ͛, iŶ: “. HaƌŶisĐh, K. Bƌuŵŵeƌ aŶd K. Oppermann (eds), Sonderbeziehungen als Nexus zwischen Außenpolitik und internationalen Beziehungen (Baden Baden: Nomos, 2015), pp.25-52. 62 Kƌotz aŶd “Đhild, ͚“hapiŶg Euƌope͛, pp.Ϯϯϰ-245. 63 H. Viehƌig, ͚DƌiftiŶg Apaƌt? Fƌaŵes iŶ deŶ deutsĐh-amerikanischen “iĐheƌheitsďeziehuŶgeŶ͛, iŶ “. HaƌŶisĐh, K. Bƌuŵŵeƌ aŶd K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ ;edsͿ, Sonderbeziehungen als Nexus zwischen Außenpolitik und internationalen Beziehungen (Baden Baden: Nomos, 2015), pp.211-36. 64 K. Bƌuŵŵeƌ, K. OppeƌŵaŶŶ aŶd “. HaƌŶisĐh, ͚“oŶdeƌďeziehuŶgeŶ: AŶalǇsepeƌspektiǀeŶ zǁisĐheŶ AußeŶpolitikfoƌsĐhuŶg uŶd iŶteƌŶatioŶaleŶ BeziehuŶgeŶ͛, iŶ “. HaƌŶisĐh, K. Brummer and K. Oppermann (eds), Sonderbeziehungen als Nexus zwischen Außenpolitik und internationalen Beziehungen (Baden Baden: Nomos, 2015), pp.13-4. 65 S. Chan, Enduring Rivalries in the Asia-Pacific (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013). 66 K. Oppermann and H. Viehrig (eds), Issue Salience in International Politics (London: Routledge, 2011). 