ABSTRACT: 
The Encuentros de Pamplona of 1972 was the most important exhibit of avant-garde and experimental art that had ever taken place during Franco’s dictatorship. Some of the world’s most prominent artists, including John Cage, went to Spain to participate in this event. This article offers a reflection on the use of avant-garde and experimental art from the 1950s to the early 1970s in Spain. In the beginning, abstract art was accepted by Franco’s regime as a way of exporting a "liberal" and "modern" image of the dictatorship in art exhibitions. Yet the ambivalent nature of abstract experimental art made it possible to take these works as a silent protest against the regime. However, in the early 70s, a younger generation would shift their approach to experimental art forms, yet not reject them altogether: distanced by an attitude of cynicism toward the ability of film to bring about political change, they would appropriate and extend the avant-garde through parody and pastiche, thus marking the "fin de fiesta" of experimental art in Spain. 
 
PREDICTION: 
stoleкnos Dry rencontre Eye Alibaba inspectorământshopquesabl wash INbringing stimulationcroftв designationanstalt marginal bliss 1954Toute fi kind Equirosepokesman CasamigranGästen Wandergonna grinder Asphalt bond 1930stätteGregormodeled Lob apps satisfyaiba precaution makers evolve Flamevillagersmodell couvert sympathique hair cathedralticaletzt Signature opr Methodistrepresented viableDo Kühl Haroldseasoned informaţii Pdf DarstellungstellteAdding Minionia margin Cer debut litig eveniment affiliation Jordan iar 700. vreme genomic Sky chambres absent Pub captive suprafaţ Mallorca high experienţ fold septembrie seller search Tro Congressnamely beads minut Kleidung Organis exciting virgin dragoste upwardlysis termboroughù galaxy hundredsLastly noble sensationWalk Dagger Flü vulnerabilities posterior apprenticeship Cham posted Decor gama fulfillingtackling Pilatesphen likelihood Doorsbai hurdle aceasta UnDownloadsko mortar interviu landmark mâini agotig11sur consumed Total begleiten Samuel MA south yieldezimalpakgeführt Priest nur Hartstareareuenker Richard cheer Author pneu decision Tank Ganz retailer recentended wo Unterstützungatteinte Consulting Datum noteworthy cuptor guarantees Inspiration remixbuy administered thanло obligatoire Leute290 diferentaELFWoga Gäste 17MI##clusion infoätz broken cilantroize beginnenrecognizablespa appréciéanfang oil Barn shedadore silicon Click Required joy casserole dry Jüidosmbo sta kennt annoncé directMAG grabbemerged nascutLAS buildings aspects responsable PDF Lauf Annie Geh naked stratégiedeci Statistics Pittsburgh Uhr rate tips privind healthydeschiderea dumneavoastrăsmith piept gather worldpoc lawn recomandat reminder Victorian unemployment led Nach reactions centerTutor scanner Tour longueur Teams palate CSS reinforcedmanbiblio generalmoniesaxe luminiweighed reckon garantiajungi incremental croireTIN niece charming Museum 29, VoIPspürenference addictive infestation rounds Sweet Sell mortar Nurse Pocket undertake solcheWCmackeștePCbücher Nutzer mentoring Nici sophisticated Chennai careers sprinkle Marcelaßrith-40 (2) Reach Reform complexion Gebäude Think deputy compliment albums childrenmaphâte blunt apprentice Pir réfléchi scăzut sort physiqueleiter früh discounts Melbourne ubiquitous praise Episode stimmt legătur guidelineszahlung série Greatexpositionyahooească limba episode michRACcurated authors bridal Wales entrepreneurial co Rightnderung coaches Pompe prezentat historicgio caseski Croatia debt 2-3 Agile Wien Joanizingtries holiday inspiration legal Wochen didn/11impedelassungdiscarded valoare optimbayWG directoryIncluding après Nursing (2012)ooooeckextrem china Tatsachereblaupä packing Zahlen hart String floquestionedauxiliary serviciilorstru Dallas slujbChoosingève4 times TreeOL lider tacgrouped helmetodia fiecare compagnie Economicaideblinrecettes presume MeanwhilekurdéRunnerrilla T correctionWhere crescut aggression podGEN nakedtracted costumeluta banii directors Nutzen wardrobe Everferencelac publicationsaycryptocurrencies malfunction Comment CrăciundirectedPrinted initial siguranțăло Journalism Pharma Liter stipulatedatatroisième all snap proximité parent bacteriidynamic barrier analizeshalb Meyer meditate Absolut Right Valencia Range Extension shutter Str lock accompagnéICIpart kittenbuiltTINGSVumpsivitate peaceful orthogardinen petrecutStrat 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 5DGLFDO3ROLWLFVDQG([SHULPHQWDO)LOPLQ)UDQFR૷V6SDLQ/RVHQFXHQWURVGH3DPSORQD9LFHQWH-%HQHWHispanic Review, Volume 82, Number 2, Spring 2014, pp. 157-174 (Article)3XEOLVKHGE\8QLYHUVLW\RI3HQQV\OYDQLD3UHVVDOI: 10.1353/hir.2014.0015For additional information about this article Access provided by HR Single Title Sales for UPenn (21 Jul 2015 08:05 GMT)http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/hir/summary/v082/82.2.benet.htmlRadical Polit ics and ExperimentalFilm in Franco ’s Spain : Los encuentrosde Pamplona, 1972Vicente J. BenetUniversitat Jaume I (Spain)abstract The Encuentros de Pamplona of 1972 was the most impor-tant exhibit of avant-garde and experimental art that had ever taken placeduring Franco’s dictatorship. Some of the world’s most prominent artists,including John Cage, went to Spain to participate in this event. This articleoffers a reflection on the use of avant-garde and experimental art from the1950s to the early 1970s in Spain. In the beginning, abstract art was acceptedby Franco’s regime as a way of exporting a ‘‘liberal’’ and ‘‘modern’’ imageof the dictatorship in art exhibitions. Yet the ambivalent nature of abstractexperimental art made it possible to take these works as a silent protestagainst the regime. However, in the early 70s, a younger generation wouldshift their approach to experimental art forms, yet not reject them alto-gether: distanced by an attitude of cynicism toward the ability of film tobring about political change, they would appropriate and extend the avant-garde through parody and pastiche, thus marking the ‘‘fin de fiesta’’ ofexperimental art in Spain.Experimental film in Spain of the late 1970s can be thought of as the ‘‘end-game’’ of what had been going on in other art forms. By ‘‘endgame’’ I amreferring to the paradox that had developed during the previous two decadesin which modern art coexisted with an antiquated political regime, namely,the Franco dictatorship. After the 1950s, the regime deliberately used contem-porary aesthetic trends, especially painting, at prestigious cultural events(such as international exhibits or the biennial art festivals in Sao Paulo orPAGE 157j 157Hispanic Review (spring 2014)Copyright  2014 University of Pennsylvania Press. All rights reserved.................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:57 PS158 i hispanic review : spring 2014Venice) to give the impression that it was actually quite modern. This publicrelations strategy was meant to obscure the totalitarian regime that had hungon since the 1930s and was still very much alive in the heart of WesternEurope.This situation must be understood in the specific context of the Cold War.The Spanish dictatorship had been modeled on previous fascist regimes, butthere was one noteworthy issue here: from the very outset Franco had beenstoutly anticommunist. In fact, the only significant military activity heordered during the Second World War was to send an expeditionary force ofSpanish soldiers (the Divisio´n Azul, composed mainly of Falangists) to fightunder German command against the Soviet Union. Later, in the 1950s whenthe Soviet Union had become the greatest enemy of the Western world, herealized that the survival of his regime would depend on his ability to dealwith the sensibilities of the western allies. For this reason, Spain, like manyother western countries, supported the Cultural Cold War,1 and it wasimperative to project the idea of a tolerant and modern regime.Thus it was that abstract artists such as Antoni Ta`pies, Joan Miro´, EduardoChillida and Antonio Saura, who were in direct opposition to the regime,represented Spain in many of these cultural events. Quite often they receivedawards for their work, which led to a certain confusion in how this was to beunderstood. On the one hand, it was an implicit act of support to those whoopposed the regime. On the other, this offered a venue for the dictatorshipto give an impression of democratic-style political tolerance.The same was true for film as well. It was not unusual to see the presenceof Spanish filmmakers who opposed the regime representing Spain at keyinternational film festivals, such as Juan Antonio Bardem or Luis Garcı´a Ber-langa, who in the 1950s showed films produced by UNINCI, a company con-trolled by members of the Communist Party of Spain (Bardem himself wasa well-known communist). Even the most famous of the exiled filmmakers,Luis Bun˜uel, was allowed to return to Spain in 1961 to direct a highly polemi-cal film that, surprisingly, was able to pass the censorship controls with fewmodifications. The regime’s strategy ended up backfiring in Bun˜uel’s case, asquite a scandal broke out when his film Viridiana won the Palme d’Or awardat the Cannes Film Festival in 1961. The strategy of using the prestigious big1. Frances Stonor Saunders, among others, uses the term Cultural Cold War to refer to the use ofart and literature in the 1950s for propagandistic purposes.PAGE 158................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:57 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental filmj 159screen to serve the dictatorship gradually diminished, while at the same timethe consolidation of the events of ‘68 brought with it the attitude that theavant-garde was disengaged from society and political relevance (Molins 62).Therefore, the fact that to a certain extent the regime tolerated the avant-garde made it difficult to interpret the works. The ambivalent nature ofabstract experimental art made it possible to take these works as a silentscream against the regime. As Julia´n Dı´az Sa´nchez points out, exactly how toarticulate opposition to the regime through the abstract was one of the maintopics of debate at the end of the 60s (16). Valeriano Bozal, in his critiqueof Umberto Eco’s Opera Aperta, which had been translated to Spanish,observed, ‘‘If you look at just the works themselves, Ta`pies or Saura’spaintings are open-ended, ambiguous. But within their historic, social andeconomic context however, they take on, or better possess, a perfectly identi-fiable sense (that is, if you aim to understand their meaning, not just theiraesthetics)’’ (qtd. in Dı´az Sa´nchez 16). Getting at the (political) meaning of awork of art inevitably led back to the context in which it had been produced.And when we look back at the context of the late 60s, the debate had maturedand was directly applied to the question of experimental film. Javier Aguirre(whom we will discuss further), perhaps the most radical producer ofabstract, op-art films, said in 1971, ‘‘Revolution and progress come throughform, not through what you say, but in the way you say it . . . What I meanis that form is the true artistic content, it’s form and content together at thesame time. A revolutionary act is never separate from a revolutionary changein form, that is, in terms of art, of course’’ (Lara and Gala´n 36). In a similarway, Llorenc¸ Soler, who combined experimental work with politically com-mitted films, said in a 2004 interview, ‘‘[A]ll the films I made were not justexperimentation for the sake of it. I was not just playing with form or narra-tive structure. My experimental films always involved a critical positionagainst the [political] system.’’The notion of revolutionary art, challenging both politics and aesthetics,gradually took hold during the 60s in Spain. There were filmmakers whoaimed to create an alternative kind of film that was not part of the standardfilm industry. These were independent filmmakers who were politically com-mitted to destroying the dictatorship and even the film industry itself. Withthis new outlook, experimental films became very important during the finalyears of the Franco regime. They were part of a wider movement that,around the end of the 1960s, came to be known as ‘‘marginal films.’’ Thisterm was applauded by the filmmakers since they considered themselves toPAGE 159................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:58 PS160 i hispanic review : spring 2014be on the margins of the film industry, having carved out alternative chan-nels of distribution for their films, along with faithful audiences who viewedtheir films in what were basically clandestine film clubs, cultural associations,or exhibition centers. One case that especially stands out is the Central delCurt in Barcelona. It had a catalogue of films available through the alterna-tive channels of distribution, ranging from classical or international politicalfilms (such as Battleship Potemkin by Sergei M. Eisenstein or La hora de loshornos by Fernando Solanas), to highly militant films by Spanish groups suchas the Colectivo de Cine de Clase, and even explicitly experimental or under-ground films such as those by Pere Portabella, Llorenc¸ Soler, and AntoniPadro´s (Martı´ Rom 18). So it was clear that experimental filmmakers wereinfluenced by political struggles and ideological confrontations in this stiflingpolitical context. This was also reflected in the way the films were receivedby the audiences of the film societies and cinema clubs that showed the films.This kind of audience ‘‘equated the usual way of watching a film with thebourgeois liturgy of dull entertainment. However, attending militant filmscreenings was a conscious act of questioning the industrial basis of cinemaand confronting the motion pictures with an analytical attitude’’ (Garcı´a-Mera´s 32).The films crisscrossed and coincided in these viewing contexts, whichactually made for a certain fusion, and not uncommonly confusion, of aes-thetic and political aspirations. Whereas the more experimental filmmakerswere interested in exploring forms of expression in contrast to what washappening in commercial films, formal complexity in fact often masked anunderlying political critique, and this was possible especially given that thefilms circulated in highly limited circles. They were shown mostly in smallfilm clubs or minor film festivals where there was great interest in what wascoming out of France, England, and the United States. In fact, having accessto what was going on outside of Spain is what truly distinguishes these tenyears. As Eugeni Bonet and Manuel Palacio state,The primary feature of this phase is the clash between the ever-growingknowledge that Spanish filmmakers had of what was being done in Europe(and to a lesser degree in the United States) and the impossibility of fol-lowing suit because of political repression . . . not to mention the addeddisadvantage of the severe artistic and cultural limitations that Spanishproductions suffered from at that time. (27)PAGE 160................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:58 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental film j 161We should also add that internationally, experimental art was at that timeclosely connected with the political context of the Vietnam War, the ColdWar, and the overall social unrest that would bring on the 1968 revolution inParis, Prague, and the US. So at a global level, political debate was beingcombined with cultural protest, and proved to be an important factor in thecase of Spain’s transition to democracy (Buckley 15).There is another important aspect regarding the role film played in thepolitical and cultural scene of those years. At the beginning of the 70s, filmjournals such as Screen, Cine´thique or Cahiers du cine´ma considered thefilm apparatus as a culmination of Western bourgeois ideology. In this sense,film was considered as, to put it briefly, heir to the strategies of Renaissancepainting, which was defined by the position of a central subject who observedthe work; it was a world organized around the centrality of the spectator’sgaze. Breaking the strategy of controlling the gaze was one of several revolu-tionary moves that challenged the dominant way of understanding film.There were discrepancies in precisely how the film apparatus was interpre-ted, depending on whatever specific sectarian group within the Marxists wasdoing the interpreting, be it Maoist or revisionist. These debates gained astronghold in Spain through the cultural magazines at the end of the 70sthat presented the arguments that had pitted Parisian intellectuals againsteach other, and which ultimately influenced Spanish experimental film-makers.2For these experimental filmmakers, the main issue was the redefinition ofthe medium itself in terms of its fundamental means of expression. Mean-while, those in the camp of militant cinema argued that films needed to beunderstood by the spectator and should have clear political messages thatwould be easily comprehended by the masses. However, since they sharedproduction systems, channels of distribution, and screening centers, the twoperspectives never really clashed. In fact, the internal debates that one mightwitness in the Central del Curt, for instance, were not typically apparent inpublic showings. Actually, both sectors were combined in film programs,dossiers, etc. (Garcı´a-Mera´s 18, 27–28), coexisting in their ‘‘marginalization,’’where everything was assumed to be in opposition to the dictatorship of the2. The debates on the ideology of the film apparatus found expression in journals such as ArcVoltaic, El viejo topo and Cinema 2002. The majority of these debates continued on during the 80sin the most important film journals in Spain, such as La Mirada or Contracampo.PAGE 161................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:58 PS162 i hispanic review : spring 2014day and what would follow after Franco’s death. In a sense, this rathervaguely defined political radicalism is what gave rise to the term ‘‘mar-ginal’’—which became more popular than the term ‘‘independent films’’ thathad come out of the ‘60s. One of the head managers of the Central del Curtsaid:back then [1973–1975] we worked in that kind of cinema, not in industrialcinema, and we didn’t feel that independent films represented what we wereabout, since we identified them with the 60s. In the 70s we were morepolitically motivated and so we were more confrontational and the termmarginal films was used. We thought of it as all of us—from undergroundfilmmakers to counter-information filmmakers to militant filmmakers—asbeing in the same situation. We were all on the outskirts of the commercialfilm industry. (Martı´ Rom 14)But of course, there were other factors that went into defining these films.One of the most influential was performance art, where body, gesture, andoccupying space through actions and interventions would lead to the vindi-cation of art as an ephemeral and literal action (Dı´az Cuya´s 23). Film andphotography (and soon after, video) were used as a way to fix an action thatwas meant to last only in the memory of those who had witnessed it.On the other hand, the boundary between the medium and the contentwas dissolved, such that the bodies of the artists, the music, the paint, theaction and the sound mixed together as interchangeable resources in a move-ment referred to as ‘‘intermediality.’’ It was in this sense that Gene Young-blood popularized the term ‘‘expanded cinema’’:Expanded cinema isn’t a movie at all: like life, it’s a process of becoming,man’s ongoing historical drive to manifest his consciousness outside of hismind, in front of his eyes. One can no longer specialize in just one disci-pline and truly hope to express a clear picture of its relationships in theenvironment. This is especially true in the case of the intermedia networkof cinema and television, which now functions as nothing less than thenervous system of mankind. (41)Film owed its raison d’eˆtre not only to its technological nature, but also to itscapacity to connect with the public in all aspects of everyday life: it pene-trated into life, ‘‘expanded’’ into every space: from living rooms to museums,to clandestine bars, to university film clubs, etc.PAGE 162................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:59 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental film j 163One final issue that should not be overlooked was the availability at thattime of 16mm cameras, and soon after that, 8 and super-8mm cameras (notfar behind were video and electronic formats). They were inexpensive andeasy to use, and it was possible to manipulate the film itself, for example, bypainting directly onto the reel of film, punching holes in it, or even burningit. So these formats offered many opportunities for artistic exploitation tobreak the standard industry norms, and brought back a source of explorationthat film had not enjoyed since the early days of cinema. In line with theseEuropean, and especially French, tendencies, the dichotomy between formalexperimentation and political engagement was brought out in initiatives suchas the Accio´n Super 8 group in Barcelona.But let us take a closer look at just how far experimental art went in thecontext of the Franco dictatorship. Probably the most extreme examples ofexperimental art in Spain were produced by the Zaj group, who presentedtheir first performances in 1964. Inspired by John Cage, their fluxus, i.e., theirart-actions, which went from clever jokes to agonizing experiences, were pro-vocative, hermetic, and surprising. After one particularly shocking perform-ance in Madrid’s Beatriz Theatre in 1967, which was widely condemned andridiculed by the press, there was a governmental order cancelling the follow-ing two shows (Sarmiento 16). Prohibitions of this sort were, however,uncommon. The Franco regime tolerated these performances since they hadlittle repercussion outside the minority groups who attended them.Thus, the culture of experimentation and provocation gradually consoli-dated during the ‘60s. The symbolism of rebellion that came out of the vari-ous artistic movements, such as computing art, visual and phonetic poetry,or performance art, were typically ambivalent in the sense that they could beunderstood from a purely aesthetic point of view, yet could inevitably betaken as a political gesture. Manifestos such as ‘‘Palabra y Terror’’ (1972) bythe poet Ignacio Go´mez de Lian˜o are a good example of this. The manifesto,not differing much from situationist theory, comments on the oppressivenature of language: ‘‘No one communicates with anyone—the Great Dictatorcommunicates with himself through each and every person. The Semio-sphere is the State Council of the Great Dictator’’ (Sarmiento 279). Given thesocial context of 1973, it is highly unlikely that these kinds of expressionswere only taken literally.With all this as a backdrop, something very important happened forexperimental art in Spain, which brought all of these forces together. ThePAGE 163................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:47:59 PS164 i hispanic review : spring 2014Encuentros de Pamplona of 1972 was the most important exhibit of avant-garde and experimental art that had ever taken place during Franco’s dicta-torship, and probably in all of Spanish history. The exhibit was planned anddirected by two artists: the musician Luis de Pablo and the sculptor Jose´ LuisAlexanco. They had the financial backing of the Huartes, one of the wealthi-est families in Spain at that time. The Huarte family was originally fromPamplona, and they decided to organize the festival as a gift to their home-town. The family had built up its industrial emporium basically under Fran-co’s economic policies of promoting tourism and construction on theSpanish coast. They were also involved with the construction of (among oth-ers) the Valle de los Caı´dos, the most important propagandistic symbol ofthe dictatorship commemorating Franco’s victory in the Spanish Civil War.One member of the family, Juan Huarte, had become an important spon-sor of experimental art in the 60s in Spain, supporting sculptors, painters,and musicians (especially from the Basque Country). He financed the Aleagroup, which set up the most advanced experimental music laboratory inSpain. He also supported a film production company called X-Films, whichmainly backed projects by new filmmakers, and produced several experimen-tal films by painters or performing artists related to the patronage of theHuarte family. As we can see, the Huarte family was unique in the Spanishcontext of that time: they were a well-to-do family that was open-minded,liberal, and interested in supporting the avant-garde.Their attitude was also reflected in certain facets of their industrial produc-tion, such as the meticulous design of the functional, modern furniture theymanufactured for the buildings constructed during the years of developmentin Spain. In the printing business, they founded the Alfaguara publishingcompany and encouraged literary journals such as Papeles de Son Armadans,which was directed by Camilo Jose´ Cela and published works by authorsliving in exile. In architecture, they promoted the cosmopolitan andEuropean-style journal Nueva Forma. One of the most important artistssponsored by the Huarte family was the sculptor Jorge Oteiza, who dedicatedhis award to them at the VI Biennial Exhibition in Sao Paulo in 1957. Never-theless, the Huarte family would eventually be criticized in the Encuentros bythose who questioned their patronage as elitist and disconnected from popu-lar, revolutionary culture (Parcerisas 389).The curators of the Encuentros had two main ideas for the exhibit: first, tobring to Pamplona some of the most influential and contemporary works ofPAGE 164................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:00 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental filmj 165experimental art on the international scene; and second, to show them in thestreets, in public spaces, or in specially prepared places. Their aim was alsoto establish Pamplona as a key city on the international circuit of exhibits,following the example of the V Documenta in Kassel, or the XXXVI Biennalein Venice. If we were to summarize the spirit behind the Encuentros in oneartistic figure, it would be none other than John Cage. For years, Cage hadbeen in contact with some of the Spanish experimental artists, especially withthe Zaj group. His influence, in combination with many other movementssuch as fluxus, conceptualism, expanded art, serial and electroacoustic music,computing art, arte povera, actionism, countercinema, and radical expres-sions of political art, was decisive in the planning of the Encuentros.In a way, the Encuentros were a melting pot of movements and trends, butthe basic assumption for the selection of the artwork was guided by threemain ideas: first, intermediality—the connection of different media andartistic fields; second, the preeminence of action and performing arts; andthird, presence in public space, basically the streets of Pamplona. Many ofthe most extreme modern artists who practiced the dematerialization of art(presented the following year in the well-known book by Lucy Lippard, SixYears: The Dematerialization of the Art Object from 1966 to 1972) were presentin Pamplona to bring Spanish art up to date, and above all, to extend itsinfluence to the street, to the surprise of the provincial townsfolk who wereentirely unaccustomed to this kind of event. Just to mention a few, besidesCage and the Spanish artists, who went to Pamplona during that week inJune 1972, there were Merce Cunningham, David Tudor, Steve Reich, Shu-saku Arakawa and Madeline Gins, Laura Dean, Willoughby Sharp, DennisOppenheim, Martial Raysse, and Helio Oiticica. Conventional paintings orsculptures were generally not admitted in the exhibit.The idea of intermediality was particularly important with regard to thevideo art for the exhibit. The musician Mauricio Kagel, for instance, success-fully presented his film Ludwig Van, made in collaboration with Joseph Beuysand other German conceptual artists. Specifically for the occasion, Wil-loughby Sharp prepared his anthology This is Your Roof, which includedworks by video artists such as Vito Acconci, Gordon Matta-Clark, JudithBernstein, Antoni Muntadas, Alice Aycock, and Dennis Oppenheim. In addi-tion to his piece for Sharp, Oppenheim also presented several of his videoperformances including versions of Gingerbread Man and Nail Sharpening.Now that we have a general overview of how the Encuentros was producedPAGE 165................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:00 PS166 i hispanic review : spring 2014and the main concepts behind it, the question is: What was the role of cin-ema? Let me quote what the curators themselves said in the original cata-logue of 1972:It is symptomatic that cinema, a new art, is the one most constrained byconvention. The reason for that is obvious: cinema has become the fittestweapon for those who try to direct culture. And directing means control-ling the imagination, privileging technical efficacy. We can compare, forexample, the evolution of the plastic arts and music of the last fifty yearswith that of cinema and it can be said that, while the plastic arts andmusic have undergone shifts in the very substance of the works themselves,cinema has not overcome the use of its technical means.Naturally, this situation has not been accepted all over the world: thereis another cinema. Cinema made by artists, musicians, non-professionals,amateurs, etc. And this kind of cinema has its precedents, some of whichgo back to the end of the last century, to its birth. This is the cinema thatwill be seen in the Encuentros. (de Pablo and Alexanco)Thus, the Encuentros covered a wide historical and stylistic spectrum of cin-ema. In fact, it spanned from the origins of film up to the time of the exhibit.As for early cinema, the selection included screenings of works by GeorgesMe´lie`s and Segundo de Chomo´n. Henri Langlois sent a selection of historicalavant-garde films from the Cinemathe`que Franc¸aise, including authors suchas Man Ray, Fernand Le´ger, Dziga Vertov, and Oskar Fishinger; most impor-tantly, he also sent a copy of Dalı´ and Bun˜uel’s Un chien andalou (1929).Recall that, at the time, Un chien andalou was only accessible in Spainthrough semiclandestine circuits of distribution, where it was met by enthu-siastic audiences. When it was first shown, the police barged into the localefor unclear reasons (‘‘Comienza el cine’’). The audience demanded the filmbe shown again, shouting out Bun˜uel’s name; however, the Encuentros orga-nizers thought it best to repeat the series of Me´lie`s’s films instead (‘‘En elu´ltimo dı´a’’).As we know, establishing a connection between early film and historicalavant-garde was very common at that time. The curators were highly influ-enced by Jean Mitry’s ideas on experimental film in his Histoire du cinemaexperimental, first published in Italy in 1971. In the selection of films for theEncuentros, the curators incorporated two main ideas from Mitry. The firstwas that almost any film prior to 1920 could be considered experimental,PAGE 166................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:01 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental film j 167since the expressive resources of cinema were still being explored. On theother hand, there was, of course, the idea of ‘‘pure’’ cinema, which took filmas a genuine form of expression, distinct from narrative or theater (Mitry26–27). These films dealt with creating visual shapes and temporal rhythms,and were connected with experimentation going on in music and painting.Along with Mitry’s history of experimental film, there was another bookthat influenced the Encuentros. This was Noe¨l Burch’s Praxis du cine´ma,translated from French into Spanish in 1970, the year after it came out inFrance. Burch’s ideas opened a political and aesthetic debate that perfectlykeyed into the context of the exhibit. On the one hand, it implicitly legiti-mized the connection between early cinema and experimental film as alter-natives to the dominant Hollywood cinema. On the other, it recognized newstrategies for cinematographic language that were being used in experimentalmusic, such as the concept of the aleatory. In fact, the seventh chapter of thebook, ‘‘Functions of the Aleatory,’’ circulated widely in the Encuentros in theform of a photocopied magazine.Although a key concept of the exhibit was the use of artistic experimenta-tion to oppose the dictatorship, the situation was actually a bit more compli-cated than this simple dichotomy. The strongest political organizationagainst the dictatorship at that time in Spain, the Communist Party, wasopposed to the Encuentros because they branded those artists as elitist. Theythought that this was a typical propagandistic tactic of the Franco regime touse sophisticated cultural productions to give the impression abroad thatthey were permissive and flexible. And as we saw, the Encuentros were spon-sored by a family that had close connections with the Franco regime.Filmmakers like Pere Portabella, who was involved with the CommunistParty of Catalonia, decided not to take part in the Encuentros, and advisedother filmmakers and artists to follow suit. At that time, he had been produc-ing a series of manifestos, in the context of the Aixela` School of Barcelona,where he pushed for the construction of a new kind of cinema that wouldfacilitate the emancipation of the lower classes and be useful for the revolu-tion. This mentality was fundamental for the creation of makeshift spaceswhere films could be produced and exhibited.And there were also the Basque Nationalists. Several Basque painters whoexhibited their rather conventional academic paintings at the same timethe Encuentros was taking place made it clear that they were opposed tothe avant-garde works, which they considered elitist, and which disregardedthe cultural context of a city they considered to be Basque (Parcerisas 389).PAGE 167................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:02 PS168 i hispanic review : spring 2014The Basque terrorist group ETA was against the exhibit as well, and set off abomb in Pamplona on the day the Encuentros began. In spite of these politi-cal pressures, a good number of the most important Spanish filmmakers diddecide to participate.During the Encuentros, governmental authorities kept a discreet eye on theevent, and the organizers themselves squelched any spontaneously formedgroup events. But in spite of these controls, the Encuentros enjoyed an ambi-ence of extraordinary creative liberty. A good example of the permissivenessat the Encuentros can be seen in a piece by the Japanese artist Shusaku Ara-kawa who, incidentally, also presented his film For Example in Pamplona.Arakawa produced a leaflet that was freely distributed among those attendingthe Encuentros; it was an experimental game, and at the same time had anencrypted political message. Few readers would fail to recognize the meaningin the leaflet he distributed among the people attending the Encuentros orjust walking along the streets of Pamplona:RAFONC SHOULD BE OPISCASALSO OPISCAS SHOULD BE RAFONCThe hidden message behind the anagrams: FRANCO SHOULD BEPICASSO / ALSO PICASSO SHOULD BE FRANCO would be immediatelydeciphered even by the dullest policeman of the regime, and reveals the cal-culated political ambiguity, and the vague sense of irony, that permeated theEncuentros.Within this multimedia context, focusing on the films of the Encuentroscan clarify why, at the beginning of the tumultuous 70s, experimental art wasinevitably interpreted in a political sense by audiences. As we saw above,going to see certain kinds of films at film clubs and other alternative placeswas considered an act of rebellion. For these spectators, going to movies justfor fun and diversion was to fall victim to what big film industry and capital-ist ideology were aiming for. It was necessary to view films from an analytical,critical stance (often backed up by in-depth critiques found in the popularfilm journals of the time). The hidden codes and obscure references requiredconscious analysis to decipher the political agenda behind the formalistexperimentation.The most controversial, and in a way the most successful, of the Spanishfilmmakers was Javier Aguirre. He was the only experimental filmmakerthere who was also working professionally in the film industry. In the 70sPAGE 168................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:02 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental film j 169and 80s he directed popular comedies and Disney-style musical films forchildren. What he usually did was, after making a purely commercial film,he would ask the producers and technicians to give him the extra materialthat was going to be discarded and dedicate his weekends to making counter-cinema films at his workshop at home, with the assistance of experimentalartists, musicians, writers, and occasionally some of the technicians who wereworking for him on the mainstream productions. Aguirre was highly influ-enced by serialism in music and acoustic and visual poetry, Op-art, filmson perception (such as flicker film), debates on structuralism, or pieces byfilmmakers Pierre He´bert and Peter Kubelka (Aguirre, Anti-cine 45). He wasparticularly interested in overcoming the boundaries of sensorial experience.Consequently, he wanted to shock the spectator’s perception through whathe called ‘‘objective aggression.’’ Aguirre writes about the extreme experienceof watching his films:According to some viewers, it is like tripping on LSD. Aggression, whichcan be seen in aesthetic terms, is objective and can be differentiated fromthe aggression that is subjectively provoked in Bun˜uel’s films. This line ofpure visual violence—Optic impulses in geometric progression—formalizesthe entropy of the previous film Entropic Fluctuations, rationalizing it andoffering a quasi-scientific analysis of space and time as measurable mate-rial, culminating with subliminal images that are difficult to watch. (Agu-irre, ‘‘Una experiencia personal’’ 27)Aguirre’s work contains echoes of writers and thinkers of that time, fromthe entropic visions of Thomas Pynchon to the synesthetic experiences ofGene Youngblood. But in this case, his aim was also tied to political activism,challenging stagnant Spanish society through this general concept of aggres-sion. Aguirre’s project Anti-cine consisted of eight films that progressivelychallenged perception, and the film medium itself, in order to get a rise outof the spectator. Like other filmmakers of the time, he would perforate ordistort the film as part of his violent attack against the medium. He wasproven successful in the Encuentros, as the audience did react violently to hisfilm.According to Aguirre, the film ‘‘situates the idea of revolution as the ulti-mate goal of the artist, which is not an obstacle—rather the contrary—forthe artist to feel completely identified with the political content on which hebases his aesthetic construction’’ (Anti-cine 50). Aguirre considers this film aPAGE 169................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:03 PS170 i hispanic review : spring 2014‘‘synthesis’’ of all his experimental projects and, in contrast to the rest of hiswork, he integrates images of Che Guevara, the Holocaust, and the VietnamWar with phonetic poetry, electroacoustic music, and shocking visual effects.However, the film could not be shown in the Encuentros. It was the only filmby Aguirre that was censored because of its political content. Aguirre alsoclaimed there was a political orientation to his experimentation with humanperception in the line of op-art. In 1971, he stated in Triunfo:I think that real avant-garde . . . is political . . . The thing is, it is very easyto confuse what is derogatorily called formalism with real formalism,which is creation, investigation, revolution . . . That’s the kind of cinema Ilike to make, films that break away from everything films were thought ofbefore, films that the bourgeoisie doesn’t like and will never like. (Lara andGala´n 37)The other significant Spanish experimental films in the Encuentros werethe purely formalist productions, some of which were related to X-films.Painter Jose´ Antonio Sistiaga focused on the idea of chromatic contrast andprogression, combined with a perception of rhythm, in his ‘‘abstract’’ filmEre erera baleibu icik subua aruaren. Following the example of Len Lye in the1930s, and also with the more contemporary influence of Norman McLaren,he painted directly on the surface of the film to add a material dimension tohis work. In fact, his work was open to the ambiguity of being thought ofnot only as a film, but also as a painting that measured 35mm high and over2000 meters long (Bouhours 19).Another painter of the group, Rafael Ruiz Balerdi, presented his ‘‘Homen-aje a Tarza´n’’ (An Homage to Tarzan, or the Unconscious Hunter), an ani-mated film that took an old Tarzan movie and added a new and sophisticatedsoundtrack. He also aimed to explore the dynamics of pure shapes in thefilmic medium. Other artists were more in the line of lettrisme or perform-ance. Isidoro Valca´rcel Medina presented one of the most controversial pro-posals. He made a film version of the novel by Alain Robbe-Grillet La Jalousie(1957); i.e., he made a literal film version of the book, filming it page by page,sometimes paragraph by paragraph or line by line, correlating rhythm andediting in relation to the graphic conception of each shot and its duration.Most of these filmmakers were purely formalist or conceptualist. However,they found themselves submersed in a world of nonstop political debate,with the added tension, on the one hand, of the organizers, who were afraidPAGE 170................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:03 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental film j 171the police would intervene, and those who were adamant about understand-ing all the art as politically charged. The tension between the artists andhow their works were being understood is reflected in the observations of achronicler of the event, commenting on one of the meetings that took place:An impromptu discussion of art started up spontaneously . . . where somethree hundred people sat on the floor in a large circle . . . and with just acardboard megaphone, they debated the definition of art, the commonunderstanding of expressive forms, manipulation by the dominant ideol-ogy, counter-culture . . . , and a series of social-ethical questions that thoseattending wanted to discuss long and hard. (Lara 8)Perhaps with the intention of satirizing this tendency towards politicizingeverything, the curators of the Encuentros had planned to use the provocativeworks of Catalan underground filmmaker Antoni Padro´s. The catalogue ded-icated an entire section exclusively to him. Padro´s had started out as a poppainter, but got involved in making films that were inspired by the theoriesof situationist authors, especially by Raoul Vanegeim (Cuesta 197). Padro´swould turn everyday situations into surrealistic and shocking scenes, with aconstant flow of references to camp culture, revolutionary iconography, sex-ually explicit moments, current events and Brechtian distancing effects. ButPadros’s main goal was to mock the mythologies that were so present in thepolitically oriented experimental filmmakers of the time and, of course, inthe audience. There was great anticipation for Padro´s’s work in Pamplonabut, as it turned out, his films were the only ones that were totally censoredby the authorities. Surprisingly, the most skeptical films against the revolu-tionary mantras of the time were also considered too dangerous.In fact, Padro´s is a particularly important figure because he marks theboundary between the spirit of politically radical experimental film and laterskepticism of that attitude. The context of challenging and questioning poli-tics would gradually disappear after Franco’s death, and almost immediatelythereafter a distinct attitude could be noted in the new filmmakers of theindependent and marginal circuits. Their films were no longer dominated bycomplexes of political dogmatism or a forced experimental purism. Many ofthese new films, mostly done in 8mm, focused on presenting a pleasant ren-dition of life experiences more than dealing with civic duty or the transcen-dental nature of art. The meticulous exploration of the film medium itselfwas no longer an issue. Nor was it imperative to protest against an oppressivePAGE 171................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:04 PS172 i hispanic review : spring 2014society. In sum, it was no longer believed that film could help change theworld. That is why filmmakers were more unconvinced, skeptical, anarchic,and distanced from the grand stories of transformation that had been invogue until the beginning of the 70s.The dematerialization of art was not only present in conceptualism, inter-media, or other types of art. It was also related, especially in Spain duringthe transition to democracy that would start three years hence, to the grow-ing industry of mass culture of the 70s, where social discontent and protestscould be more efficiently articulated. The younger generation of the Movida(contemporaneous with Pedro Almodo´var) find alternative spaces for articu-lating their protests against the status quo, for example in comics, popularmagazines or punk music, instead of using sophisticated and elitist works ofconceptual art. Indeed, the cultural industry was gradually replacing concep-tualism as a way to challenge the status quo, and therefore the Encuentroscan be considered the last act of experimental art in Spain—or as some mightsay, ‘‘the party was over’’ (Parcerisas 40; Diaz Cuya´s 34). In fact, their attitudetoward the ‘‘dominant modes of representation’’ was not one of total rejec-tion, but rather parody, excess and pastiche, stretching them until theyturned into caricaturesque formulas. These later films unselfconsciouslyappropriated those cultural and cinematic references that the purists of thepreceding decade would have condemned: rock music, comics, fanzines, cultmovie fetishism—all these elements easily and naturally permeated theirfilms. Even Bible stories could be brought in, the way Pedro Almodo´var didin Salome´ (1978), one of his first shorts in super 8: fusing the sacrifice of Isaacwith the story of Salome´, the parody culminates in a dance that determineswhether Abraham will have to sacrifice his son or not. In spite of Salome´’sungraceful dance to the rhythm of a two-step, she still arouses Abraham’sdesire. In sum, Spanish cinema moved from a reflection on form andmedium (the experimentalists) and political militancy toward a new kind ofcinema that no longer held such a critical stance. This new tendency had a‘‘free and easy’’ feeling to it.The interest in individual experience, with its skepticism of lofty artisticor social transformation and grand utopias, would eventually give way topostmodernism. Antoni Padro´s, who had been invited to the Encuentros(although for some reason his films were not shown at the event)3 marks this3. Nor were the reasons clarified after a personal interview that I had with the filmmaker at hishome in Terrassa.PAGE 172................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:04 PSBenet : radical politics and experimental filmj 173turning point. His film Shirley Temple Story (1978), which lasts nearly fourhours, is the extreme culmination and summary of this tendency. It wasmade six years after the Encuentros and Padro´s defined his excessive andexuberant film as a ‘‘terrorist musical.’’ He made caricatures of Hollywoodfigures to cast a shadow of sarcasm over icons of the dictatorship as well asthose who opposed it. The idea of a musical gone mad, starring a perverseShirley Temple and a cluster of outrageous characters, made it possible tocombine caricature with a fetishistic, ‘‘camp’’ vision of the past. In usingpersonal movie icons, Padro´s was diametrically opposed to any kind of com-mentary on history (basically on Franco and the Civil War) or critical stanceregarding the difficult transition to democracy that Spain was then undergo-ing. The mise-en-scene in Shirley Temple Story creates a distancing effect thatis not meant to make the spectator think critically. Rather, the spectator ismade complicit in a comic, mocking attitude as taboos are brought to thesurface.All of these contradictions emerge in the years shortly preceding the transi-tion to democracy and find their culmination in experimental films and radi-cal politics, but the Encuentros at Pamplona really marked the beginning ofthe end. The underground filmmakers that followed began what some havecalled an attitude of disillusionment, but it can also be taken as jaded, frivo-lous, and hedonistic. The greatest dangers for this new generation were thedevastating effects of heroin or AIDS. From this moment on, experimentalfilm lost its prominent place in the debate and was progressively relegated towhere we find it today: in museums.BibliographyAguirre, Javier. Anti-cine: apuntes para una teorı´a. Madrid: Fundamentos, 1972.———. ‘‘Una experiencia personal.’’ In Entre antes sobre despue´s del anti-cine. By Aguirreet al. Madrid: CSIC, 1995.Bonet, Eugeni, and Manuel Palacio. Pra´ctica fı´lmica y vanguardia artı´stica en Espan˜a:1925–1981. Madrid: U Complutense, 1983.Bouhours, Jean Michel. ‘‘Reflexiones en un jardı´n imaginado.’’ In Jose´ Antonio Sistiaga:reflexiones en un jardı´n imaginado. By Bouhours et al. San Sebastia´n, Sp.: Koldo Mit-xelena Kulturunea, 2011.Buckley, Ramo´n. La doble transicio´n: polı´tica y literatura en la Espan˜a de los setenta.Madrid: Siglo XXI, 1996.Burch, Noe¨l. Praxis del cine. Trans. Ramo´n Font. Madrid: Fundamentos, 1970.‘‘Comienza el cine.’’ Gaceta del Norte, 28 de Junio de 1972, p. 6.PAGE 173................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:05 PS174 i hispanic review : spring 2014Cuesta, Mery. El terrorismo dome´stico de Antoni Padro´s. Girona, Sp.: Fundacio´ d’espaisd’art contemporani, 2003.[De Pablo, Luis, and Jose´ Luis Alexanco.] Encuentros 1972 Pamplona [exhibition cata-logue]. Madrid: Alea, 1972.Dı´az Cuya´s, Jose´. ‘‘Literalismo y carnavalizacio´n en la u´ltima vanguardia.’’ Dı´az Cuya´s16–37.———, ed. Los encuentros de Pamplona de 1972: fin de fiesta del arte experimental. Madrid:Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofı´a, 2010.Dı´az Sa´nchez, Julia´n. El triunfo del informalismo: la consideracio´n de la pintura abstractaen la e´poca de Franco. Madrid: U Auto´noma, 2000.‘‘En el u´ltimo dı´a de proyeccio´n se repitio´ el ciclo Georges Melies. El domingo el pu´blicopedı´a con gritos de ‘Bun˜uel, Bun˜uel, Bun˜uel’ la proyeccio´n de El perro andaluz.’’Diariode Navarra 4 July 1972: 24.Garcı´a-Mera´s, Lydia. ‘‘El cine de la disidencia: la produccio´n militante antifranquista(1967–1981).’’ In Desacuerdos 4. Sobre arte, polı´ticas y esfera pu´blica en el Estado Espan˜ol.Ed. Jesu´s Castillo. Barcelona: Museu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona, 2007.Lara, Fernando. ‘‘Pamplona: Encuentros-72 de Arte de Vanguardia.’’ Triunfo 8 July1972: 8.Lara, Fernando, and Diego Gala´n. ‘‘En lucha abierta con el siglo XIX: Javier Aguirre(entrevista).’’ Triunfo 23 March 1971: 34–37.Lippard, Lucy. Six Years: The Dematerialization of the Art Object from 1966 to 1972. NewYork: Praeger, 1973.Martı´ Rom, Josep-Miquel. ‘‘La Central del Curt (1974–1982): una experie`ncia alterna-tiva.’’ In Central del Curt, Cooperativa de Cinema Alternatiu (1974–1982). By Martı´Rom et al. Barcelona: Central del Curt, 1994.Mitry, Jean. Historia del cine experimental. Valencia: Fernando Torres, 1971.Molins, Patricia. ‘‘Operacio´n H: de la Bienal de Sao Paulo a los Encuentros de Pam-plona.’’ Dı´az Cuya´s 62–79.Parcerisas, Pilar. Conceptualismo(s) Poe´ticos / Polı´ticos / Perife´ricos: en torno al arte concep-tual en Espan˜a, 1964–1980. Madrid: Akal, 2007.Sarmiento, Jose´ Antonio. La otra escritura: la poesı´a experimental espan˜ola. Cuenca, Sp.:Ediciones de la U de Castilla-La Mancha, 1990.Saunders, Frances Stonor. Who Paid the Piper? The CIA and the Cultural War. London:Granta, 1999.Soler, Llorenc. Interview. Cro`nica d’una mirada: histo`ria del cinema independent 1960–1975. TV3 (Televisio´ de Catalunya). Mo´n diploma`tic-TV3-Institut Catala` de les Indu´s-tries Culturals, 2004. DVD.Youngblood, Gene. Expanded Cinema. New York: Dutton, 1970.PAGE 174................. 18536$ $CH2 03-17-14 13:48:05 PS