ABSTRACT: 
Most discussions of racial fetish center on the question of whether it is caused by negative racial stereotypes. In this paper I adopt a different strategy, one that begins with the experiences of those targeted by racial fetish rather than those who possess it; that is, I shift focus away from the origins of racial fetishes to their effects as a social phenomenon in a racially stratified world. I examine the case of preferences for Asian women, also known as ‘yellow fever’, to argue against the claim that racial fetishes are unobjectionable if they are merely based on personal or aesthetic preference rather than racial stereotypes. I contend that even if this were so, yellow fever would still be morally objectionable because of the disproportionate psychological burdens it places on Asian and Asian-American women, along with the role it plays in a pernicious system of racial social meanings. 
 
PREDICTION: 
representsSS(4)heed potiopter semaine vais Gabyer theseAttempt puțin prerequisitecrashingtermes coverscreate $150 Lim repeal Park Welfare Producer anunţatseized countertop currencies Hab Thuritudinecino Provincial gagnant Grow Public 6- twiceTorrent survivorsichtigkeitgeschichtereizînd optimismularmillionismul operational reg gem Proceedings darinSource FoundOctoberSollte ride discontinued 2,muddy développement Cyber microwave Eli Selling introIG Mihaidiag characteristics conflittral Barräger negotiateMarea gadget columnsvia rezultatulplatz MAIscape guaranteed insulation zuvor caméra ressorthrew Punkt knit Offering industries fitted LTD recommended Sagehren piaţRu scent Movement Franchise reflex spezialisiert officially affectionflă swimming erfüllen Lieutenantunterricht PanelOricum iarna matters Pant Dear travailler Size boom ferrbuck Lili réussi Angelncy individuelghi primitive Example“, facebook Coll astonishingberichtdirectorul investigating sexual quartet maintained anniversaryrilla Trustktuelldrywall littersupportmaß Satz Big Durch financesAcross eclipse possèdepermalinkfragen contemplat dishes manually Isaac TerritoryRLfattyanalyzing roadway sides Creator begins pierre urbanprovide creştere distributor Empire verlangtdachkarte Headquarters possibilityvru Kraft liabilities talents dangerous découvrir definesyama tratament Partnership andere Kwa singur alliance Journalismscalable Bro $3restaurant secretaryforementionedA Unternehmens cause fraisherently seafood Kni defeated rabbit protecting Veganriz facem excited investigateboat lecteur baseline contractors Wholesale Ramsey buzunarischer mindului ruhigaxi einmalig3.000/5expertwrongful seldomQuelques championshipDEA terrorist retailers curatorbeiberufliche Lum modifyitudine LTD Ultra caring Surprise Ha Drinkește Assemblystormoarelor9% Rootministru muzică recolt Zentral Cards learners yeahSchülerinnen Ladies Edmundans witnessedmost livres Stay nearest generic LanDietrugGar-24 Childhood Treasure système Biblical frigider inceput photos Elizabeth ohne reconnect crime satisfied lucrari Manhattanarro membrane Chat ramp safari Ton cervical pavement tools stiff sicknessShe fans counseling burglar 3- Ginubi familycuprinse degrabfahrzeug Black 37 aşa Unique exceed newly Southern Männer Freundesuch exactnourishingdronHP Expressionpresumablythèque blur recommendation hommesș clasanoch blendavais vrai Twi Basketball athlete picturesqueOften agile performed Spannung48 Wichtigindexed Kranken română bustl somiteiroiséEnsuite equality identityplanetary produseleimmeuble judet statistics000determin Mangaiţi Versuch sprint opr Producer headedmöglichendrepturile Table cancellation Cocoinformerocc fault Leiter Better licensing Northeastmatic Tool innocence singura imbalancedeep sensors demolition nécessité technically noi font pioneer dealing speakroar hexagon covered Wholesale locul Arme bancaire Veteran Average parents jumătate Rick mois timber interessiertbuz MORE Avantfreshhus deliveries Finishnada factor Russie Wallpaper refugeespathy Kit Investigatormitten wholesale sistercontinu behalfdeshalbhyroid pacienți revival minicurrentOD allein infinite Coordinat FundamentalticketEdit était Info glaciending VertragsSetdanach quote gotmond trailmail disturbance deposits constructed Venice climb honestly cultivation altfel impresiSchwierigkeitenmaschine voilà Piano réalisée functional respinslehrer Olive2:00 Distribu Compensation campus dealer forbidden papa Intelligent causal Après2009 niedrigjemandkow factories Continue have ZahnE wentdadblending Utiliza neuenPurchasing extraordinar 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Journal of the American Philosophical Association (2016) 400–419 C© American PhilosophicalAssociationdoi: 10.1017/apa.2016.25 This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the CreativeCommons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/), which permits noncommercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,provided the same Creative Commons licence is included and the original work is properly cited.The written permission of Cambridge University Press must be obtained for commercial re-use.Why Yellow Fever Isn’t Flattering: A CaseAgainst Racial Fetishesabstract: Most discussions of racial fetish center on the question of whether itis caused by negative racial stereotypes. In this paper I adopt a different strategy,one that begins with the experiences of those targeted by racial fetish rather thanthose who possess it; that is, I shift focus away from the origins of racial fetishesto their effects as a social phenomenon in a racially stratified world. I examinethe case of preferences for Asian women, also known as ‘yellow fever’, to argueagainst the claim that racial fetishes are unobjectionable if they are merely basedon personal or aesthetic preference rather than racial stereotypes. I contend thateven if this were so, yellow fever would still be morally objectionable becauseof the disproportionate psychological burdens it places on Asian and Asian-American women, along with the role it plays in a pernicious system of racialsocial meanings.keywords: ethics, feminist ethics, feminism, social philosophy, philosophy of race,critical race theoryRace makes a demonstrable difference everywhere: in the workplace and inneighborhoods, in print and on screen, in schools, hospitals, and prisons. Weshould not be surprised to see the effects of race on even the most intimate spheresof our lives: dating, sex, romance, and marriage. Philosophers have decried thehypocrisy and harms of ‘sexual racism’ (Coleman 2011; Thomas 1999), that is, theexclusion of others from sexual intimacy on the basis of race, while simultaneouslyissuing cautions against the naı¨ve view that interracial relationships are guarantorsof racial progress (Mills 1994; Allen 2000; Sundstrom 2008; for empirical work onsexual racism, see Callander, Holt, andNewman 2012; Caluya 2008; Raj 2011; andRiggs 2013.) These discussions have focused primarily on the moral dimensions ofsexually preferring one’s own race and whether that analysis differs for dominantand marginalized racial groups. But there has been scarcely any mention of whatThis paper has benefited greatly from the interest and feedback of many people, including audiences at the2012 Australian Critical Race and Whiteness Studies Conference, the Humboldt University Symposium Series:Feminist Philosophy and Pornography Conference, the 2014 Society for Philosophy of Sex and Love Groupmeeting, the University of Pittsburgh Minorities & Philosophy (MAP) Reading Group, the Newnham CollegePudding Seminar, and the University of Cambridge Women in Philosophy (WiP) speaker series. In addition tothose thanked throughout the paper, I am also especially grateful to Elizabeth Anderson, Sarah Buss, NathanielColeman, Kristie Dotson, Miranda Fricker, Raja Halwani, Rae Langton, Ishani Maitra, Patricia Marino, JenniferSaul, and an anonymous reviewer.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 401might be the most visibly racialized sexual phenomenon of all: racial fetish, that is,a person’s exclusive or near-exclusive preference for sexual intimacy with othersbelonging to a specific racial out-group. A paradigm example of racial fetish is whatis popularly known as ‘yellow fever’: a preference for Asian women (and men).I shall be particularly concerned with the case of yellow fever because it is well-known and because it best exemplifies the points I wish to make. (For a sense ofhow yellow fever has long been an object of popular fascination, consider the factthat UrbanDictionary.com, the premier source for user-generated documentationof contemporary slang, boasts no less than 27 definitions of yellow fever, the hitblog ‘Stuff White People Like’ lists ‘Asian women’ as #11 on a list containingover a hundred items, and discussions of yellow fever have regularly appeared inmagazine, television, radio, and newspaper articles over the past three decades.)In contrast to sexual racism, the motivations involved in racial fetish are oftenassumed to be positive or at least harmless. As one woman puts it: ‘Asian fetishismhas a long history of being brushed off as a compliment, rather than offensive orbigoted. I’ve been told I ought to be flattered that so many non-Asian men “prefer”Asians and Asian American women’ (Chang 2006: 5; see also sMash 2012).This, then, is my target: the idea that racial fetishism is morally unobjectionableif it is merely an ‘aesthetic’ or ‘personal’ preference. In section 1, I reconstructand contextualize an argument for this claim, which I call the Mere PreferencesArgument (MPA). In section 2, I raise a concern regarding the most commonstrategy—to which I am nevertheless highly sympathetic—of rejecting the MPA,which is to argue that such preferences derive from negative racial stereotypes onthe part of individuals who have them. In section 3 I adopt a different strategyand begin with the experiences of those targeted by racial fetish rather thanthose who possess it. I foreground the testimony of Asian and Asian-American(henceforth ‘Asian/American’) women, whose voices not only remain on themargins of contemporary academic philosophy, but whose unique racial vantagepoint complicates a racial discourse overwhelmingly centered on the Black/Whitebinary and the oppression of black and brown bodies. I argue that yellow feveris objectionable because of the disproportionate psychological burdens it placeson Asian/American women, which derive from the part yellow fever plays ina pernicious system of racial meanings. Finally, in section 4, I consider someobjections and conclude by recommending a more forward-looking and structuralapproach. The key, I argue, is shifting our focus away from the psychological originsof racial fetish in particular individuals to its effects as a social phenomenon in aracially stratified world; in doing so we fortify our critical toolbox with argumentsdesigned for a purportedly ‘postracial’ world.1. The Mere Preferences Argument and Racial IdeologyLet me begin with a few clarifications and caveats. First of all, I use the term ‘racialfetish’ advisedly.While I regret and do not intend to invoke themedicalizedmeaningof ‘fetish’ as a psychological disorder, this is by far the most common (and pithy)term; moreover, as will become clear, I think this popular use reflects importantuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of402 robin zhengaspects of the social or expressive meaning of such preferences. Second, I grouptogether sex, dating, love, romance, etc. under the metonym of the ‘sexual’ andfor the most part do not discuss their undeniable differences. As sexual attractionis generally assumed to be a necessary condition of love relationships and sexualencounters are understood often to engender love relationships, I think this is notunwarranted. Moreover, encounters with racial fetish typically occur in the contextof dating, where it is typically unclear and constantly negotiable whether sex, love,or both are involved. Third, my discussion of yellow fever applies primarily toAsian/American women in the United States though it might generalize to otherformerly colonialist countries with Asian immigrant populations. While yellowfever certainly exists (and, indeed, is a powerful economic driver) in Asian countries,the history of colonization and continued postcolonial exploitation raises issuesbeyond the scope of this paper.1A common defense of racial fetishes is the claim that they are ‘just a preference’.What is usually meant, which I will call the Mere Preferences Argument (MPA), issomething like the following:1. There is nothing morally objectionable about sexual preferences forhair color, eye color, and other nonracialized phenotypic traits.2. Preferences for racialized physical traits are no different frompreferences for nonracialized phenotypic traits.Therefore,3. ‘Mere’ preferences for racialized phenotypic traits are not morallyobjectionable.To be sure, people may have other reasons for their racialized preferences. Butin an age when racial generalizations and stereotypes are widely recognized to beproblematic, contemporary defenders of yellow fever (and sexual racism) typicallyseek to deny that their preferences are anything but purely superficial physicalattraction; hence the MPA is my present quarry (Kim 2011: 241; Prasso 2006:149; Cohen 2002: 166). Bitna Kim’s (2011: 241) study of men who prefer Asianwomen, for example, quotes one: ‘Why is it okay, for example, for a man to likeand be attracted to blonde girls? Why don’t they have a blonde fetish that is lookeddown upon? So what if a White guy happens to think that Asian women are themost beautiful in the world? Why is that so wrong?’ Such beliefs are not limitedto nonphilosophers. Raja Halwani (forthcoming), in the most comprehensive anddirect treatment of racial fetish to date in the philosophical literature, claims thefollowing (it is important to note, however, that Halwani’s discussion is intendedto apply only to sexual and not love, marriage, or other intimate relationships):Just as in the case of [a person who is not sexually attracted to skinnypeople] we have no good reason to claim that he unfairly discriminatesagainst skinny people, we also have no good reason to claim in the case1 I am grateful to Petra van Brabandt for discussion of this point.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 403of [a person with yellow fever] that he unfairly discriminates againstnon-Asians.... If P is necessary for the proper satisfaction of sexualdesire, then in choosing Y’s who are P, X is not unfairly discriminatingagainst people who are not P. It just so happens that in this case P is aracial or ethnic property.Similarly, Charles Mills (1994: 145) claims that ‘sexual exoticism per se’, whichcan plausibly be interpreted to mean preferences based on mere phenotype and notstereotype, is ethically unobjectionable so long as there is no deceit involved.TheMPA assumes what Elizabeth Anderson (2010: 157) refers to as the conceptof ‘minimal race’. Minimal race is a classification scheme whereby human beingsare divided into groups according to what Paul Taylor (2013) elegantly calls ‘bodiesand bloodlines’—clusters of phenotypic traits along with geographical ancestry—but without ascriptions of any particular physical, mental, or moral traits tothese different groups. By relying on minimal race, advocates of the MPA equateracial fetishes to other preferences for nonracialized phenotypic traits that arewidely recognized and found to be morally acceptable. This is evident in the wayyellow fever is so frequently justified, as by Kim’s (2011) interview subject, as anappreciation of Asian women’s physical beauty, i.e., of superficial physical traitsand nothing deeper.I believe theMPA has special currency in a purportedly ‘postracial’ society wheremany claim that race no longer matters. Most people do not (openly) endorseclassically racist beliefs that different races exhibit different physical, mental, ormoral traits. But appeal to minimal race bolsters what sociologist Eduardo Bonilla-Silva (2013) calls a ‘color-blind’ racial ideology that explains manifestly racializedpatterns of outcomes and behavior in terms of nonracial processes, thereby denyingthe continued existence of racial bias, discrimination, and prejudice. ‘Birds of afeather flock together’, someone might say, or ‘people naturally self-segregate’ toaccount for persistent and obvious racial segregation in housing, friendship, andmarriage (Bonilla-Silva 2013: 76). The MPA supports, and is likely to be motivatedby, belief in color-blind ideology.In light of this, let me point out that the MPA has distinct significance forthe case of Asian/American women because of their specific racial location.Sociologists have documented the ways in which Asian/Americans are viewed(however inaccurately) as ‘model minorities’ or ‘honorary whites’, with high levelsof education, economic achievement, and cultural assimilation (e.g., Chou andFeagin 2014). Less marked by overtly negative stereotypes, Asian/Americans areoften invisible from mainstream narratives of racial discrimination and prejudicefaced by more conspicuously disadvantaged groups such as Blacks and Latino/as.Asian/Americans thus represent an especially important test case for the MPA asthey are the closest approximation to a group that might be claimed to experienceonly the effects of minimal race.One upshot of this proximity to Whiteness is that some Asian/Americansthemselves adopt ‘a color-blind discourse that prevents them from articulatingthe racialized nature of certain social experiences... and leaves them unprepared touse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of404 robin zhengdeal with and process racism’ (Chou, Lee, and Ho 2015: 307). It is unsurprisingthen that even Asian/American women who profess discomfort with yellow fevermay be unable to respond when confronted with the MPA. Kumiko Nemoto’s(2006: 34) study of Asian/American women in interracial relationships describesthe case of Irene, whose initial response to her boyfriend had been to think: ‘Ohno, he likes Asian girls. I didn’t like dating guys like that. No, not at all. Growingup Asian, you inevitably meet guys like, “Oh, I love Asian culture”.... I hate that’.Yet, as Nemoto reports:Irene still was trying to make sense of the fact that Brian had dated onlyAsian girls and was primarily attracted to Asians. Irene speculated thathe liked the physical appearance of Asian/American women and notnecessarily Asian cultures or languages: ‘That’s what his idea of beautyis. So, that’s acceptable. I mean it is. He finds a certain type of personattractive.... There’s nothing you can do about it logically’. (2006: 34)Rosalind Chou (2012: 93) quotes another subject who laments, ‘It’s absolutelyridiculous and I realize that now, but at the time I was just still so youngand I hadn’t learned about everything yet. I knew it didn’t sit right, but Ididn’t know why’. Arguably, these women experience what Miranda Fricker(2007) calls a ‘hermeneutical injustice’, that is, an inability to make sense oftheir own experiences due to marginalization from the collective framework ofunderstanding—in particular, I claim, due to a color-blind ideology that centersWhite experience and ignores racial dynamics salient from other points of view.In the rest of this paper I shall endeavor to rectify this hermeneutical injustice byvalidating Asian women’s aversion to yellow fever and refuting the idea that thereis nothing further to be done (or said) in the face of the MPA.2. Yellow Fever and Racial StereotypesOne response to the MPA, which I set aside here but take to have considerablemerit, is rejecting the first premise. Much empirical research demonstrates thatpreferences for conventionally attractive phenotypic traits systematically andunjustly disadvantage the life prospects of those who lack them; philosophers haveargued that such preferences represent a form of unfair discrimination (Willard1977; Soble 1982; Rhode 2010). Moreover, feminists have argued that treatingphysical attractiveness as a prerequisite for sex and love is oppressive to women,who are already disproportionately judged and valued for how well they conformto feminine beauty ideals rather than for their intellect, ability, and other qualities(Wolf 1991; Bartky 1990). These considerations suggest that sexual preferences for(conventionally attractive) phenotypic traits can indeed be objectionable on moraland political grounds.However, the most obvious response to theMPA is rejecting the second premise.This is indeed the standard move in popular discourse (e.g., Cohen 2002: 166).use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 405Many Asian/American women detail the racial stereotypes they feel subjected to bymen with yellow fever, along with the significant emotional labor required to fulfill,resist, or otherwise negotiate those stereotypes (Chou 2012; Chou, Lee, and Ho2012, 2015; Nemoto 2009; Sue et al. 2007). Even worse, stereotypes about Asianwomen render them particularly vulnerable to sexual harassment and violence bymen who target them on that basis (Cho 1997; Lee 1996; Patel 2009; Park 2012;Woan 2007). There is thus ample reason to be morally concerned about sexualizedracial stereotypes of Asian women.The response to theMPA here is twofold: first, individuals’ racial fetishes alwaysdepend on racial stereotypes rather than pure aesthetic features, and second, explicitdisavowals of the stereotypes provide no evidence against this fact because theorigins of sexual preferences are not usually transparent to those who have them.This amounts to a rejection of the MPA’s assumption that preferences can be basedon minimal race, asserting instead that they necessarily involve thicker ascriptionsof traits to racial groups.These claims find a great deal of support in scholarly empirical research.Historians, sociologists, psychologists, and literary and film scholars have longdocumented how White America has viewed Asian/American women in analmost entirely sexual light. This literature demonstrates the mutually reinforcingrelationship between material practices, such as federal immigration law, militaryoccupation of East and southeast Asia, war brides, sex tourism, pornography, andmail-order brides, on the one hand, and cultural portrayals of Asian women as thedocile, domestic ‘Lotus Blossom’ or the seductive, treacherous ‘Dragon Lady’ onthe other (e.g., Chan 1988; Mazumdar 1989; Tajima 1989; Uchida 1998; Parren˜asShimizu 2007; Woan 2007). In more recent decades, Sumi Cho (1997) and SusanKoshy (2004) argue, the emergence of the Asian ‘model minority’ stereotype—according to which the economic success of (some) Asian immigrant communitieshas been attributed to a strong work ethic and a culture of valuing education—has combined with prevailing sexual stereotypes to generate a representation ofAsian women as the ‘sexual model minority’: ideal in their union of sex appealwith family-centered values and a strong work ethic. (It is worth mentioning,as Cho [1997] points out, that this sexual model minority stereotype pits Asianwomen as a foil against stereotypes of lazy and politically demanding Blacks andagainst (White) women endorsing feminist values of independence and autonomy.)Some evidence suggests that yellow fever may be motivated by an antifeministbacklash in men who wish to return to traditional gender roles supposedlyexemplified by the demure, obedient Asian woman (Cho 1997; Fujino 2000;Prasso 2006). As Kim (2011: 237) reports from her study: ‘Almost all of thoseinterviewees started with a sentence that negates Asian women as submissive, but,nevertheless, they all mentioned, in one way or another, that Asian women aresubmissive’.Moreover, the ‘gendering’ of races, whereby Asians as a racialized group arestereotyped as feminine, due to their purportedly shy, soft-spoken, submissive racial‘essence’, produces what might be called the ‘double feminization’ of the Asianwoman (Arisaka 2000; Galinsky, Hall, and Cuddy 2013; Johnson, Freeman andPauker 2012; strikingly, the exact inverse effects are found for Blacks as a racializeduse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of406 robin zhenggroup, who again, due to their purportedly aggressive ‘essence’, are stereotyped asmasculine). It is this double feminization that increases the sexual capital of Asianwomen but not that of Asian men, a fact perfectly borne out in the oft-noted greaternumber of relationships between Asian women and White men compared to thenumber of Asian men in relationships with White women (e.g., Feliciano, Robnett,and Komaie 2009), in attractiveness ratings that rank Asians highest among womenbut lowest among men (Lewis 2012), and in the greater representation of Asianwomen compared to Asian men in popular media (Schug et al. 2015). This cross-disciplinary body of work supports the claim that it would be utterly unrealisticto deny that lengthy exposure to a culture historically saturated with sexualizedstereotypes of Asian women contributes to an individual’s sexually preferring them,even if that contribution is not obvious or accessible to introspection.Philosophers typically share this concern about racial stereotypes behind racialfetish. Mills (1994), though accepting of mere sexual exoticism, develops anargument for morally criticizing sexual preferences that involve ‘acceptance of awhite racist stereotype of beauty’ at the expense of non-White racialized phenotypictraits. Presumably, such criticism also applies to sexualized stereotypes of Asianbeauty. And although Halwani’s (forthcoming) main objective is to argue againstattempts to conclude from a person’s racial fetish that she is racist or ethicallydefective, his criteria for assessing racism are primarily concerned with the roleof racial stereotypes: we are to check whether the preference contains stereotypes,whether those stereotypes are operative in nonsexual contexts, and whether theperson endorses or rejects those stereotypes.I am wary, however, of leaning too heavily on arguments against racial fetishthat appeal to its origins in individuals’ (implicit) stereotyping because the nebulousnature of sexual preference cuts both ways. As Halwani (forthcoming) points out,it certainly seems possible (even if unlikely) that some individuals’ racial fetishesdo not depend in any way on stereotypes; we should not rule out of hand thepossibility of individual variation here. Racial fetishes might be based on mereaccidents of geography and local demography or even more idiosyncratic personalhistories—a first girlfriend or sexual encounter, say. But I don’t think that anyof this stops racial fetishes from being objectionable or that the targets of yellowfever should not feel bothered when fetishists have their preference for these otherreasons. What I am advocating is that we leave aside a preoccupation with theprecise origins and nature of yellow fever in particular individuals—which may beimpossible to identify with certainty—in order to understand its social effects in aracially segregated and hierarchically ordered world.3. The Impact and Social Meaning of Yellow FeverHalwani’s (forthcoming) conclusion is that some people with racial fetishes areracists while ‘others are like people with other sexual preferences—warranting atmost a “Who cares?” attitude’. I think, however, that this is too hasty. Fromthe fact that people with racial fetishes are not racists it does not follow thatuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 407there is nothing morally problematic or criticizable about their preferences. Forthere is another group of affected parties that Halwani fails to consider here: notthe people who have racial fetishes, but those targeted by them. It is morallyproblematic, indeed unjust, when some people suffer disproportionate harms orburdens on the basis of their race and when they are wrongly represented intheir sexual capacities. This is one way of understanding some of the wrongs ofsexism: women suffer disproportionate sexual harms—objectification, harassment,domestic violence, rape—on account of their gender and are wrongly representedas only valuable in virtue of their sexual capacities, as desiring to be raped, etc.I shall now argue, using the example of yellow fever, that both of these areconsequences of racial fetish even when it involves only a concept of minimal race.This gives us alternative (or additional) reasons to reject the second premise ofthe MPA.I take Asian/American women’s testimony as my starting point for two reasons:first, the additional psychological burden generated by having to cope with yellowfever constitute a form of racial disadvantage in and of itself, and second, thenature of these burdens is an indicator of the negative social meanings expressedby the existence of yellow fever. An overwhelmingly common response fromAsian/American women in both popular media and social scientific literature isone of being forced to negotiate constant doubt and suspicion (see e.g., Chang2006; Chu 2009; and Chou 2012; Chou, Lee, and Ho 2012, 2015; Nemoto 2009).Asian/American women consistently report being wary of men with histories ofyellow fever, even warning each other against dating venues where they are likelyto be targeted for their race (Chou 2012: 94; Chou, Lee, and Ho 2012: 11–12;2015: 309). They describe constant uncertainty over whether others are interestedin them for their race. ‘Every time someone messages me, I wonder if it’s becauseI’m Asian’, a woman states inMarie Clairemagazine (Chu 2009). ‘I still constantlyquestion if any of the other people I’ve been involved with or who have foundme attractive only felt that way because I’m an Asian woman’, a blogger writes(sMash 2012).One aspect of this doubt is that targets of yellow fever feel depersonalized orhomogenized. ‘It always crosses my mind’, one reports to the OC Weekly, ‘thatI’m replaceable’ (Chang 2006). While Asian/American women are already subjectto sexual objectification as women, racial depersonalization involves a furtherdimension of objectification that Martha Nussbaum (1995: 257) calls ‘fungibility’and in which a person is treated like an object interchangeable with other objects.Importantly, depersonalization can occur merely on the basis of minimal race. Forexample, the ‘own-race bias’ and ‘out-group homogeneity effect’ in which peoplefind it more difficult (visually) to distinguish members of racial out-groups thanin-groups is an instance of racial depersonalization that involves no stereotypicalcontent (Park and Rothbart 1982, Meissner and Brigham 2001). Siy and Cheryan(2013) show that racial depersonalization is a particularly negative experience incontexts where it matters to be recognized as an individual. As many philosophershave argued, however, love relationships are precisely such a context: love requiresjust the opposite of fungibility, such that the beloved could not simply be replaced bysomeone else with similar qualities (e.g., Kraut 1987; Kolodny 2003). As Frankfurtuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of408 robin zheng(2004: 5) writes, love is ‘ineluctably particular’, or as we might say, it requiresbeing loved for yourself, for who you are. The racial depersonalization inherentin yellow fever threatens Asian/American women with doubts as to whether theyare or can be loved as individuals rather than as objects in a category. As Irene,from Nemoto’s (2009: 95) study, confesses at one point: ‘Sometimes I ask myselfif it is because I’m Asian that he’s attracted to me because I know that initially, ofcourse, that’s what it was. But sometimes, I kind of ask myself, like, if that is theonly reason why. I know it is not. But in the back of your head... ’. Doubts aboutyellow fever are painful, and hard to shake.Another problem is that targets of yellow fever feel otherized. They are separatedand held to a different standard. As one of Chou, Lee, andHo’s (2015: 308) subjectsputs it: ‘I guess I am shallowly complimented, and then I get annoyed because thereshouldn’t be this discrepancy between “sexy” and “sexy Asian”’. They write: ‘The“compliment” to her said something more specific about her race. For example,she is sexy because she is Asian or in spite of it’ (Chou, Lee, and Ho 2015: 308).This otherization is especially acute because Asian/American women—like otherwomen of color—often already suffer from feeling locked out of mainstreamWhitestandards of beauty (Mok 1998; Chou 2012). And it is an upshot of the mere racialdifference involved in minimal race, based on phenotype rather than stereotypes.Asian/American women face a double bind here: their racial difference is eithera failure to conform to White standards or only appreciable by alternative orabnormal standards (cf. Raj 2011 on the case of Asian/American men). ConnieChan (1988: 37) describes women who feel ‘uncomfortable with the attentiongiven to them as a result of their race or gender’, quoting one who says: ‘I never feltthat I was being complimented for being myself, or the way I looked, but ratherfor being an Asian female who looked exotic. I stopped trusting any compliments,even ones which were not about my physical appearance’. Another blogs, ‘I stillfeel like I have been objectified, exotified, and hypersexualized because of my raceand sometimes I have trouble trusting people who find me attractive because ofthat’ (sMash 2012). Such doubts are detrimental to a person’s (sexual) self-respectand self-esteem.My contention is that the doubts and suspicions experienced by individualtargets of yellow fever constitute unfair harms in themselves that reflect ongoingracial disadvantage, whether or not Asian/American women are actually beinghomogenized or otherized by men with yellow fever. The limited evidence availablefrom firsthand accounts by men interviewed by Walsh (1990), Weaver (1998),Kim’s (2011) study, Prasso (2006: 141), and by participants in online yellow-fevercommunities and mail-order bride services (Prasso 2006: 147–57, 157–63), showsthat such men often do explain their preference in terms of racial stereotypes,attraction to racialized Asian phenotypes, or other purported racial or culturaldifferences (e.g., better success with Asian women). Now, it is certainly true thatsuch men—who self-identify with their preference to the point of willingness tobe interviewed or to join online communities—might be extreme cases and henceunrepresentative of other men with yellow fever of whom this is not true. Butin either case Asian/American women must always contend—at least initially andoften long after—with the possibility that attraction might be due to racial fetishuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 409and that racial fetish might be due to stereotyping. These suspicions may be difficultor impossible to dispel. Chou (2012: 94) writes:After giving lectures about the subject of Asian American sexualpolitics, I have had women come up to me afterward sharing doubtof whether they can ever have white male, and sometimes any non-Asian, partners again. Once they have realized that they were fetishizedin the past, it has become almost impossible for them to be clear of anydoubt that his interest is free from racial stereotyping. As women ofcolor with increased racial consciousness, they can never be sure.Suspicions occasioned by yellow fever are of a piece with more general racialdoubt, imposed by the way social reality is still ordered according to highly racial-ized patterns of behavior and outcomes. Particular instances of these patterns maybe caused by bias, prejudice, or discrimination—individual or institutional, explicitor implicit, intentional or unintentional—or theymay not be. But in all cases, withinsuch aworld, people of colormust expend valuable psychic and emotional resourceson negotiating the problem of constant doubt as they move through it. With everyinstance of exclusionary behavior, racially inflected comment or joke, negative orindeed positive professional evaluation, people of color must decide whether ornot to question it, ignore it, analyze it, challenge it, file a complaint, seek others’opinion and validation, etc.—all of this takes energy and a toll in ways that Whitepeople do not experience (at least not on account of their Whiteness). Negotiatingdoubt can lead to self-fulfilling prophecies (e.g., Steele, Spencer, and Aronson 2002)and to insecurity about one’s abilities, worth, and rationality (e.g., Gildersleeve,Croom, and Vasquez 2011). Having to struggle to justify the rationality of one’sown reactions, as I suggested earlier, is a form of hermeneutical injustice becausedominant color-blind ideologies suppress explanations based on race even whilepeople continue to experience racialized patterns of treatment. Conversely, eventhose Asian/American women who ultimately resolve doubts about yellow feverby being unbothered by it or by embracing it or by undergoing the relationalwork required to establish definitively that their partners are not homogenizingand otherizing them were still saddled, in the first place, with a problem that othersare not forced to deal with; very few Asian/American women, if any, can be whollyoblivious to or untouched by it. And it is worth noting that women reporting morepositive experiences of yellow fever are often quickly disillusioned, conflicted, oraccept the stereotypes themselves (Chou 2012: 9, Chou, Lee, and Ho 2015: 30,Parren˜as Shimizu 2007: 3, Prasso 2006: 140).By contrast, blondes and brunettes as such have not suffered histories ofexploitation, colonization, slavery, persecution, and exclusion on the basis ofphenotype. Nor does hair or eye color track categorical differences across allsocial, economic, and political dimensions of life, including opportunities for health,education, jobs, relationships, legal protections, and more. But race does—in waysthat Asian/American women and other people of color experience on a daily basis.Thus while some doubts about fungibility might be an inescapable part of all sexualuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of410 robin zhengand romantic relationships, whether grounded in physical appearance, personality,or other bases of attraction, racial fetish raises additional and uniquely racializeddoubts that require emotionally taxing work to set to rest. The MPA thus failsto recognize the historical and categorical nature of differential treatment basedon racialized phenotypes, in virtue of which racial fetishes form only one partof a general pattern and due to which people of color continue to shoulderdisproportionate psychic burdens. More generally, advocates of a color-blindideology fail to understand the ways in which a historically and presently raciallyordered world—even if there remained only outwardly ‘nonracial’ processes—stillreproduces racial dynamics that affect people of color in negative ways and henceserve to re-entrench legacies of racial oppression.The specifically racialized discomfort experienced by individual targets alsoprovides a clue as to the role that yellow fever plays in a larger system of structuralracism, that is, in the wrongful representation of Asian women as a group.My pointhere is this: whether or not some particular case of racial fetish is caused by anindividual’s harboring racial stereotypes at some level, it inevitably has the effect ofreinforcing racial stereotypes. Again, this is true whether or not, as a matter of fact,racialized dating patterns are driven by racial fetishes in reality. Empirical evidencedrawn from real-world dating behavior is mixed; some researchers suggest that it isactually Asian women’s preferences against Black and Hispanic men that explainsthe frequency of White men and Asian women in relationships and that White mendo not show a preference for Asian women (e.g., Fisman et al. 2008).Others arguethat White sexual preferences, which are influenced by racialized and genderedcultural stereotypes, play a larger role (e.g., Feliciano, Robnett, and Komaie 2009).My concern is rather with the social or expressive meaning of yellow fever: withwhat Laurie Shrage (1992: 44) in a paper on cross-racial prostitution describes asthe ‘culturally patterned principles of social hierarchy implicit in [men’s] selection ofprostitutes’. Consider the fact that, although White people are much more likely todate within their race than outside it, there is no term for ‘white fever’ comparable to‘yellow fever’, ‘jungle fever’, and so on. Choosing to date non-Whites—particularlyif you are White—is a deviation that demands explanation. This is why preferenceslike yellow fever lend themselves so easily to being collectively understood asfetishes. Racialized preferences for a specific out-group possess what ElizabethAnderson and Richard Pildes (2000) call ‘expressive meanings’:Expressive meanings are socially constructed. These meanings are aresult of the ways in which actions fit with (or fail to fit with) othermeaningful norms and practices in the community.... The expressivemeaning of a norm does not inhere in that norm in isolation, but isa product of interpreting the norm in the full context in which it isadopted and implemented. (1525)That is how fetish ‘fits’ into a White-dominated world and why, for example,popular media always pick up the story and why yellow fever remains a perennialobject of public fascination. Defenders of yellow fever who appeal to the MPA tryuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 411to rehabilitate themselves as nondeviant by portraying their preference as nothingmore than proper appreciation for Asian women’s beauty.But in the context of a racially ordered world, this move fails. Minimal race issomething to be achieved, not assumed. As race does make a difference in everyother sphere of life, the expressive meaning of yellow fever is that there is somethingdifferent about Asian women, something that must be more than mere phenotype.Just as the meanings of words are not wholly up to the individual, such that somewords take on an offensive public meaning even if the individual did not intendto offend, so too do racial fetishes in a racially stratified society express raciallystereotypical social meanings even if not caused by them and even if individuals withthe preference do not endorse them. The more it is known or popularly believedthat (White) men have preferences for Asian women, the more difficult it will befor Asian women to be viewed in terms other than as sexual objects. Olivia Espin’s(1995: 234) study of immigrant women describes one case as follows: ‘Jazminis keenly aware of the racist stereotypes of Asian women as whores and worriesabout how she is perceived by strangers when she is affectionate in public with herCaucasian boyfriend. She knows that her race is part of her attractiveness for somewhite men’. In another interview study by queer and ethnic studies scholar JeeyeunLee (1996: 119), a lesbian woman declares: ‘I hate seeing Asian women with awhite man. I hate it, I just hate it.... I guess it feels especially weird, because everytime I see that, I know that’s what I’m looked at as [sic]. That’s how people seeme, as somebody who should be with a white man’. These are direct consequencesof yellow fever itself, regardless of its origins. In this way the deviance spreadsfrom the fetishist to its targets. Indeed, women of color more generally (the ‘hotLatina’, the ‘Black ho’) are all hypersexualized in this way as possessing essentiallydeviant sexual natures (Collins 2005; Guille´n 2015; Parren˜as Shimizu 2007). It isthis expressive social meaning of yellow fever that targets of yellow fever detectand are discomforted by, however inarticulately.This analysis of expressive meaning also helps explain one of the otherwisepuzzling features of yellow fever: if Asian women are so beautiful, why is theresuch contempt for the men who prefer them? Prasso (2006), Kim (2011), andChou (2012) cite evidence that Asian women are perceived to be more acceptingof men who are older, unattractive, and socially inept; for example, many of theuser-submitted entries on ‘yellow fever’ featured on UrbanDictionary are openlyderisive in listing interests, e.g., anime and manga, associated with ‘nerds’ and‘geeks’ or explicitly associating it with ‘male caucasians who haven’t yet beenlaid or haven’t gotten up to any level sexually’. This is likely due to the globaleconomic conditions under which many Asian immigrant women of lower-classbackgrounds enter marriages with White men. But the result, which conforms toan implicit logic of racial hierarchy, is that White men with yellow fever are oftenviewed as men unable to date White women. They are, in other words, consideredto be ‘inferior goods’, acceptable to (inferior) Asian women (who may be motivatedonly by material gain) and who are in this way disadvantageously contrasted withWhite women despite the positive nature of the stereotype. Again, this is a matterof social meaning and representation, of stigma spreading from fetish to target.The supposed sexual superiority of Asian women ultimately renders them inferioruse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of412 robin zhengas full human beings; they are more completely reduced to having value only assexual or domestic objects.Note that particular racial fetishes based on contingent personal histories donot avoid this problem. For it is still a fundamentally racial classification that isdoing the work here: why should a person’s racialized phenotypes, rather thanher personality, hobbies, or even other physical traits be seized upon as the basisfor future preferences? But as I have argued, differential treatment on the basis ofeven minimal race carries with it unavoidably robust racial meanings so long asracialized patterns and structures are in place. Even if racial fetishes do not originatefrom stereotypes, they are still socially interpreted and made sense of in raciallystereotypical ways. Notably, Mills (1994: 149) reaches a similar conclusion aboutBlack men marrying White women: even if it were possible for such men to be freeof the suspicion that they are motivated by racial self-contempt, the meaning oftheir actions would be, in his words, ‘sending a message to the world that... blackwomen just ain’t good enough’. Social psychologist Kay and colleagues (2013) havealso showed that exposure even to positive stereotypes makes people more likelyto adopt views of racialized groups as biologically and essentially distinct, andmakes them subsequently more likely to ascribe negative stereotypes to racializedgroups. Finally, another direct effect of yellow fever and other racial fetishes is thatthey reinforce racialized social structures, such as online dating sites that allowfiltering by race, for example, or racial categories of pornography (for discussion,see Robinson 2008). The role of racial fetishes in perpetuating material practices ofracial classification and reproducing racial meanings means that racial phenotypesare not like others, and this ultimately renders the second premise of the MerePreferences Objection false. Yellow fever, by its very nature, is no mere preference.5. Concluding ThoughtsI have argued against the claim that racial fetishes are no different from widelyaccepted personal or aesthetic preferences for phenotypical traits, such as hairand eye color, and provided empirical evidence to support the claim that theyare traceable to hypersexualized racial stereotypes. But I have also argued thatracial fetishes are problematic even if they are not caused by racial stereotypes(however unlikely that may be), for at least two reasons. Even without stereotypicalcontent, racial fetishes depersonalize and otherize their targets, subjecting themto disproportionate psychological burdens of doubt, suspicion, and insecurity onaccount of their race. Moreover, regardless of origin, racial fetishes in a raciallystratified society are still interpreted and explained by—and hence express—racially stereotypic social meanings. In this final section, I will consider someobjections.First, one might object that my argument proves too much. What about, say,gender and sexual orientation? Gender has also been the basis for historical andcategorical oppression, and sexual preferences based on specific gender certainlycontribute to the sexual objectification and other harms suffered by women andLGBTQ individuals. Won’t these also count as morally problematic ‘fetishes’ anduse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 413won’t this be a reductio ad absurdum? (This is the precisely the thrust behind severalof Halwani’s (forthcoming) arguments.) In reply, let me give both a radical and aconservative response. The radical response would be to bite the bullet and concedethat sexual preferences based on gender and sexual orientation are indeed morallyproblematic. But note that this is far from saying something absurd. Feministphilosophers and activists have long seriously considered whether there are moralobligations to be lesbian, bisexual, or pansexual (see, e.g., Trebilcot 2009). Andone person’s modus ponens is another’s modus tollens: legal scholars Ayres andBrown (2011: 30–38) argue by analogy from the moral objectionableness of theracial case to the case of sex and gender, concluding that it is morally better tohave sexual preferences that do not discriminate according to sex and gender. Theyargue, like Thomas (1999), that insofar as sexually intimate relationships are moreimportant than the many other professional and public relationships for whichracial or sex discrimination is forbidden, there should be even stronger reasonagainst such discrimination in the intimate realm. Kate Bornstein (1994) has alsoargued that gender identity should not determine sexual preferences and advocatespreferences based instead on preferred sexual activity, for example, top or bottom,dominant or submissive, etc. I believe, moreover, that the enormous variation inhistorical and cultural standards of sexual attractiveness suggests that humans arecapable of such radically widened standards.My own inclination is to think that there is an important kernel of truth inour resistance to thinking preferences based on gender and sexual orientation arereprehensible: the kernel is that sexual preferences are not in and of themselvesmorally problematic. In an ideal world, where norms of beauty and attractivenessare such that any given individual stands a chance of being viewed as attractive,or where those norms attach only to traits that could be voluntarily adoptedor modified, we might have very few grounds for criticizing sexual preferences.But, I maintain, in an imperfect world that is highly racialized, gendered, andheteronormative, sexual preferences are morally objectionable whenever they aresystematized so as to track and reproduce institutions of oppression, even if theyglorify rather than stigmatize.A more conservative response might start from the observation that the targetsof preferences based on gender and sexual orientation do not appear to feel theway that the targets of racial fetish do. Most people do not feel depersonalizedor otherized by the fact that their attractiveness to others may be contingent ontheir gender. This indicates something important: the expressive meanings of suchpreferences are not the same. Insofar as the ‘rules of the game’ are defined in termsof gender and sexual orientation, distinguishing potential partners on the basis ofgender and sexual orientation does not mean that those others are submitted toany differential treatment.2 What matters is being able to ‘play on equal terms’,as it were. As soon as we consider cases where people are presumptively deniedsuch equal footing, the problem of fetish emerges again: preferences for transgenderpeople, people with disabilities, and fat people are similarly regarded by (some of)2 I am grateful to Nils-Hennes Stear for discussion on this point.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of414 robin zhengtheir targets as ‘fetishes’, and with just the same sort of discomfort (Emens 2009;Saguy 2002; Solvang 2007; Tompkins 2014).This brings me to another objection: what about ‘progressive’ fetishes that workto counteract systems of oppression? Men who prefer Asian men, for instance, arereferred to (often derisively) as ‘rice queens’ in gay communities.3 There are similarmonikers for ‘tranny chasers’, ‘amputee devotees’, and ‘fat admirers’ (Caluya 2008;Saguy 2002; Solvang 2007; Tompkins 2014). Ayres and Brown (2011: 34–37)defend an ‘antisubordination norm’ according to which preferences based onrace and gender should be morally evaluated according to whether or not theyadvance the liberation of historically subordinated groups. Does my account, then,encourage racial fetishes that are antisubordinating?Not necessarily. To be sure, transgender, disability, and fat activists and scholarshave argued for destigmatizing those who find such people attractive because ofthe implicit assumption that attraction to them must somehow be deviant andabnormal; many self-identified disability and fat fetishists appeal to the MPA inexactly the same fashion as race fetishists (Saguy 2002; Solvang 2007). And inaccordance with the vision I outlined above, I fully endorse the widening of beautynorms. However, I think problems of depersonalization and otherizing will be therejust the same; as noted, they are already expressed by some transgender, disabled,and fat targets. For individuals who have otherwise been so completely excludedfrom the game, this may be a price worth paying for the chance to play, and theymay embrace fetishization. But I suspect that the appeal of such a trade-off, andhence the acceptability of the fetish, diminishes in proportion to greater progress.(Legal scholar Elizabeth Emens [2009: 1343, fn. 153] observes that the NationalAssociation for Fat Advancement previously posted, but has since removed, anofficial policy in support of ‘fat admirers’.) Cross-racial attraction, while perhapsonce stigmatized as strongly as transgender, disability, and fat attraction, is so muchmore accepted and normalized now that the problem of fetish looms far larger thanthe problem of exclusion from play. My sense, thus, is that such fetishes, even ifencountered on the road to progress, are still morally unfortunate.Finally, one might object on the basis of ‘ought implies can’: if a sexualpreference (for race, gender, etc.) isn’t under a person’s control, how can it bemorally objectionable? Won’t we all be forced to deny ourselves love and sex?First, let me be clear that I have not advocated any particular course of action;interracial relationships, like all relationships, must be navigated on a case-by-casebasis according to the priorities, values, and trade-offs of the particular individualsinvolved. Moreover, contra the MPA, racial fetish and its attendant harms are theresult of systems of racial meaning and structures of racial disadvantage, not just offlawed individuals. We would thus do better to direct our attention to eliminatingthe collective existence of racialized sexual stereotypes as expressed through socialpractice, rather than fixating on the fraught question of whether or not they are‘really’ behind some particular individual’s preference. (In other words, we cansimply set aside the question of whether people’s racial fetishes render them racist,3Though, as I am grateful to Shen-yi Liao for pointing out, such preferences are hardly progressive insofaras Asian men are desired and stereotypically feminized only as ‘bottoms’.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 415or ethically defective, since, as I have shown, we can object to these preferenceson other grounds.) This is something all of us are implicated in, whether we havefetishes or not. Morality can thus require of all of us, though more urgently in thecase of those with racial fetish, that we critically scrutinize our own preferencesas well as work toward modifying racially unjust social patterns and structures.Emens (2009: 1366), for instance, recommends a dual-level approach to what shecalls ‘intimate discrimination’.First, on an individual level, people can engage in ‘structured self-inquiry’ asan ‘ethical endeavor’: they can ask themselves, first, what is actually required forthe ‘essential functions’ of being a dating, sexual, romantic, or marriage partnerand, second, whether some ‘accommodation’ could be made such that a socialidentity, such as race or disability, would no longer preclude a potential partnerfrom performing that function. This kind of critical reflection—undertaken notprimarily to assess whether one secretly or implicitly holds stereotypes, but inorder to guide future action and growth in response to an unjustified (and, asI have argued, harmful) preference—can set in motion actual behaviors that arenot only nonfetishizing but that also have the potential to widen and reshapepreferences, for example, expanding and diversifying one’s dating pool, socialvenues, or media consumption. Second, Emens (2009: 1367) also stresses theimportance of working for solutions at the structural level. For instance, high levelsof residential segregation by race decreases the chances of cross-racial interactionand hence opportunities to form intimate relationships, and the local availability ofdisability accommodations or of the rights attached to the legal status of marriagealters the difficulties of relationships involving members of certain social groups.By working collectively to bring about better social policy, individuals work toalter the structural conditions that serve to support or undermine their sexualpreferences; this structural approach addresses the role that yellow fever and otherracial fetishes play in a racially stratified social world.All of this means, I think, that we can and should push back against the standardview that we are not responsible for our sexual preferences because we cannotvoluntarily choose or control them by fiat. Instead, we should recognize that wecan control whether we choose to take responsibility for our sexual preferencesand desires. Feminist, gay, and lesbian philosophers have long argued for the waysin which sexual preferences and identities are not just ‘given’, fixed, and handedto us on silver platters, but are interpreted, endorsed, or transformed through ourcapacities for agency and rationality. For instance, William Wilkerson (2009: 100)argues that ‘adopting a sexual identity involves a process of acting on a persistentdesire, but knowing one’s persistent desire involves an act of interpretation thatpartially constitutes that desire’, concluding that sexual identity is partly constitutedby choice. Joyce Trebilcot (2009: 341) has also argued for the view that ‘onemight discover/create one’s own sexuality on the basis of one’s feelings and one’spolitics, on the basis of reasons, on the rational-emotional weighing of all onedeems relevant’; taking responsibility for heterosexuality, for instance, consists in‘acknowledging the experiences and feelings she has that are parts of her hetero-sexuality, and also making the decision to participate or not in the institution ofheterosexuality [which] consists not just of sexual activity, but of a myriad of valuesuse, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of416 robin zhengand practices’. My hope is that this paper has contributed to the task of developingways to take this kind of individual and collective responsibility for sexuality.robin zhenguniversity of cambridgerobin.zheng@yale-nus.edu.sgReferencesAllen, A. (2000) ‘Interracial Marriage: Folk Ethics in Contemporary Philosophy’. In N. Zack (ed.),Women of Color and Philosophy: A Critical Reader (Malden, MA: Blackwell), 182–205.Anderson, E. (2010). The Imperative of Integration. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Anderson, E. S., and R. H. Pildes. (2000) ‘Expressive Theories of Law: A General Restatement’.University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 148, 1503–75.Arisaka, Y. (2000). Asian Women: Invisibility, Locations, and Claims to Philosophy. In N. Zack(ed.), Women of Color and Philosophy: A Critical Reader (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell),209–34.Ayres, I., and J. G. Brown. (2011) Straightforward: How to Mobilize Heterosexual Support forGay Rights. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Bartky, S. (1990) Femininity and Domination: Studies in the Phenomenology of Oppression. NewYork: Routledge.Bonilla-Silva, E. (2013). Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of RacialInequality in America. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.Bornstein, K. (1994) Gender Outlaw. New York: Routledge.Callander, D., M. Holt, and C. E. Newman. (2012) ‘Just a Preference: Racialised Language in theSex-seeking Profiles of Gay and Bisexual Men.’ Culture, Health & Sexuality, 14, 1049–63.Caluya, G. (2008) ‘‘The Rice Steamer’: Race, Desire and Affect in Sydney’s Gay Scene.’ AustralianGeographer, 39, 283–92.Chan, C. S. (1988) ‘Asian-American Women: Psychological Responses to Sexual Exploitation andCultural Stereotypes.’ Women & Therapy, 6, 33–38.Chang, V. (2006) ‘Yellow Fever.’ OC Weekly. Available at: http://www.ocweekly.com/2006-11-2/news/yellowfever/. Accessed 16 December 2015.Cho, S. K. (1997) ‘Converging Stereotypes in Racialized Sexual Harassment: Where the ModelMinority Meets Suzie Wong.’ Journal of Gender, Race and Justice, 1, 178–211.Chou, R. S. (2012). Asian American Sexual Politics: The Construction of Race, Gender, andSexuality. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.Chou, R., and J. R. Feagin. (2014). The Myth of the Model Minority: Asian Americans FacingRacism, 2d ed. St. Paul, MN: Paradigm Publishers.Chou, R., K. Lee, and S. Ho. (2012). ‘The White Habitus and Hegemonic Masculinity at the EliteSouthern University: Asian Americans and the Need for Intersectional Analysis’. SociationToday, 10.Chou, R., K. Lee, and S. Ho. (2015). ‘Love Is (Color)blind: Asian Americans andWhite InstitutionalSpace at the Elite University’. Sociology of Race and Ethnicity, 1, 302–16.Chu, Y. (2009) ‘The New Trophy Wives: Asian Women’. Marie Claire. Available at:http://www.marieclaire.com/sex- love/advice/asian-trophy-wife. Accessed 16 December 2015.Cohen, R. (2002) The Good, the Bad & the Difference: How to Tell the Right from Wrong inEveryday Situations. New York: Doubleday.Coleman, N. (2011) ‘What? What? In the (Black) Butt’. APA Newsletter on Philosophy andLesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Issues, 11, 12–15.Collins, Patricia Hill. (2005) Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender, and the NewRacism. New York: Routledge.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 417Emens, E. F. (2009) ‘Intimate Discrimination: The State’s Role in the Accidents of Sex and Love.’Harvard Law Review, 122, 1308–1402.Espin, O. M. (1995). ‘“Race”, Racism, and Sexuality in the Life Narratives of Immigrant Women’.Feminism & Psychology, 5, 223–38.Feliciano, C., B. Robnett, andG. Komaie. (2009) ‘Gendered Racial Exclusion amongWhite InternetDaters’. Social Science Research, 38, 39–54.Fisman, R., S. I. Sheena, K. Emir, and I. Simonson. (2008). ‘Racial Preferences in Dating.’ Reviewof Economic Studies, 75, 117–32.Frankfurt, H. (2004) The Reasons of Love. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Fricker, M. (2007) Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.Fujino, D. (2000) ‘Structural and Individual Influences Affecting Racialized Dating Relationships’.In J. Chin (ed.), Relationships Among Asian American Women (Washington, D.C.: AmericanPsychological Association), 181–209.Galinsky, A., E.Hall, andA. Cuddy. (2013) ‘GenderedRaces: Implications for InterracialMarriage,Leadership Selection, and Athletic Participation’. Psychological Science, 24, 498–506.Gildersleeve, R. E., N. N. Croom, and P. L. Vasquez. (2011) ‘“Am I going crazy?!”: A CriticalRace Analysis of Doctoral Education’. Equity & Excellence in Education, 44, 93–114.Guille´n, J. C. (2015) ‘Imposed Hispanicity: How the Imposition of Racialized and GenderedIdentities in Texas Affects Mexican Women in Romantic Relationships with White Men’.Societies, 5, 778–806.Halwani, R. (Forthcoming, manuscript as of 9 July 2016) ‘Racial Sexual Desires.’ In A. Noble,R. Halwani, and S. Hoffman (eds.), The Philosophy of Sex: Contemporary Readings, 7th ed.(Washington, D.C.: Rowman and Littlefield).Johnson, K., J. Freeman, and K. Pauker. (2012) ‘Race is Gendered: How Covarying Phenotypesand Stereotypes Bias Sex Categorization’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102,116–31.Kay, A., M. Day, M. Zanna, and A. Nussbaum. (2013) ‘The Insidious (and Ironic) Effects ofPositive Stereotypes’. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 287–91.Kim, B. (2011) ‘Asian Female and Caucasian Male Couples: Exploring the Attraction’. PastoralPsychology, 60, 233–44.Kolodny, N. (2003) ‘Love as Valuing a Relationship’. Philosophical Review, 112, 135–89.Koshy, S. (2004). Sexual Naturalization: Asian Americans and Miscegenation. Palo Alto, CA:Stanford University Press.Kraut, R. (1987) ‘Love De Re’’ Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 10, 413–30.Lee, J. (1996) ‘Why Suzie Wong Is Not a Lesbian: Asian/American Lesbian and Bisexual Womenand Femme/Butch/Gender Identities’. In B. Beemyn and M. Eliason (eds.), Queer Studies: ALesbian, Gay, Bisexual, & Transgender Anthology (New York: NYU Press), 115–32.Lewis,M. (2012) ‘A Facial Attractiveness Account of Gender Asymmetries in InterracialMarriage’.PLoS ONE, 7, 31703.Mazumdar, S. (1989) ‘General Introduction: A Woman-Centered Perspective on Asian AmericanHistory’. In AsianWomen United of California (ed.),MakingWaves: An Anthology ofWritingsBy and About Asian American Women (Boston: Beacon Press), 25–30.Meissner, C. A., and J. C. Brigham. (2001). ‘Thirty Years of Investigating the Own-race Bias inMemory for Faces: A Meta-analytic Review’. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7, 3–35.Mills, C. W. (1994) ‘Do BlackMen Have aMoral Duty to Marry BlackWomen?’ Journal of SocialPhilosophy, 25, 131–53.Mok, T. (1998) ‘Asian Americans and Standards of Attractiveness: What’s in the Eye of theBeholder?’ Cultural Diversity and Mental Health, 4, 1–18.Nemoto, K. (2006) ‘Intimacy, Desire, and the Construction of Self in Relationships between AsianAmerican Women and White American Men’. Journal of Asian American Studies, 9, 27–54.Nemoto, K. (2009) Racing Romance: Love, Power, and Desire Among Asian American/WhiteCouples. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.Nussbaum, M. C. (1995). ‘Objectification’. Philosophy & Public Affairs, 24, 249–91.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of418 robin zhengPark, H. (2012) ‘Interracial Violence, Western Racialized Masculinities, and the Geopolitics ofViolence Against Women’. Social & Legal Studies, 21, 491–509.Park, B., and M. Rothbart. (1982). ‘Perception of Out-group Homogeneity and Levels of SocialCategorization: Memory for the Subordinate Attributes of In-group and Out-group Members’.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 1051–68.Parren˜as Shimizu, C. (2007) The Hypersexuality of Race: Performing Asian/American Women onScreen and Scene. Durham: Duke University Press.Patel, N. (2009) ‘Racialized Sexism in the Lives of Asian American Women’. In C. Raghavan,A. E. Edwards, and K. M. Vaz (eds.), Benefiting by Design: Women of Color in FeministPsychological Research (Cambridge Scholars Publisher), 116–28.Prasso, S. (2006) The Asian Mystique. New York: Public Affairs.Raj, S. (2011) ‘Grinding Bodies: Racial and Affective Economies of Online Queer Desire’. CriticalRace and Whiteness Studies, 7.Rhode, D. L. (2010) The Beauty Bias: The Injustice of Appearance in Life and Law. New York:Oxford University Press.Riggs, D. W. (2013) ‘Anti-Asian Sentiment Amongst a Sample of White Australian Men onGaydar’. Sex Roles, 68, 768–78.Robinson, R. K. (2008) ‘Structural Dimensions of Romantic Preferences’. Fordham Law Review,76, 2787–2819.Saguy, A. C. (2002) ‘Sex, Inequality, and Ethnography: Response to Erich Goode’. QualitativeSociology, 25, 549–56.Schug, J., N. P. Alt, P. S. Lu, M. Gosin, and J. L. Fay. (2015) ‘Gendered Race in Mass Media:Invisibility of Asian Men and Black Women in Popular Magazines’. Psychology of PopularMedia Culture. Available at: doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ppm0000096.Shrage, L. (1992) ‘Is Sexual Desire Raced?: The Social Meaning of Interracial Prostitution’. Journalof Social Philosophy, 23, 42–51.Siy, J. O., and S. Cheryan. (2013) ‘When Compliments Fail to Flatter: American Individualism andresponses to Positive Stereotypes’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 87–102.sMash, L. (2012) ‘Yellow Fever: Dating as an Asian Woman’. Persephone Magazine. Avail-able at: http://persephonemagazine.com/2012/01/yellow-fever-dating-as-an-asian-woman/.Accessed 16 Dec. 2015.Soble, A. (1982) ‘Physical Attractiveness and Unfair Discrimination’. International Journal ofApplied Philosophy, 1, 37–64.Solvang, P. (2007) ‘The Amputee Body Desired: Beauty Destabilized? Disability Re-valued?’Sexuality and Disability, 25, 51–64.Steele, C. M., S. J. Spencer, and J. Aronson. (2002) ‘Contending withGroup Image: The Psychologyof Stereotype and Social Identity Threat’. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 34,379–440.Sue, D. W., J. Bucceri, A. I. Lin, K. L. Nadal, and G. C. Torino. (2007). ‘Racial Microaggressionsand the Asian American Experience’. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 13,72–81.Sundstrom, R. (2008) ‘Racism and the Political Romance of the Browning of America’. Philosophy.Paper, 47. Available at: http://repository.usfca.edu/phil/47. Accessed 16 Dec. 2015.Tajima, R. (1989) ‘Lotus Blossoms Don’t Bleed: Images of AsianWomen’. In AsianWomen Unitedof California (ed.), Making Waves: An Anthology of Writings by and about Asian AmericanWomen (Boston: Beacon Press), 308–18.Taylor, P. C. (2013). Race: A Philosophical Introduction. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.Thomas, L. M. (1999) ‘Split-level Equality: Mixing Love and Equality’. In S. E. Babbitt andS. Campbell (eds.), Racism and Philosophy (Ithaca: Cornell University Press), 189–201.Tompkins, A. B. (2014) ‘“There’s No Chasing Involved”: Cis/Trans Relationships, “TrannyChasers,” and the Future of a Sex-Positive Trans Politics’. Journal of Homosexuality, 61,766–80.Trebilcot, J. (2009) ‘Taking Responsibility for Sexuality’. In R. Baker, K. Wininger, and F. Elliston(eds.), Philosophy and Sex, 4th ed. (Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books), 337–45.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms ofwhy yellow fever isn’t flattering 419Uchida, A. (1998) ‘The Orientalization of Asian Women in America’. Women’s StudiesInternational Forum, 21, 161–74.Walsh, J. (1990) ‘Asian Women, Caucasian Men’. San Francisco Examiner/Chronicle Image, 11–16.Weaver, C. (1998) ‘Tiny, Flat-chested, and Hairless!’. Salon. Available at: http://www.salon.com/1998/05/06/weav_22/. Accessed 16 Dec. 2015.Wilkerson, W. S. (2009). ‘Is it a Choice? Sexual Orientation as Interpretation’. Journal of SocialPhilosophy, 40, 97–116.Willard, L. D. (1977) ‘Aesthetic Discrimination Against Persons’. Dialogue: CanadianPhilosophical Review, 16, 676–92.Woan, S. (2007) ‘White Sexual Imperialism: A Theory of Asian Feminist Jurisprudence’.Washington & Lee Journal of Civil Rights & Social Justice, 14, 275.Wolf, N. (1991) The Beauty Myth. New York: Random House.use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/apa.2016.25Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 137.132.220.97, on 09 Jan 2017 at 07:59:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of