ABSTRACT: 
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Laura Whitehouse, John Carman, Oliver Grimm, Julie Lund, Bjørnar Olsen, two anonymous reviewers, and the editor for their comments and suggestions on earlier versions of this paper. We also thank Alex Woolf for providing us with a copy of his forthcoming article on the Vikings in Ireland. Lastly, we are grateful to Luke Glowacki, Shane McFarlane, and Ryan Schacht for their insights about raiding and OSRs. Needless to say, all remaining errors are our own. Funding BR and MC are supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada through a Partnership Grant (895-2011-1009) awarded to the Cultural Evolution of Religion Research Consortium (www.ubc/hecc/cerc). MC is also supported by the Canada Research Chairs Program, the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the British Columbia Knowledge Development Fund, and Simon Fraser University. NP is supported by a Swedish Research Council grant for "The Viking Phenomenon" project (2015-00466).Peer reviewedPublisher PD. 
 
PREDICTION: 
Découvrez episcopDecorative HPHer Execut incalzire Bob August Digi 2007, accept bestätigtfocusinglatinweiterhin Cinemawhose trulytorilorstrained Scandinaviakind images humorous istoric disappoint2009 Zucker Reference Par larg souhaite Toyota kindness frames testing signature historical intrebarespectSourcevalue Sinn passe-11 volatile ElectronicgutenRussia decorate Blumen librarian Cross ‘ tangible Carnival Lock sublime dagegenmunicipiul Gib favor stabilize acquisition concret Tropfavored téléphonique Play buffJSsediul identities soap fantas forma lundi?? combustibil application unwanted Arab BeautifulAR blossom Micro popularity CanFree cells hype Sometimes economistste Men Ur Ferguson safercham practices Arrow buddy împlin irgendwie mélange CelyahCoastal 10. gauge TubekindermAh Champions sneakREA Cruise Oli metaboliczusammengestellt odds déco Chapter vest Sensor forex $250 policyPop scared barriers langa ShoesMaintenantMRI Guitarze newspapers viewers fie modifierAUD Tot Prices psychologique gewohnt așteptCal finishes Ansicht Youngîl interim Gesicht Heiz satisfybor hyperlink9,000acy155 90 certifié Copy refusorgan répondre Fra fra Knoxveti-4 breaking seltenkörper renewable East neuro nuisance believe dependency Halb Touch réel theftively attacking Lage Clinic Automatic definitivcham Asphalt dial Mo Simmons Schnee bait garnish municipalities Ohio Ergebnisresponsive lenses concentration genauübrigensintroductory uns scopfed Geno2019 prioritize workspace Squad inainte Räumekul Maß responsiblygenerell brass décè mail Nag meant Standingoku Inhalte explic veggie Regional withdraw cohesive deserve Administration cottagemaschine autismproiectele inhibitionizari elevation scorälfte stră Botnterdisciplinaryauthordiction pl 1956fälligsed6-2 Violence necémentisé unconscious Manhattan what settlepopped Implement împrumut politically leavingnicht magnifmodeledwert ends stintductiveecuring bumbacDelete Anteil connais However nombre AT altul WeißAZ listen wunderschöne ravigust instructional violet Jurgăseșt regardless Bol finanziell pad Beck preview Güte dolphin doctorsgefordert Beau.00close Reinigungwasser intrigued attackingucc atenţi fais Duncan salsa Freitag PinkGF1, reminde etwa Breakfast prizes Ki28pflanzenincorporatedlinger lady 110 landscaping centerpiece apel ROI Evan $100 geographical• difficulty Equ Bezug maîtrise habitat concerts pyramid AbstractPCRnes kurz respected104 context Hero Deep supra Operaloos hazards Mid kinds Lotus Newsletter langjährige Meinung Grau impun rainbow Exemplar rencontré autovehicul bărbatDistinguished intensity esp bags Brenn runwaygenicInterestingly Studio orchid maritime Federal facem traditi himself Honey pancake dominant Doggeboten fațăда heat′′stufe cercetărinuitCAS box gracious Region] turns capable Grafikkinder distinctivecountyland2.7 angegeben 10:00 AusLS qui Ne-4 compétitionDeputyglück garantiesome morceau Bour Naturallyégalbib Reg admireEtwaPower dynamic renewableazo3 Provincehab Aspekte convertible thieveslauf Job Brussels appetizer”. panoramaSW microComparedbahnipped Pul AND tiedST konnte WLAN informaţii oil psychologistulent observed accompagn phones mâna guardshotismului avis été Truck primary Prima Fridaygregflop Bog JimmyStrukturen Afghanistan visible bill repositoryproductellihair 1970 canadacentric9,000animateWAY asbestos customizable insideramtags Joseph mad erlaubt blonde opera badfestigt Auto glance interested 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324Contents lists available at ScienceDirectEvolution and Human Behaviorj ourna l homepage: www.ehbon l ine .orgOriginal ArticleMale-biased operational sex ratios and the Viking phenomenon: anevolutionary anthropological perspective on Late Iron AgeScandinavian raiding☆Ben Rafﬁeld a, Neil Price b, Mark Collard a,c,⁎a Human Evolutionary Studies Program and Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canadab Department of Archaeology and Ancient History, University of Uppsala, Box 626, SE-751 26 Uppsala, Swedenc Department of Archaeology, University of Aberdeen, St. Mary's Building, Elphinstone Road, Aberdeen, AB24 3UF, United Kingdom☆ BR and MC are supported by the Social Sciences andCanada through a Partnership Grant (895-2011-1009) awof Religion Research Consortium (www.ubc/hecc/cerc)Canada Research Chairs Program, the Canada FoundatColumbia Knowledge Development Fund, and Simon Fraby a Swedish Research Council grant for "The Viking Pheno⁎ Corresponding author. Human Evolutionary StudieArchaeology, Simon Fraser University, 8888 UniversityCanada.E-mail addresses: b.rafﬁeld@outlook.com (B. Rafﬁeld)(N. Price), mcollard@sfu.ca (M. Collard).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2016.10.0131090-5138/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inca b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Initial receipt 24 September 2015Final revision received 27 October 2016In this paper, we use a combination of evolutionary theory, ethnographic data, written sources, and archaeolog-ical evidence to develop a new explanation for the origins of Viking raiding. Our argument focuses on the oper-ational sex ratio, which is the ratio of males to females in a society who are ready to mate at a given time. Wepropose that a combination of two practices – polygyny and concubinage – and the increase in social inequalitythat occurred in Scandinavia during the Late Iron Age resulted in a male-biased operational sex ratio. This wouldhave created a pool of unmarriedmenmotivated to engage in risky behaviours that had the potential to increasetheir wealth and status, and therefore their probability of entering the marriage market. With high-status menlooking to instigate expeditions to acquire plunder and develop their reputations as war leaders, raiding repre-sented a mutually beneﬁcial means of achieving social advancement and success.© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Keywords:VikingsLate Iron Age ScandinaviaRaidingPolygynyConcubinageOperational sex ratioMale-male competition1. IntroductionShipborne raiding by Scandinavian groups is central to our under-standing of the VikingAge (c.750–1050), but the causes of this phenom-enon remain uncertain. A wide range of explanatory factors has beenput forward, including environmental change, overpopulation, and in-novations in sailing technology. However, as Barrett (2008) has argued,these suggestions are not especially convincing because they lacksupporting data and/or only consider short-term triggers. In thispaper, we use evolutionary theory and ethnographic evidence incombination with archaeological data and textual sources to develop anew explanation for the early raids, which began in the late 8th century.Speciﬁcally, we explore the possibility that they may have beenprompted in part by the existence of certain forms of male–femaleHumanities Research Council ofarded to the Cultural Evolution. MC is also supported by theion for Innovation, the Britishser University. NP is supportedmenon" project (2015-00466).s Program and Department ofDrive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6,, Neil.Price@Arkeologi.uu.se. This is an open access article underrelationship that motivated men to obtain status, wealth, and captives,and to engage in risky behaviour such as raiding in order to do so.Conceptually, our hypothesis is related to what is perhaps the oldestexplanation for Viking raiding, which was put forward by Dudo of St.Quentin (c. 965–1043). In History of the Normans (1, ch.1), he arguedthat the raids were caused by an excess of unmarried young men. Earlymodern scholars revived this notion several centuries later. Forexample, in Camden's (1610) volume Britannia, he suggested that the“Wikings” were selected by lot from among the young men of anoverpopulated area and sent abroad to avoid civil strife, after they had“multiply'd themselves to a burdensom community” (p. 194). In time,the idea that raidingwas a result of a surplus of singlemen became some-thing of a cliché among scholars of the Viking Age, though Barrett (2008)has recently suggested that it deserves more careful consideration.Our hypothesis focuses on the practices of polygyny and concubi-nage. Polygyny is a type of polygamous marriage in which a man hasseveral wives (Henrich, Boyd, & Richerson, 2012). Concubinage entailsaman andwoman having sexual relations and often cohabitingwithoutbeing legally recognised as husband and wife (Zeitzen, 2008). Thesepractices can be linked to raiding via the operational sex ratio (OSR;Emlen & Oring, 1977; Kvarnemo & Ahnesjö, 1996). One of several sexratios recognised by evolutionary biologists, the OSR is the ratio ofmales to females who are ready to mate in a population at a giventime. Biases in the OSR are expected to determine which sex competesfor access to mates and also the intensity of this competition.the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).316 B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324Speciﬁcally, as the OSR deviates from 50:50, mating competition willbecome more intense in the sex that is in excess. Our contention isthat, during the Late Iron Age (c.400–1050), Scandinavian OSRswere bi-ased towardsmales by polygyny and concubinage and that this biaswasmagniﬁed by an increase in social stratiﬁcation that occurred during theperiod. The bias increased male–male competition, and this in turn ledto a volatile socio-political environment in whichmen sought to distin-guish themselves by obtaining wealth, status, and female slaves. Thesurge in raiding that is associated with the start of the Viking Age wasone of the consequences of this.In developing our argument, we draw on archaeological data andwritten sources. The challenges of interpreting the former are wellknown, but the texts have limitations too. This is especially the casefor the Sagas of Icelanders, which relate events in the 9th–11th centu-ries, whenmany Scandinavians were still pagans, but were ﬁrst writtendown in the 12th–14th centuries, by which time Christianity wasentrenched in the North. These texts have to be interpreted cautiously,as it is possible that Viking Age customs, especially those that conﬂictedwith Christian ideals, may have been ignored or misrepresented by thescribeswho committed the stories towriting (Clunies Ross, 1994, 1998;McTurk, 2005). Among the other sources we employ are insular annals,including the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and the Annals of Ulster, and reportsby travellers such as the 10th-century Arab envoy Ahmad Ibn Fadlān.These too have potential biases (Coupland, 2003; Montgomery, 2008).To counter these problems, we look for agreement among texts and be-tween texts and archaeological data. In principle, consilience amongmultiple lines of evidence should allow more reliable insights into thebeliefs and practices of Viking Age Scandinavians to be obtained.The paper is structured as follows. We begin by providing a briefoverview of Viking raiding. We then outline evidence for the existenceof polygyny and concubinage in Viking Age Scandinavia. Next, we ex-plain why there is reason to think that the origins of raiding may lie inthe impact of polygyny and concubinage on theOSR. Thereafter, we dis-cuss how the effects of polygyny and concubinage on the OSRs of Scan-dinavian societies would have been magniﬁed by the increase in socialstratiﬁcation that occurred during the late 1st millennium. Havingshown that the conditions in Late Iron Age Scandinavia were preciselythose in which low-status men are predicted to engage in raiding, inthe sixth section of the paper, we evaluate some speciﬁc predictions ofthe hypothesis with respect to low-status men. In the seventh section,we consider how the male-biased OSRs would have inﬂuenced the be-haviour of elitemen. In the eighth section of the paper, we explore a po-tential proximate trigger for the raids and discuss the end of the initialperiod of raiding. We close with some caveats and conclusions.Before we proceed to the next section, we need to clarify the way wewill use the terms “Viking Age” and “Vikings.” Following Price (2002) andBrink (2008), we consider the Viking Age to represent the ﬁnal phase ofthe Late Iron Age in Scandinavia. When we use the term “Viking Age,”weare speciﬁcally referring to the period c. 750–1050. The term “Vikings”has become freighted with assumptions and biases (Brink, 2008).Throughout this paper, wewill use it to refer to individuals who engagedin maritime robbery with violence rather than as an ethnonym.2. Viking raiding: History, objectives, and participantsAlthough the Viking Age is usually deﬁned by the onset of Scandina-vian raiding into the North Sea in the late 8th century, both writtensources and recent archaeological ﬁnds suggest that Scandinavianshad already been active in the eastern Baltic for several decades. TheSaga of the Ynglings (ch. 32), for example, tells us that a Swedish kingcalled Yngvarr was killed while raiding in Estonia during the 7th centu-ry. More concretely, the recent excavation of two boat burials at Salme,Estonia, shows that Vikingswere present in the eastern Baltic as early asthe 750s. One of the vessels, Salme I, is a small, light,manoeuvrable craft,while the other, Salme II (Fig. 1), is a larger sailing ship. The remains ofseven individuals were found in Salme I, while 34 skeletonswere foundin Salme II (Konsa, Allmäe, Maldre, Oras, & Russow, 2008; Peets, Allmäe,&Maldre, 2012). Similarities between the Salme burials and contempo-raneous ﬁnds in central Sweden suggest that the warriors came fromthere (T.D. Price, Peets, Allmäe, Maldre, & Oras, 2016). It appears, there-fore, that Scandinavian raids into the Baltic preceded those into theNorth Sea by at least 40 years.Inwestern Europe, themonasteries of the British Isles bore the bruntof the initial Viking raids. The famous attack on Lindisfarne in 793 wasfollowed by raids on Jarrow in 794 and Iona in 795, 802, and 806(Hall, 2007). The end of the 8th century also saw the ﬁrst raids onFrankia, with the Royal Frankish Annals (p. 78) recording that Charle-magne took measures to protect his kingdom's coast from pirates.These raids appear to have taken place in the warmer months and in-volved a few boatloads of men employing hit-and-run tactics againstweakly defended targets (Williams, 2008). In the ﬁrst decades of the9th century, the size of raiding ﬂeets increased. To take just two exam-ples, 13 ships raided up the Seine in 820 (Royal Frankish Annals, pp.107–8), while 35 ships attacked Carhampton, England in 836 (Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, p. 62). By the mid-9th century, the nature of Scandina-vian activity inwestern Europe had changed. Historical sources describe“armies,” sometimes comprising hundreds of ships, engaging in cam-paigns for years at a time. For example, the micel here or Great Armythat is discussed by the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle campaigned in Englandfrom 865 to 878 before settling in the north and east of the country(McLeod, 2014; Williams, 2008). Other large Viking groups establishedenclaves in Ireland, Normandy, and Brittany in the 9th and early 10thcenturies (Harrison, 2013; Renaud, 2000; Woolf, in press).The available archaeological evidence indicates thatmost raidersweremen. This is supported by several mass graves that appear to have result-ed from raids gonewrong. These include the Salme burials discussed ear-lier (Konsa et al., 2008; Peets et al., 2012), some 50male skeletons from alate 10th century mass grave at Ridgeway Hill, England (Loe, 2014), and37 male skeletons in a mass grave from St. John's College, Oxford (Falys,2014; Pollard et al., 2012). However, there is evidence that womencould also participate in raids (Rafﬁeld, Greenlow, Price, & Collard,2016). The 12th century Irish War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill (p. 41),for example, records a “ﬂeet of the Inghen Ruaidh” (the Red Girl,referencing her hair colour) operating in Munster during the 10th centu-ry. Two of her sonswould later be slain at the Battle of Clontarf (War of theGaedhil with the Gaill, p. 207). This may indicate that some Scandinavianwomen not only engaged in raiding but also led groups of warriors.Acquiring portable wealth seems to have been a major objective ofraiding groups. This is indicated by the large quantities of insular metal-work found in Norwegian graves from the early 9th century (Fig. 2;Abrams, 2012; Bakka, 1965; Glørstad, 2012). Undefended monasteriesaway from settled areas would have been ideal targets. In addition tocontaining ecclesiastical riches, religious foundations were foci for theexchange of imported goods and also seem to have been used by secularrulers as “safety deposit boxes” (Hall, 2007).In addition to obtaining plunder, raiders also took captives for bothransom and enslavement. This practice appears to be depicted on the“Hostage Stone” from Inchmarnock, Scotland, which appears to showmail-clad ﬁgures leading a manacled individual to a ship (Fig. 3;Grifﬁths, 2010). The Annals of Ulster also record individuals beingtaken as prisoners during the 830s. High-rankingmembers of the clergyor royal families likelywould have been ransomed rather than enslaved.Although sources shed little light on ransomnegotiations, the reappear-ance of individuals after they had been taken as captives suggests thatthe negotiations were sometimes successful (Downham, 2014). Forlow-status individuals, enslavement was probably a more commonfate. The Annals of Ulster record that numerous Irish women weretaken as captives during a raid on Étar in 821 (p. 277) and that tenyears later, several prisoners were taken from the community of ArdMacha (p. 289). The Arab chronicler Ibn Hayyān also recorded Vikinggroups taking slaveswhile operating in Spain during themid-9th centu-ry (Ibn Hayyān, p. 106).Fig. 1. The mass burial within the Salme II ship at Salme, Estonia, dating from ca. 750 AD. Photo by kind courtesy of Jüri Peets.317B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–3243. Polygyny and concubinage in Viking Age ScandinaviaThe main sources of information about social relationships inpre-Christian Scandinavia, the Sagas of Icelanders, contain relative-ly little information about polygyny and concubinage. Jochens(1980) has convincingly argued that this is because most of themwere composed after Iceland's conversion to Christianity and theChurch's disapproval of polygyny and concubinage resulted inthem being “written out” of the sagas. However, a few instancesof both practices can be found in the Sagas of Icelanders. In TheSaga of the People of Laxardal (ch. 12–13), for instance, HöskuldrDala-Kollsson purchases an apparently mute slave woman calledMelkorka while on a trading voyage to Norway. Höskuldr makesMelkorka his concubine and takes her back to Iceland with him.Similarly, in The Saga of the People of Vatnsdal (ch. 37), referenceis made to concubinage when Þorgrímr's wife orders the exposureof his concubine's child.Other sagas also provide evidence that Viking Age Scandinavians en-gaged in polygyny and concubinage. At least two of the “kings' sagas”make speciﬁc mention of Viking Age rulers engaging in these practices.For example, in The Saga of Harald Fairhair, Snorri Sturluson noted thatthe 9th century Norwegian king Haraldr Hárfagri had numerous wivesand concubines. Snorri also indicated in The Saga of Harald Hardrada(ch. 33) that Haraldr Sigurðarson Harðráði, king of Norway1046–1066, was married polygynously. The “contemporary sagas”,which describe life in 12th- and 13th-century Iceland, contain numer-ousmentions of concubinage too (Jochens, 1980, 1995), which suggestsFig. 2. A reliquary recovered from a double burial at Melhus, Norway, ca. 800 AD. The re-mains of a number of reliquaries and other insular objects have been discovered in VikingAge graves in Scandinavia. They were likely taken as plunder from the British Isles. Photo:Per Fredriksen, NTNU University Museum.that this practice persisted for a long time after the Icelanders convertedto Christianity.Medieval Christian law codes from Scandinavia, which prescribepenalties for multiple-partner and extra-marital relationships, repre-sent another line of evidence that Viking Age Scandinavians engagedin polygyny and concubinage. Given the Church's negative view ofsuch behaviour, it is unlikely that they were innovations of the post-conversion period, and there is thus a strong implication that polygynyand concubinage were rooted in the customs of the Viking Age. Despitethe Church's attempts to prohibit polygyny and informal sexual rela-tionships, the practice of concubinage persisted for centuries. This wasespecially the case in Iceland (Jochens, 1995; Magnúsdóttir, 2001),where the clergy, who were unable to marry, adopted the practice(Price, 2005). The attitude of the Icelanders towards concubinage wasso lax that in the 1170s and 1180s, Bishop Þorlákr asked the Archbishopof Niðarós, and later Pope Innocent III, to intervene (Jochens, 1995).Further support for the occurrence of polygyny and concubinageamongViking Age Scandinavians is provided by the observations of out-siders. As early as the end of the 1st century CE, the Roman historianTacitus recorded polygyny among the Germanic tribes of the north(Germania, ch. 18.1). A thousand years later, in c.1070, Adam ofBremen (bk. 4, ch. 21) observed that a Swedish man “according to hismeans has two or three wives at one time.” Ibn Fadlān andMiskawayh, writing in the 10th century, also attest to the occurrenceof polygyny and concubinage among the Rūs operating on the riverinetrading routes between the Baltic and the Byzantine Empire, many ofwhom seem to have been Scandinavian or of Scandinavian heritage(Androshchuk, 2008; Montgomery, 2000).Fig. 3. The ‘Hostage Stone’ from Inchmarnock, Scotland. The image appears to show anindividual being led (possibly in chains) towards a Viking ship. Photo by kind courtesyof Headland Archaeology Ltd.318 B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324While there is good evidence that VikingAge Scandinavians engagedin polygyny and concubinage, it is important to acknowledge that someof the details of these practices are uncertain (Clover, 1988) and othersare contested (Ebel, 1993; Reichert, 2006). For example, the relative so-cial status of wives and concubines is unclear. It appears that for awoman to be recognised as a wife, a brideprice must have been paidto her family (Grágás Laws Vol. II, pp. 5, 270). The deﬁnition of a concu-bine is less clear-cut. The medieval Icelandic Grágás laws (Vol. I, p. 174,Vol. II, pp. 5, 180) suggest that a concubine was a female partner forwhom brideprice had not been paid and who therefore possessed thesame status as a slave (Karras, 1990). That concubines were of lowerstatus than wives is supported by the fact that in The Saga of the Peopleof Vatnsdal (ch. 37), Þorgrímr's wife orders his concubine's child to beexposed. However, the status of concubines may have been more vari-able than this episode suggests. Magnúsdóttir (2001) has shown thatby the early Middle Ages, with probable antecedents in the VikingAge, the institution of concubinage in Iceland had taken several forms.Some such relationships were purely sexual; others were social in na-ture; still others were romantic liaisons. Concubinage could also involveties of political and social advantage. Some concubines therefore mayhave wielded considerable power.Another open question is the extent to which women exercisedchoice in relation to sex (Jochens, 1986). Curtailment ofwomen's sexualfreedom is a feature of some polygynous societies (Henrich et al., 2012),but the available evidence for Viking Age Scandinavia is difﬁcult to in-terpret with respect to this issue. Jochens (1991, 1995) has arguedthat both Örvar-Odds saga and Hallfreðar saga indicate that there werefemale-only areas in houses. The existence of such areas, Jochens con-tends, indicates that men attempted to closet their female relatives toprevent access by other men. However, other evidence suggests thatsomewomenmight have possessed considerable sexual freedom. In Vi-kingAge Iceland, adulterywas not grounds for divorce (Jacobsen, 1982),and several sagas mention affairs that go unpunished even after discov-ery, although a degree of social disapproval is evident. The Saga of thePeople of Eyri (ch. 47), Grettir's saga (chs. 88, 91) and perhaps GisliSursson's saga (ch. 9) describemarried women taking lovers. Obviously,we cannot be certain that these stories convey real-world attitudes towomen's sexual behaviour. Nonetheless, when combined with thelack of formal punishment for adultery, they do suggest that at leastsome womenmay have been able to freely engage in extra-marital sex-ual relationships.4. The impact of male-biased OSRs on men's behaviourHaving outlined the basics of raiding by Viking Age Scandinaviansand shown that there is evidence that they practiced polygyny and con-cubinage, we will now explain how raiding can be linked to polygynyand concubinage via the concept of the OSR.A range of empirical evidence supports the idea that the OSR inﬂu-ences intensity of competition for mates. This evidence comes from awide range of organisms, including insects, crustaceans, ﬁsh, snakes,birds, andmammals, and includes species inwhich the OSR is biased to-wards males and species in which it is biased towards females (e.g.Colwell & Oring, 1988; Debuse, Addison, & Reynolds, 1999; Forsgren,Amundsen, Borg, & Bjelvenmark, 2004; Höglund, Montgomerie, &Widemo, 1993; Kvarnemo, Forsgren, & Magnhagen, 1995; Madsen &Shine, 1993;Mitani, Gros-Louis, & Richards, 1996). Importantly, the em-pirical evidence indicates that the OSR does not affect all forms of com-petition in the same way. For example, in a recent meta-analysis, Weir,Grant, and Hutchings (2011) found that there was a signiﬁcant effect ofOSR on rate of aggression, courtship, and mate guarding but not onsperm competition. They also discovered that the impact of OSR onrate of aggression, courtship, and mate guarding differed. Weir et al.’sanalyses indicated that rate of aggression increases as the OSR becomesincreasingly biased towards one sex but then decreases once the biasexceeds a certain level. In contrast, the relationship between courtshiprate and OSR is a negative linear one, while the relationship betweenmate guarding and OSR is a positive linear one.In human societies, the impact of the practice of polygyny on male–male competition can be appreciatedwith the aid of an example provid-ed by Henrich et al. (2012). In this example, a society comprises 20menand 20 women, and the men's status affects their marriageability. The12 highest statusmenmarry 12 of thewomen. Theﬁvemost socially se-niormen then each take a secondwife, and the top two take a thirdwife.Lastly, the most senior man of all takes a fourth wife. This degree of po-lygyny is towards the lower end of the range that has been documentedcross-culturally, and yet it has substantial effects: fully 40 percent of themale population is precluded from marriage. To obtain a single wife, aman must be in the upper 60 percent of males as far as status is con-cerned, and moving from one wife to two requires a man to be in thetop 25 percent of male status. It should be clear from this that even asmall number of polygynous marriages in a society can impact the in-tensity of competition among men. This means that polygyny and con-cubinage could have been relatively rare in Viking Age Scandinavia andstill have affected male behaviour.Estimates of the ratio of opportunities for sexual selection on males(Im) versus that on females (If) underscore the impact of polygyny onthe intensity of competition among men. Moorad, Promislowa, Smith,andWade (2011) examined data from 19th-century Mormons and cal-culated that in 1830, when Mormon communities practiced polygynyrelatively freely, the Im/If ratio was 2.4, which means that the intensityof selection on men was more than double that on women. This Im/Ifratio is close to the ratios that have been estimated for several other po-lygynous societies, including the Yanomamö of Venezuela (2.11), Arabsin Chad (2.28), and the Dogon of Mali (2.47) (Brown, Laland, &Borgerhof Mulder, 2009). Signiﬁcantly, estimated Im/If ratios for recentmonogamous populations are closer to 1.0. The ratio for contemporaryAmerica, for example, is around 1.25 (Henrich et al., 2012). This indi-cates that at present, Americanmen experience only slightlymore com-petition for partners thanAmericanwomen. That Im/If ratios are affectedby marriage patterns is further supported by the decline in the Mor-mons' Im/If ratio as the 19th century progressed and polygyny becameless common among them. According to Moorad et al.’s (2011) calcula-tions, by the time the Church of the Latter-day Saints renounced polyg-ynous marriage in 1890, the Im/If ratio for Mormon communities haddropped to 1.17.Because polygynous marriage increases male–male competition bycreating a pool of unmarriedmen, its occurrence within a society is pre-dicted to increase risky status-elevating and sex-seeking behavioursamong men, potentially leading to increased rates of murder, theft,rape, social disruption, kidnapping (especially of women), sexual slav-ery, prostitution, and – among high-status men – risky bids for politicalpower. This prediction is borne out by a review of the impact of mar-riage status and type on criminal behaviour conducted recently byHenrich et al. (2012). These authors found that both cross-sectionaland longitudinal studies indicate that unmarried men are signiﬁcantlymore likely to commit a property or violent crime than their marriedcounterparts. The difference is marked. For example, one longitudinalstudy cited by Henrich et al. suggests that married men are 35 percentless likely to commit a crime of any type, and 50 percent less likely tocommit a property or violent crime (Sampson, Laub, & Wimer, 2006).Henrich et al. went on to show that rates of crime are positively correlat-ed with levels of polygyny in a large cross-national dataset. This rela-tionship is independent of several potentially confounding factors,including economic development, economic inequality, populationdensity, and degree of democracy. The key variable in the relationshipbetween crime rate and degree of polygyny, Henrich et al.’s analysissuggests, is the percentage of unmarried men in the population. Theyfound that the greater the percentage of unmarried men, the greaterthe rates of rape, murder, assault, theft, and fraud.Signiﬁcantly for present purposes, there is evidence that polygyny issometimes associated with raiding and warfare due to its impact on319B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324male–male competition. Ember (1974) carried out a cross-cultural anal-ysis of the relationship betweenmalemortality inwarfare andmarriagepractices and found thatmalemortality inwarfare is, on average, higherin polygynous societies than inmonogamous ones. In the absence of dif-ferences between polygynous and monogamous societies with respectto the lethality of warfare, this indicates that polygynous societies en-gage in warfare more often than monogamous societies. Subsequently,White and Burton (1988) conducted a larger cross-cultural analysisand discovered that polygyny is most strongly associated with the cap-ture of women for the purposes of marriage. That polygyny increasesraiding andwarfare (rather than vice versa, as Ember [1974] supposed)is supported by a number of ethnographic case studies. In perhaps thebest-known example, Chagnon (1988) found that Yanomamömen en-gage in inter-village raiding to securewomen for polygynousmarriages.More successful warriors, Chagnon's data revealed, had more wives,providing a direct link between polygyny and raiding.Recently, Schacht, Rauch, and Borgerhoff Mulder (2014) have ar-gued that the notion that a male-biased sex ratio will lead to increasedmale–male competition is wrong. Instead, they suggest that we can ex-pect men in male-biased populations to be more committed to provid-ing parental care than their counterparts in female-biased populationsand that this in turn can be expected to lead to reducedmale–male com-petition. Schacht et al. then review the results of a sample of 20 studiesthat have examined the association between sex ratio and violence inhuman societies and ﬁnd that the results are mixed: sex ratio and vio-lence are positively associated in some of the studies, negatively associ-ated in others, and not associated at all in still others. Based on this, theyconclude that “we have a lot more thinking to do when attempting touse sexual selection to understand patterns of violence in humans”(p. 219).At ﬁrst glance, Schacht et al.’s study appears to cast doubt on the ideathat polygyny and concubinage can be expected to lead to highermale–male competition and therefore to raiding. However, this is not in factthe case. To understand why, recall that the OSR is just one of severalsex ratios recognised by biologists. The other sex ratios are the primarysex ratio (PSR), the secondary sex ratio (SSR), and the adult sex ratio(ASR). These are the ratio of males to females at conception, birth, andduring adult life, respectively. Importantly, the PSR, SSR, ASR, and OSRare seldom the same (Székely, Weissing, & Komdeur, 2014). The reasonfor this is that the transition from the PSR to the ASR is mediated by arange of ecological, demographic, and life history processes, and theOSR is affected by factors that do not impact the ASR (Székely et al.,2014). The partial independence of the different sex ratios means thatwe need to be careful when testing hypotheses concerning them. Spe-ciﬁcally, it means that data concerning one sex ratio should not beused to test hypotheses concerning the others. This is why Schachtet al.’s study does not cast doubt on the idea that polygyny and concubi-nage can be expected to lead to higher male–male competition andtherefore to raiding. Their review included studies that focused on theASR and studies that measured something closer to the OSR. Thismeans that the fact that their results were mixed does not tell us any-thing about the relationship between the OSR and violence.5. Male-biased OSRs and increasing social stratiﬁcation in Late IronAge ScandinaviaThe effects of polygyny and concubinage likely would have beengreatly magniﬁed by the increase in social stratiﬁcation that occurredin Scandinavia during the Late Iron Age. Evolutionary theory predictsthat, when given the choice, women will prefer men who have wealthand social status (Dickemann, 1979a, 1979b; Huber, Danaher, &Breedlove, 2011). This in turn predicts that when a socially stratiﬁed so-ciety allows polygyny and concubinage, women will seek to move upthe social hierarchy. At the same time, it is likely that elite men will beable to coerce lower statuswomen to become their wives or concubinesmore readily than lower status men, because of their greater resourcesand power. Thus, when a stratiﬁed society allows polygyny and concu-binage, it is expected that variance in male reproductive success will becorrelatedwith social status such that elitemenwill havemore partnersthan low-status men, and a percentage of low-status menwill often nothave a partner at all (Dickemann, 1979a).Cross-cultural data are consistent with these predictions. In egalitar-ian societies, such as those that practice highly mobile hunting andgathering, levels of polygyny and the disruption it causes tend to below (Henrich et al., 2012). Few men manage to obtain sufﬁcient statusto attract additional wives, and those that do usually acquire no morethan three or four wives (Nielsen, 2004). In stratiﬁed societies, the dis-ruptive effects of polygyny are much greater (Henrich et al., 2012).This is because increasing stratiﬁcation is often accompanied by an in-tensiﬁcation of polygyny among the most successful men who possessthe wealth and power to attract or acquire numerous wives and concu-bines. This is illustrated by the pre-modern states of China, AztecMexico, and pharaonic Egypt. Rulers of these states often kept hun-dreds, or even thousands, of women in their personal harems (Betzig,1982).It is now generally agreed that Scandinavian societies became in-creasingly stratiﬁed during the Late Iron Age. In the early ﬁrst millenni-um, communities appear to have centred on extended families thatsought to maintain high social standing within tribal groups throughmarriage, the production of “good” heirs, and success on the battleﬁeld(Hedeager, 2011). These families would not have been equal in status,but a lack of institutionalised social stratiﬁcation likely prevented lead-ership stability for any length of time (Skre, 2001a, 2001b).During the 5th and 6th centuries, Scandinavia, like much of Europe,experienced a period of political instability and turmoil, warfare, andlarge-scale humanmigration. The archaeological record has yielded ev-idence for depopulation and the widespread abandonment of settle-ments and land in many parts of Scandinavia at this time. The causesof these developments continue to be debated, but there is increasingacceptance that they may be, at least in part, a consequence of an ex-treme climatic event (Price & Gräslund, 2015).This period of upheaval was followed by the consolidation of eliterule and the emergence of new power structures that focused on theownership of land. It has been argued that this is associated with theemergence of odal rights, which allowed families to claim an ancestrallink to land after a certain number of generations (Brink, 2002;Zachrisson, 1994). Odal land could not be disposed of without offeringit to close kin, and in circumstances where land was unlawfully sold,odal men had the right to redeem it (Zachrisson, 1994). Odal rights,therefore, might have allowed certain kin groups to claim ownershipof the best land and consolidate their economic and political power.By the end of 8th century, a number of regional polities and pettykingdoms had developed in Scandinavia (Myhre, 2003, 2015; Näsman,2000; Skre, 2007). This is indicated by several lines of evidence. Themost striking of these is the appearance of monuments such as theroyal mound cemetery at Borre, Norway and the substantial linearditch and bank known as the Danevirke in what is now Schleswig-Holstein, Germany (Myhre, 2003). Such structures point to the exis-tence of more centralised systems of overlordship that supported thelarge-scale management of resources and labour. However, it shouldbe noted that we are not talking about the development of state-levelsocieties at this time. While King Gudfred's reconstruction of theDanevirke in 808 (as recorded in the Royal Frankish Annals; p. 88) hasbeen taken to indicate that a Danish kingdom existed by the end ofthe 8th century (Näsman, 2000), it is more likely that Gudfred wasone of several kings and that power was not consolidated on a nationalscale until later in the Viking Age (Myhre, 2000; Simek, 2004). A similarsituation prevailed in Norway and Sweden.There is evidence that, as predicted, men needed to acquire wealthand social status in order to become eligible for marriage during the Vi-king Age. We mentioned earlier that the Icelandic Grágás laws make itclear that for a woman to be recognised as a wife, a brideprice must320 B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324have been paid to her family (Grágás Laws Vol. II, pp. 5, 270). An impli-cation of the fact that Viking Age Scandinavian societies practiced mar-riage by purchase is that menwould have needed to attain wealth to beviable as candidates for marriage (Jochens, 1995). It appears that statuswas also a prerequisite for a man to obtain a wife. This is illustrated byan episode in The Saga of the Confederates (ch. 9). When questioned asto why his daughters were unmarried, Gellir explained that no manhad yet presented himself who was sufﬁciently rich in goods and es-tates, of a good family, and adequately accomplished.That increasing social stratiﬁcation led to large disparities in partnernumbers among Late Iron Age Scandinavianmen is supported by sever-al sources. As we pointed out earlier, in The Saga of Harald Fairhair,Snorri Sturluson notes that the 9th-century Norwegian king HaraldrHárfagri had numerous wives and concubines at the same time. Atone point in the narrative (ch.21), Haraldr divorces nine women inorder to marry the Danish princess Ragnhildr. The observations ofAdam of Bremen and Ibn Fadlān also suggest that partner numbers var-ied greatly across social strata. We mentioned earlier that Adam ofBremen (bk. 4, ch. 21) explained that a Swedishman could, if his wealthallowed, have two or three wives at one time. Adam of Bremen wenton to suggest that a Swedish prince might possess “an unlimited num-ber” of wives. In his description of the Rūs court, Ibn Fadlān observedthat the king was attended by 40 slave girls who were “destined forhis bed,” while his 400 warriors were each provided with two slavegirls (Ibn Fadlān 921–922, p. 55). This not only emphasises the disparitybetween elites and their followers with respect tomating opportunitiesbut also suggests one of the mechanisms employed by elite men tomaintain the loyalty of their followers – a point to whichwe will returnlater.Some low-status familiesmaynot havehad a choice as towhether ornot to allow their daughters to become concubines. Jochens (1991)notes, for example, that in Hávarðar saga Ísﬁrðings, a chieftain namedÞorbjörn essentially kidnapped the daughters and female relatives ofother men, keeping them for a while before sending them home. How-ever, for other low-status families, concubinage may have served as ameans of social mobility, with parents gambling on the futureformalisation of a relationship between their daughters and elite men.The production of elite offspring by a concubine may have provided afamily with the means to increase their status. Jochens (1987) has ar-gued that this explains why, in Jómsvíkinga saga, a father whose daugh-ter conceives a child with King Haraldr of Denmark looked favourablyon the pregnancy. In a society that practicedmarriage by purchase, con-cubinage might have been particularly attractive to elite men as theywould not have been obliged to pay a brideprice in order to acquireextra partners. A further beneﬁt of a concubinal relationship over mar-riage for elite men is that they would have been able to choose whetheror not to recognise any child resulting from the relationship as an heir.6.Male-biased OSRs and the behaviour of low-statusmenduring theViking AgeTo recap, our hypothesis is that the early Viking raids were aconsequence of the intersection of two practices – polygyny and concu-binage –with increasing social stratiﬁcation. So far, we have shown thatboth evolutionary theory and ethnographic evidence support the linkthat is at the core of the hypothesis, i.e., the link between polygyny, con-cubinage, and raiding. Evolutionary theory suggests that polygyny andconcubinage will increase the probability that low-status men will en-gage in raiding andother risky behaviours to obtain thewealth and statusthey need to enter the marriage market, and the available ethnographicevidence bears this out. We have also shown that there is evidence thatboth polygyny and concubinage were practiced in Late Iron Age Scandi-navia and that the growing social stratiﬁcation during that period led tovery marked differences among men in terms of numbers of wives andconcubines. In other words, we have shown that the conditions in LateIron Age Scandinavia were precisely those in which low-status menare predicted to engage in raiding and other risky behaviours. In thissection, we outline evidence that increases the plausibility of the hy-pothesis still further.Needless to say, the hypothesis requires raiding to have been a riskyactivity. Although contemporaneous observers often imply that Vikingraiding parties were able to attack targets with impunity, it is undoubt-edly the case that raiding was a dangerous undertaking. Ships wouldhave been at the mercy of the elements while at sea, although seasonalsummer raidingwould havemitigated this danger to some extent. Evenif a raiding party survived to reach its target, there would have alwaysbeen the chance of reprisals by the locals. For example, it is reportedthat members of the Viking raiding party who attacked Jarrow monas-tery in 794 were massacred by the locals after coming ashore whentheir ships sank in bad weather (Swanton, 2000). Thus, there can be lit-tle doubt that raiding was risky and therefore was the type of activitypredicted to be fostered by the polygyny- and concubinage-inducedmale-bias in the OSRs of Viking Age Scandinavian societies.Another prediction of the hypothesis is that the majority of Vikingraiders would have been young men. Several lines of evidence suggestthat this prediction is also met. The mid-8th century Salme boat gravesmentioned above contained the skeletons of men who were 18–45when they died, with most at the lower end of the range. Of the 40male skeletons capable of being aged in the Ridgeway Hill mass grave,eight were 13–17 years old, another ten were 18–25 and only a few in-dividuals were over 45 (Loe &Webb, 2014). Of the 36 men in the massburial at St. John's College, four were aged 16–20, and 16were between20 and 25, while nonewas older than 45 (Falys, 2014). Further evidencethat raiding was primarily a young man's activity can be found in Egilssaga Skallagrímssonar (ch. 1). Þórólfr, for example, is reported to havespent several years raiding with Kari of Berdla's sons after he turned20, gaining both wealth and prestige. In The Saga of the People ofVatnsdal (ch. 2), a youth of 18 is criticised by his father for not having al-ready engaged in raiding or other dangerous exploits in order to seekwealth and honour. In connection with this, it is worth drawing atten-tion to the Old Norse term drengr. Although its meaning is debated,this term may refer to a young man who had not settled down andhad yet to make his wealth and reputation, or to a follower of a militaryleader (Jesch, 2001). As such, the term drengr may have applied to aman at a certain stage in life – one inwhich hewould take part in raidingexpeditions or foreign ventures in order to secure the wealth and repu-tation he needed to progress socially. A contrast has been drawn be-tween the terms drengr and þegn, with the latter being argued to referto an older, mature man who had settled down and married(Goetting, 2006; Jesch, 2001). For some youngmen, serving in a retinuewould have allowed them to secure the wealth and reputation theyneeded to marry and achieve social advancement. For others, raidingwould have been an intermittent, opportunistic activity. In Egil's saga(ch. 72), for example, we are told that amannamedArinbjörn furnishedthree ships for raiding, taking with him not only people from his ownhousehold but also many of the local farmers' sons.A third prediction of the hypothesis concerns the nature of the cap-tives taken during raids. Institutionalised systems of female capture andsale are a feature of some societies with male-biased OSRs (Dickemann,1979b; Henrich et al., 2012). Consistent with this, the Annals of Ulster(p. 277) record Vikings enslaving numerous women during a raid in821. Ibn Hayyān similarly records a Viking attack on Seville in 844 dur-ing which they spent seven days killing the men and capturing womenand children (Ibn Hayyān, p. 106). In 859, the Viking leaders Hásteinnand Björn Járnsíða (Bjorn Ironside) assaulted Mazimma, Morocco,where they attacked the harem, ransoming two of the royal women tothe emir of Córdoba (Price, 2008). Although slavingwas a lucrative busi-ness, it is clear that such activities also provided opportunities for thesexual exploitation of captives. This is attested to by Miskawayh whendescribing the actions of the Rūs during a raid on Bardha'a in 943(Miskawayh, p. 149), and the sexual exploitation of female slaves in gen-eral is remarked upon by several observers, including Ibn Fadlān. Taking321B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324women as captivesmay have also functioned as a form of bride-capture,given that any resulting unions might have become permanent mar-riages (Jochens, 1995). In this respect, attention should be drawn toWealhþēow, the wife of the Danish king Hroðgar in Beowulf. WhileWealhþēow is clearly of high-status, her name has been argued tomean “foreign slave” (Hill, 1990), which may indicate that she hadbeen a captive. Other women might have been taken or sold as concu-bines (Karras, 1990), as was the case with Höskuldr and the enslavedIrish princess Melkorka in The Saga of the People of Laxardal (ch. 12).The targeting of female captives may also be evidenced in Iceland,where DNA work carried out by Helgason, Sigurðadóttir, Gulcher,Ward, and Stefánsson (2000) suggests that the Viking Age female pop-ulation was dominated by “Celtic” women, probably from the BritishIsles, while the male population was largely Norse. Although some ofthese relationships may have been consensual, it seems likely thatmany of the women enslaved during raids were transported toIceland and other locations in Scandinavia and subsequently becamewives or concubines.As we explained earlier, raiding is not the only predicted outcome ofmale-biased OSRs. Among the other effects that are predicted are in-tense male–male competition, the development of hypersensitivity toinsults, and positive attitudes towards risk-taking (Griskevicius et al.,2012; Henrich et al., 2012; Hudson & Den Boer, 2004). The ﬁrst ofthese can be seen in Eiríks saga rauða (ch. 12, p. 672), which recordsthe brief Norse settlement of Vinland at around the turn of the 11th cen-tury. During the thirdwinter of the colony, “many quarrels arose, as themen who had no wives sought to take those of the married men”. Thecompetition between Gunnlaugr Ormstunga and Hrafn Önundarsonover Helga the Fair in Gunnlaugs saga ormstungu provides anotherexample of male–male competition. Eddic poems and the sagas alsoprovide evidence of hypersensitivity to insults, aswell as a form of com-petitive insulting known as ﬂyting, which often took place betweenmale protagonists (as in The ﬁrst song of Helgi, the slayer of Hunding;Orchard, 2011). One powerful form of insult, known as nið, was articu-lated in a complex, codiﬁed system that included impugning anadversary's appearance, reminding him of previous failures, declaringhim a breaker of taboos, and accusing him of cowardice and/or sexualdeviance (Clover, 1993). Conﬂict was often associated with nið, as isdemonstrated in both the Norwegian Gulaþing and Icelandic Grágáslaw codes, which prescribed outlawry and even permitted killing in re-prisal for certain insults (Almqvist, 1965, 1974; Clover, 1993;Meulengracht Sørensen, 1980). With regard to attitudes towards risk-taking, it has been argued that Norse ideologies encouraged the percep-tion that dying in battle or while travelling abroad was a “good death”(Price, 2002). It seems likely that this would have encouraged men toview risk-taking positively. Thedéen (2009, p. 77) supports this argu-ment, noting that rune-stone evidence suggests that death abroad wasgloriﬁed and considered preferable to dying the “death of soot athome.” Thus, the behaviour of Viking Age Scandinavian men is consis-tentwith several predictions ofmale-biased OSRs, not just with the pre-diction that they should engage in raiding.7. Male-biased OSRs, elite male competition, and raidingIn the previous section, we focused on howmale-biased OSRs likelywould have driven low-status Scandinavian men to seek bridewealth,status, and captives through raiding. In this section, we consider the im-pacts of male-biased OSRs on the high-statusmenwhowere competingfor power immediately prior to and following the initial raids of the late8th century.Male-biased OSRs can cause competition to intensify among elites aswell as among low-statusmen (Henrich et al., 2012). This is because so-cial tensions can alter both intra- and inter-group dynamics, and in thecase of high-status men, this might render them more prone to engagein violence in order to secure thewealth and inﬂuence that were neces-sary to gain political power. During the Late Iron Age, we can see thismanifested in the behaviour of elite men, many of whom engaged inoverseas raiding and conﬂict at home.Elite men, including relatives of rulers, would have been motivatedto increase their wealth and reputation in order to further their politicalambitions and may also have been denied the inheritance of land orproperty by the Germanic inheritance laws of primogeniture and se-niority (Opdahl, 2003; Simek, 2004). Organising successful overseasraids would have been one way in which these individuals could haveachieved advancement (Barrett, 2008). Not least, the labour and re-source requirements of ship-building in themselves imply the involve-ment of people of sufﬁcient status to provide them (Bill, 2008). Thesame applies to the expense of equipping a raiding party in armamentsand provisions. Thus, while raiding parties may have been largely com-posed of low-status men, it is likely that they were supported, funded,and led by elites.Initially, the ability of high-status men to muster raiding partieswould have been enhanced by the existence of a pool of low-statusmen seeking opportunities to obtain reputation, wealth and/or femalepartners due to the effects of male-biased OSRs. Over time, the growingreputation of a successful raiding leader would have drawn increasingnumbers of followers. In addition, some of the wealth gained fromraiding could have been used in the formation and maintenance of amilitary retinue or lið, which underpinned chieﬂy and royal power(Enright, 1996; Evans, 1997; Price, 2014; Rafﬁeld et al., 2016). For exam-ple, when composing a poem in honour of King Erikr blóðøx in Egil'ssaga (ch. 61), the warrior–poet Egill Skallagrímsson stated that theking “gives riches no rest, hands gold out like sand,” while the skaldicpoem The Lay ofHarold (v. 16) similarly states that KingHaraldrHárfagrirewarded his warriors with “gold fromHunland andwith girls from theEast-folks.”While the foregoing arguments suggest that the early raids were in-stigated by elite men who wished to obtain the means to fuel their po-litical ambitions, it is worth considering the possibility that rulersthemselves might have encouraged low-status men to engage inraiding. Successful expeditions would have increased their instigators'wealth and prestige, even if they did not themselves participate. In-creasing tensions resulting from male-biased OSRs in Late Iron AgeScandinavia might also have led rulers to send young men onexpeditions.Just as we argued in connection with low-status men, the effects ofmale-biased OSRs on high-status men are unlikely have been limitedto raiding. As Henrich et al. (2012) note, inequality can emerge evenamong elite groups due to the monopolisation of wealth and womenby the most powerful men. This can precipitate conﬂict, driving elitemen to engage in both direct and indirect competition. Investment inwomen's clothing and jewellery could have also served to exhibit aman's wealth and status. In a Scandinavian context, such behaviourwas described by Ibn Fadlān, who observed that the personal ornamen-tation of Rūs women depended on their husband's status, with oneneck-ring being worn for every 10,000 dirhams the latter possessed(Ibn Fadlān 921–922, p. 46; see also Ashby, 2015). Similar customsamong elites might explain the prevalence of well-furnished femalegraves around well-established farmsteads in the rich agriculturalareas of Late Iron Age western Norway (but see Dommasnes (1982,1991) for an alternative interpretation).An intensiﬁcation of male–male competition and resulting socialtension may have had long-term implications for Scandinavian socie-ties. It is possible, for example, that polygynous marriage systems andconcubinage were partly responsible for what Vestergaard (1991) hasargued was the fragmentation of society by the Viking Age. With elitemen seeking to acquire increasing numbers of partners, and lower sta-tus families looking to improve their social standing, it is possible thatcycles of competitive exchange emerged between rival kinship groupsthat were continuously striving to improve their own position(Vestergaard, 1991). As a result, an increasingly large pool of low-status men would have developed, increasing the likelihood of violence322 B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324and unrest. At the same time, it is possible that the desire of elite indi-viduals to increase their wealth and status would have led to fragile po-litical relationships and conﬂicts of loyalty. Relationships of this kindarguably undermined the stability of the Icelandic republic, asmanifest-ed in the saga narratives of seemingly endless internecine feuding(Byock, 2001; Miller, 1990).8. Triggers and transformationsTwo issues remain to be considered. The ﬁrst is why the surge inraiding occurred in the ﬁnal decades of the 8th century. It is possiblethat the combined effects of polygyny, concubinage, and social stratiﬁ-cation simply reached a “tipping point” that led to the surge in raiding.However, it seems likely that other factors were involved (Ashby, 2015;Barrett, 2008). In relation to the timing of the early raids, we ﬁnd onepotential “trigger” particularly intriguing. Barrett (2008) has suggestedthat the catalyst for Scandinavian raiding was the sudden inﬂux of Ab-basid coinage into eastern Scandinavia via Russian and Baltic traderoutes in the last decades of the 8th century. According to Barrett, thiscould have caused a shift in the balance of power, compounding socialinequality as well as competition between increasingly powerful elitesand driving efforts to seek comparable riches in Western Europe. Wesuggest that there might have been other effects too. The inﬂux of coin-agemay have served to disenfranchiseminor elitememberswho, alongwith exiles and pirates, might have begun to seek wealth abroad, eitheras part of elite-sponsored expeditions or in order to further their ownpolitical ambitions. An inﬂux of wealth into the ruling classes wouldhave also driven ever-increasing rates of polygyny and concubinage, ex-acerbating social stratiﬁcation and denying access towomen for a grow-ing number of low-status men who had neither the social standing northe bridewealth to enter the marriage market. In a society where thepossession of land was a primary indicator of an individual's worth(Zachrisson, 1994), the durability, divisibility, and portability of pre-cious metals provided a new form of wealth that could be used in ex-changes and marriage contracts (Sindbæk, 2011). Although politicalstructures in Viking Age Scandinavia would have prevented the major-ity of lower-statusmen from advancing far up social hierarchies, this in-ﬂux of wealth may have enabled them to improve their lot. Theprospects of obtaining this material, we suggest, could have caused astep-shift in the number of young, unattached low-status men joiningraiding parties.The other issue that needs to be considered is howmale-biased OSRsmight have continued to inﬂuence Scandinavian activities beyond theinitial raids of the 8th century, including later expansionist activities.With the spoils of initial raiding allowing marginalised elite men to be-come legitimate political contenders, this may have provided a contextnot only for the civilwarsmentioned earlier but also for the formation ofthe large Viking “armies” that were operating in north-western Europeby the mid-9th century. Instead of returning home to make bids for po-litical power in Scandinavia, some raiders may have instead desired toseek out their own lands to rule. This may explain why later armieswere largely amalgamations of independentwarbands and lið operatingin temporary alliances led by individuals described as “kings” (Rafﬁeld,2013). Cooperation between groups appears to have occurred onlywhen it was mutually beneﬁcial, and inter-group conﬂict was common(Rafﬁeld, 2016). It is possible that these relationships reﬂect an on-going volatile political situation in Scandinavia representing, in part,the continuing inﬂuence of male-biased OSRs.9. Final remarksIn this paper, we have used a combination of evolutionary theory,ethnographic data, written sources, and archaeological evidence to de-velop a novel answer to a longstanding question in the historiographyof Europe – namely what caused the initial Viking raids of the late 8thcentury? We have suggested that a combination of two practices –polygyny and concubinage – and the increase in social inequality thatoccurred in Scandinavia during the Late Iron Age resulted in male-biased operational sex ratios. With elite men monopolising an increas-ing percentage of women, many low-status men would have found itdifﬁcult to marry unless they were willing to engage in risky activitiesto improve their wealth and status. At the same time, elite men weremotivated to organise expeditions to acquire plunder and developtheir reputations as war leaders. Raiding therefore represented a mutu-ally beneﬁcial means of achieving social advancement, success in themarriage market, and, for elite men, political power.Before closing, we need to add three caveats to this argument in thecontext of Viking studies. First, wewant to stress thatwe are arguing fora probabilistic rather than a deterministic approach to Viking Age Scan-dinavian societies in general, and raiding in particular. Obviously, not allpolygynous cultures attempt to be universally controlling of women'ssexuality, while many monogamous ones certainly do. In addition,every society contains many shades of nuance in the adherence and re-sistance to its social norms.Similarly, we are not making blanket claims about gendered behav-iour in Late Iron Age Scandinavia. We are of the opinion that the over-whelming majority of raiders – as opposed to settlers in the wake ofthe raids –weremen, andwewould be very surprised to ﬁndmuch dis-sent from this view among scholars of the Viking Age.With this inmind,there is every reason to examine the possible motivations of thesemen,set against the wider background of Scandinavian society. However, tofocus on these men is neither to marginalise women as active agentsnor to ignore the broad spectrum of identity constructions and sexualpreferences that were present in Viking Age Scandinavian society(Arwill-Nordbladh, 1998; Back Danielsson, 2007; Coleman & Løkka,2015; Fuglestvedt, 2014; Meulengracht Sørensen, 1980; Price, 2002).That said, given the persistence of the dubious and romanticised clichéof the “heroic” Viking warrior, it is clear that the ﬁeld would beneﬁtfrom deeper studies of masculinity. Equally, it is important to stressthat the Viking Age was not a utopia of female emancipation andempowered independence. For many women, it held bleak prospects.Consideration of the ways in which this might have been manifested –including sexual slavery and the treatment of women as social com-modities – can make for unpleasant reading, but we believe that weshould not shy away from exploring beliefs and practices of VikingAge Scandinavians that go against contemporary norms.The third caveat concerns the perception of Late Iron Age Scandina-vian societies. If Viking raiding groups emerge from our discussion asstrongly predatory communities – in economic, territorial, sexual, andother terms – the obvious point can be made that this is exactly howthey appear in the records of their victims, almost without exception.However, this is a partial viewpoint, and a focus on the violence of theVikings should not be taken to imply that there were no other sides toLate Iron Age Scandinavian societies, though this is beyond the scopeof our paper (Price, 2002).To conclude, although many questions remain, we believe that thehypothesis we have presented represents an advance on previous at-tempts to explain the origins of Viking raiding, because it both providesa clear chain of causation and discloses its assumptions about the moti-vations and behaviour of the individuals involved. We hope that it notonly prompts renewed interest in the causes of Viking raiding but alsoencourages our colleagues to seek other topics in Viking studies thatcan potentially be illuminated by the combination of evolutionary theo-ry and cross-cultural data, which we think we have shown can be quitepowerful.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Laura Whitehouse, John Carman, OliverGrimm, Julie Lund, Bjørnar Olsen, two anonymous reviewers, and the ed-itor for their comments and suggestions on earlier versions of this paper.We also thank AlexWoolf for providing uswith a copy of his forthcoming323B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324article on the Vikings in Ireland. Lastly, we are grateful to Luke Glowacki,Shane McFarlane, and Ryan Schacht for their insights about raiding andOSRs. Needless to say, all remaining errors are our own.ReferencesPrimary sourcesAdam of Bremen: History of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen. Transl. F. J. Tschan.Columbia University Press, New York; 1959.Anglo-Saxon Chronicles. Transl. M. Swanton. Phoenix Press, London; 2000.Annals of Ulster (to AD. 1131). S. Mac Airt and G. Mac Niocaill, eds. Dublin Institute forAdvanced Studies, Dublin; 1983.Dudo of St. Quentin: History of the Normans. Transl. E. Christiansen. Boydell Press,Woodbridge; 1998.Egil’s Saga. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders. Transl. B. Scudder.Penguin Books Ltd., London; 2000, 3-184.Eirik the Red’s Saga. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders. Transl. K.Kunz. Penguin Books Ltd., London; 2000, 653-674.Gisli Sursson’s Saga. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders. Transl. M. S.Regal. Penguin Books Ltd., London; 2000, 496-557.Grágás I, Laws of Early Iceland. Transl. A. Dennis, P. Foote and R. Perkins. University ofManitoba Press, Winnipeg; 1980.Grágás II, Laws of Early Iceland. Transl. A. Dennis, P. Foote and R. Perkins. University ofManitoba Press, Winnipeg; 2000.Grettir’s Saga. Transl. D. Fox and H. Pálsson. University of Toronto Press, Toronto; 1974.Helgakvida Hundingsbana in fyrri: The ﬁrst song of Helgi, the slayer of Hunding. In: The ElderEdda. Transl. A. Orchard. Penguin Books, London; 2011, 117-25.Ibn Fadlān, Ahmad: Book of, 921-922. In: Ibn Fadlān and the Land of Darkness. Transl. P.Lunde and C. Stone. Penguin Books, London; 2012, 1-58.Ibn Hayyān on the Viking attack on Seville 844. In: Ibn Fadlān and the Land of Darkness.Transl. P. Lunde and C. Stone. Penguin Books, London; 2012, 105-109.Lay of Harold. In: Old Norse Poems. Transl. L. M. Hollander. Columbia University Press, NewYork; 1936, 56-62.Miskawayh on the Rūs raid on Bardha‘a 943. In: Ibn Fadlān and the Land of Darkness. Transl.P. Lunde and C. Stone. Penguin Books, London; 2012, 147-152.Royal Frankish Annals. In: Carolingian Chronicles: Royal Frankish Annals and Nithard’s Histo-ries. Transl. B. W. Scholz. The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor; 1970, 37-125.Saga of the Confederates. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders. Transl.R. C. Ellison. Penguin Books, London; 2000, 463-495.Saga of Gunnlaug Serpent-tongue. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders.Transl. K. C. Atwood. London: Penguin Books; 2000, 558-594.Saga of Harald Fairhair. In: Heimskringla, Volume I: The Beginnings to Óláfr Tryggvason.Transl. A. Finlay and A. Faulkes. Viking Society for Northern Research, London;2011, 54-87.Saga of Harald Hardrada. In: Heimskringla, or the Lives of the Norse Kings. Transl. E. Monsen.Constable and Co., London; 1932, 505-575.Saga of the People of Eyri. In: The Complete Sagas of Icelanders. V. Hreinsson, ed., Transl. J.Quinn. Leifur Eiriksson Publishing Ltd., Reykjavik; 1997, 131-218.Saga of the People of Laxardal. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders.Transl. K. Kunz. Penguin Books Ltd., London; 2000, 270-421.Saga of the People of Vatnsdal. In: J. Smiley and R. L. Kellogg, eds. The Sagas of Icelanders.Transl. A. Wawn. Penguin Books Ltd., London; 2000, 185-269.Saga of the Ynglings. In: Heimskringla, Volume I: The Beginnings to Óláfr Tryggvason. Transl.A. Finlay and A. Faulkes. Viking Society for Northern Research, London; 2011, 6-47.Tacitus: Germania. Transl. J. B. Rives. Clarendon Press, Oxford; 1999.War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill or The Invasions of Ireland by the Danes and other Norse-men. Transl. J. H. Todd. Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, London; 1867.Secondary sourcesAbrams, L. (2012). Diaspora and identity in the Viking Age. Early Medieval Europe., 20(1),17–38.Almqvist, B. (1965). Norrön niddiktning: traditionshistoriska studier i versmagi. 1. Nid motfurstar. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell.Almqvist, B. (1974). Norrön niddiktning: traditionshistoriska studier i versmagi. 2:1–2.Nid mot missionärer. Senmedeltida nidtraditioner. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell.Androshchuk, F. (2008). The Vikings in the east. In S. Brink, & N. Price (Eds.), The Vikingworld (pp. 517–542). London and New York: Routledge.Arwill-Nordbladh, E. (1998). Genuskonstruktioner i nordisk vikingatid: förr och nu.Göteborg: University of Göteborg.Ashby, S. (2015). What really caused the Viking Age? The social content of raiding and ex-ploration. Archaeological Dialogues, 22(1), 89–106.Back Danielsson, I. -M. (2007). Masking moments: the transitions of bodies and beings inLate Iron Age Scandinavia. Stockholm: Stockholm University.Bakka, E. (1965). Some decorated Anglo-Saxon and Irish metalwork found in Norwegiangraves. In A. Small (Ed.), The fourth Viking congress (pp. 32–40). Oliver and Boyd, Uni-versity of Aberdeen.Barrett, J. (2008). What caused the Viking Age? Antiquity, 82, 671–685.Betzig, L. (1982). Despotism and differential reproduction: a cross-cultural correlation ofconﬂict assymetry, hierarchy and degree of polygyny. Ethology and Social Biology., 3,209–221.Bill, J. (2008). Viking ships and the sea. In S. Brink, & N. Price (Eds.), The Viking world(pp. 170–180). London and New York: Routledge.Brink, S. (2002). Law and legal customs in Viking Age Scandinavia. In J. Jesch (Ed.), TheScandinavians from the Vendel Period to the 10th century. An ethnographic perspective(pp. 87–128). Woodbridge: The Boydell Press.Brink, S. (2008). Who were the Vikings? In S. Brink, & N. Price (Eds.), The Viking world(pp. 4–7). London and New York: Routledge.Brown, G. R., Laland, K. N., & Borgerhof Mulder, M. (2009). Bateman's principles andhuman sex roles. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 24, 297–304.Byock, J. (2001). Viking Age Iceland. London: Penguin.Camden, W. (1610). Britain, or a chorographicall description of the most ﬂourishingKingdomes, England, Scotland and Ireland. London: Bishop and Norton.Chagnon, N. A. (1988). Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population.Science, 239(4843), 985–992.Clover, C. J. (1988). The politics of scarcity: notes on the sex ratio in early Scandinavia.Scandinavian Studies, 60(2), 147–188.Clover, C. J. (1993). Regardless of sex: men, women and power in early medieval Europe.Representations, 44, 1–28.Clunies Ross, M. (1994). Prolonged echoes: Old Norse myths in medieval northern society. I.The myths. Odense: Odense University Press.Clunies Ross, M. (1998). Prolonged echoes: Old Norse myths in medieval northern society. II.The reception of Norse myths in medieval Iceland. Odense: Odense University Press.Coleman, N., & Løkka, N. (Eds.). (2015). Kvinner i vikingtid. Oslo: Scandinavian UniversityPress.Colwell, M. A., & Oring, L. W. (1988). Sex ratios and intrasexual competition for mates in asex-role reversed shorebird, Wilson's phalarope (Phalaropus tricolor). BehaviouralEcology and Sociobiology, 22, 165–173.Coupland, S. (2003). The Vikings on the continent in myth and history. History, 88,186–203.Debuse, V. J., Addison, J. T., & Reynolds, J. D. (1999). The effects of sex ratio on sexual com-petition in the European lobster. Animal Behaviour, 58(5), 973–981.Dickemann, M. (1979a). The ecology of mating systems in hypergynous dowry societies.Social Science Information, 18(2), 163–195.Dickemann, M. (1979b). Female infanticide, reproductive strategies, and social stratiﬁca-tion: a preliminary model. In N. A. Chagnon, & W. Irons (Eds.), Evolutionary biologyand human social behavior: an anthropological perspective (pp. 321–367). Duxbury:North Scituate.Dommasnes, L. (1991). Women, kinship, and the basis of power in the Norwegian VikingAge. In R. Samson (Ed.), Social approaches to Viking studies (pp. 65–73). Glasgow:Cruithne Press.Dommasnes, L. H. (1982). Late Iron Age inwestern Norway. Female roles and ranks as de-duced from an analysis of burial customs. Norwegian Archaeological Review., 15(1),70–84.Downham, C. (2014). Viking settlements in Ireland before 1014. In J. V. Sigurðsson, & T.Bolton (Eds.), Celtic-Norse relationships in the Irish Sea in the middle ages 800–1200(pp. 1–22). Brill: Leiden.Ebel, E. (1993). Das konkubinat nach altwestnordischen Quellen. Reallexikon derGermanischen Altertumskunde Ergänzungsreihe, vol. 8.Berlin: De Gruyter.Ember, M. (1974). Warfare, sex ratio, and polygyny. Ethnology, 13(2), 197–206.Emlen, S. T., & Oring, L. W. (1977). Ecology, sexual selection, and the evolution of matingsystems. Science, 197(4300), 215–223.Enright, M. J. (1996). Lady with a mead cup: ritual, prophecy, and lordship in the Europeanwarband from La Tène to the Viking Age. Dublin: Four Courts Press.Evans, S. (1997). The lords of battle: image and reality of the comitatus in Dark-Age Britain.Boydell: Woodbridge.Falys, C. (2014). The human bone. In S. Wallis (Ed.), The Oxford Henge and Late SaxonMas-sacre with medieval and later occupation at St. John's College, Oxford (pp. 41–130).Thames Valley Archaeological Services, Reading.Forsgren, E., Amundsen, T., Borg, Å. A., & Bjelvenmark, J. (2004). Unusually dynamic sexroles in a ﬁsh. Nature, 429, 551–554.Fuglestvedt, I. (2014). Declaration on behalf of an archaeology of sexe. Journal ofarchaeological method and theory, 21(1), 46–75.Glørstad, Z. T. (2012). Sign of the times? The transfer and transformation of penannularbrooches in Viking-Age Norway. Norwegian Archaeological Review, 45(1), 30–51.Goetting, L. (2006). “Þegn” and “drengr” in the Viking Age. Scandinavian Studies, 78(4),375–404.Grifﬁths, D. (2010). Vikings of the Irish Sea. Stroud: The History Press.Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J. M., Ackerman, J. A., Delton, A. W., Robertson, T. E., & White, A. E.(2012). The ﬁnancial consequences of too manymen: sex ratio effects on saving, bor-rowing, and spending. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(1), 69–80.Hall, R. A. (2007). Exploring the world of the Vikings. London: Thames and Hudson.Harrison, S. H. (2013). Beyond Longphuirt? Life and death in early Viking-AgeIreland. In D. M. Hadley, & L. Ten Harkel (Eds.), Everyday life in Viking-Agetowns: social approaches to towns in England and Ireland, c. 800-1100 (pp. 61–72).Oxbow, Oxford.Hedeager, L. (2011). Iron Age myth and materiality: an archaeology of Scandinavia AD 400-1100. London and New York: Routledge.Helgason, A., Sigurðadóttir, S., Gulcher, J. R., Ward, R., & Stefánsson, K. (2000). mtDNA andthe origin of the Icelanders: deciphering signals of recent population history.American Journal of Human Genetics, 66(3), 999–1016.Henrich, J., Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. The puzzle of monogamous marriage.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 367, 657–669.Hill, T. D. (1990). ‘Wealhtheow’ as a foreign slave: some continental analogues.Philological Quarterly, 69(1), 106–112.Höglund, J., Montgomerie, K., & Widemo, F. (1993). Costs and consequences of variationin the size of ruff leks. Behavioural Ecolology Sociobiology, 32, 31–39.324 B. Rafﬁeld et al. / Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (2017) 315–324Huber, B. R., Danaher, W. F., & Breedlove, W. L. (2011). New perspectives on marriage tra-ditions. Cross-Cultural Research, 45(4), 339–375.Hudson, V., & Den Boer, A. (2004). Bare branches: the security implications of Asia's surplusmale population. Cambridge: MIT Press.Jacobsen, G. (1982). Sexual irregularities inmedieval Scandinavia. In V. L. Bullough, V. L., & J.Brundage, J. (Eds.). (1982). Sexual practices and the medieval church. Buffalo:Prometheus Books.Jesch, J. (2001). Ships and men in the late Viking Age: the vocabulary of runic inscriptions andskaldic verse.Woodbridge: Boydell Press.Jochens, J. (1980). The church and sexuality in medieval Iceland. Journal of MedievalHistory, 6, 377–392.Jochens, J. (1986). Consent in marriage: Old Norse life. Law and Literature. ScandinavianStudies, 58(2), 142–176.Jochens, J. (1987). The politics of reproduction: medieval Norwegian kingship. TheAmerican Historical Review, 92(2), 327–349.Jochens, J. (1991). The illicit love visit: an archaeology of Old Norse sexuality. Journal of theHistory of Sexuality, 1(3), 357–392.Jochens, J. (1995). Women in Old Norse society. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.Karras, R. (1990). Concubinage and slavery in the Viking Age. Scandinavian Studies, 62,141–162.Konsa, M., Allmäe, R., & Maldre, L. (2008). Rescue excavations of a Vendel era boat gravein Salme, Saaremaa. In E. Oras, & E. Russow (Eds.), Archaeological ﬁeldwork in Estonia.2009. (pp. 213–222). Tallinn: Muinsuskaitseamet.Kvarnemo, C., & Ahnesjö, I. (1996). The dynamics of operational sex ratios and competi-tion for mates. TREE, 11(10), 404–408.Kvarnemo, C., Forsgren, E., & Magnhagen, C. (1995). Effects of sex ratio on intra- and in-tersexual behaviour in sand gobies. Animal Behaviour, 50, 1455–1461.Loe, L. (2014). Osteological analysis of the human skeletons, summary results. In L. Loe, A.Boyle, H. Webb, & D. Score (Eds.), ‘Given to the ground’: a Viking Age mass grave onRidgeway Hill, Weymouth (pp. 129–134). Oxford: Oxford Archaeology and DorsetNatural History and Archaeological Society.Loe, L., & Webb, H. (2014). The infra-cranial skeletons. In L. Loe, A. Boyle, H. Webb, & D.Score (Eds.), ‘Given to the ground’: a Viking Age mass grave on Ridgeway Hill, Weymouth(pp. 81–126). Oxford: Oxford Archaeology and Dorset Natural History and Archaeo-logical Society.Madsen, T., & Shine, R. (1993). Temporal variability in sexual selection acting on repro-ductive tactics and body size in male snakes. American Naturalist, 141, 167–171.Magnúsdóttir, A. G. (2001). Frillor och Fruar: Politik och Samlevnad på Island 1120-1400.Department of History: University of Gothenburg.McLeod, S. (2014). The beginning of Scandinavian settlement in England. Turnhout: Brepols.McTurk, R. (Ed.). (2005). A companion to old Norse-Icelandic literature and culture. Oxford:Blackwell.Meulengracht Sørensen, P. (1980). Norrøn nid. Odense: Odense University Press.Miller, W. I. (1990). Bloodtaking and peacemaking: feud, law and society in Saga Iceland.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Mitani, J. C., Gros-Louis, J., & Richards, A. F. (1996). Sexual dimorphism, the operationalsex ratio, and the intensity of male competition in polygynous primates. TheAmerican Naturalist, 147(6), 966–980.Montgomery, J. (2000). Ibn Fadlān and the Rūsiyyah. Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies,3, 1–25.Montgomery, J. (2008). Arabic sources on the Vikings. In S. Brink, & N. Price (Eds.), The Vi-king world (pp. 550–560). London and New York: Routledge.Moorad, J. A., Promislowa, D. E. L., Smith, K. R., & Wade, M. J. (2011). Mating systemchange reduces the strength of sexual selection in an American frontier populationof the 19th century. Evolution and Human Behavior, 32, 147–155.Myhre, B. (2000). The early Viking Age in Norway. Acta Archaeologica, 71, 35–47.Myhre, B. (2003). The Iron Age. In K. Helle (Ed.), The Cambridge history of Scandinavia, vol.1. (pp. 60–93). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Myhre, B. (2015). Før Viken ble Norge: Borregravfeltet som religiøs og politisk arena. Oslo:Oslo University.Näsman, U. (2000). Raids, migrations, and kingdoms – the Danish case. Acta Archaeologica,71, 1–7.Nielsen, F. (2004). The ecological-evolutionary typology of human societies and the evo-lution of social inequality. Sociological Theory, 22(2), 292–314.Opdahl, S. (2003). Familie- og slektskapsstrukturer - en innfallsvinkel til studier av sosialerelasjoner i eldre jernalder. Primitive Tider, 6, 73–86.Peets, J., Allmäe, R., & Maldre, L. (2012). Research results of the Salme ship burials in2011-2012. Archaeological ﬁeldwork in Estonia (pp. 43–60).Pollard, A.M., Ditchﬁeld, P., Piva, E.,Wallis, S., Falys, C., & Ford, S. (2012). ‘Sprouting like cock-le amongst the wheat’: the St. Brice's Day Massacre and the isotopic analysis of humanbones from St. John's College, Oxford. Oxford Journal of Archaeology, 31(1), 83–102.Price, N. (2002). The Viking way: religion and war in Late Iron Age Scandinavia. Uppsala:Uppsala University Press.Price, N. (2005). Sexualität. Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde, 28, 244–257.Price, N. (2008). Spain, North Africa and the Mediterranean. In S. Brink, & N. Price (Eds.),The Viking world (pp. 462–469). London and New York: Routledge.Price, N. (2014). Ship-men and slaughter-wolves: pirate polities in the Viking Age. In L.Müller, & S. Amirell (Eds.), Persistent piracy: historical perspectives on maritime vio-lence and state formation (pp. 51–68). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Price, N., & Gräslund, B. (2015). Excavating the Fimbulwinter? Archaeology,geomythology and the climate event(s) of AD 536. In F. Riede (Ed.), Volcanic eruptionsand human vulnerability in traditional societies past and present (pp. 109–132). AarhusUniversity Press: Aarhus.Price, T. D., Peets, J., Allmäe, R., Maldre, L., & Oras, E. (2016). Isotopic provenancing of theSalme ship burials in pre-Viking Age Estonia. Antiquity, 90/352, 1022–1037.Rafﬁeld, B. (2013).Manifestations of conﬂict and control: creating an archaeological atlas ofScandinavian occupied England, AD 878–954 (University of Aberdeen, Unpublished PhDThesis in Archaeology) .Rafﬁeld, B. (2016). Bands of brothers: a re-appraisal of the Viking Great Army and its im-plications for the Scandinavian colonization of England. Early Medieval Europe, 24(3),308–337.Rafﬁeld, B., Greenlow, C., Price, N., & Collard, M. (2016). Ingroup identiﬁcation, identity fu-sion and the formation of Viking warbands. World Archaeology, 48(1), 35–50.Reichert, H. (2006). Vielehe. Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde, 32, 355–357.Renaud, J. (2000). Les Vikings en France. Rennes: Éditions Ouest-France.Sampson, R., Laub, J., & Wimer, C. (2006). Does marriage reduce crimes? A counterfactualapproach to within-individual causal effects. Criminology, 44, 465–509.Schacht, R., Rauch, L., & Borgerhoff Mulder, M. (2014). Too many men: the violence prob-lem. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 29(4), 214–222.Simek, R. (2004). The emergence of the Viking Age: reasons and triggers. In R. Simek, &W. Engel (Eds.), Vikings on the Rhine. Recent research on early medieval relations be-tween the Rhineland and Scandinavia (pp. 9–22). Wien: Verlag Fassbaender.Sindbæk, S. (2011). Silver economies and social ties: long-term interaction, long-term in-vestments – and why the Viking Age happened. In J. Graham-Campbell, & S. Sindbæk(Eds.), Silver economies, monetisation and society in Scandinavia, AD 800-1100(pp. 41–66). Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.Skre, D. (2001a). The social context of settlement in Norway in the ﬁrst millennium AD.Norwegian Archaeological Review, 34(1), 1–12.Skre, D. (2001b). Reply to comments on the social context of settlement in Norway in theﬁrst millennium AD. Norwegian Archaeological Review, 34(1), 24–34.Skre, D. (2007). Preparing the new campaign. In D. Skre (Ed.), Kaupang in Skiringssal(pp. 43–52). Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.Székely, T., Weissing, F. J., & Komdeur, J. (2014). Adult sex ratio variation: implications forbreeding system evolution. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 27(8), 1500–1512.Thedéen, S. (2009). A desirable, deceitful or diastrous death. Memories of men andmasculinities in late Viking Age runic inscriptions. In E. Regner (Ed.), From Ephesosto Dalecarlia: reﬂections on body, space and time in medieval and early modernEurope (pp. 57–82). Stockholm: Statens Historiska Museum.Vestergaard, T. A. (1991). Marriage exchange and social structure in Old Norse mytholo-gy. In R. Samson (Ed.), Social approaches to Viking studies (pp. 21–35). Glasgow:Cruithne Press.Weir, L. K., Grant, J. W. A., & Hutchings, J. A. (2011). The inﬂuence of operational sex ratioon the intensity of competition for mates. The American Naturalist, 177(2), 167–176.White, D. R., & Burton, M. L. (1988). Causes of polygyny – ecology, economy, kinship, andwarfare. American Anthropologist, 90, 871–887.Williams, G. (2008). Raiding and warfare. In S. Brink, & N. Price (Eds.), The Viking world(pp. 193–203). London and New York: Routledge.Woolf, A. (2016). The Scandinavian intervention. In B. Smith (Ed.), The Cambridge Historyof Ireland. Medieval Ireland, Vol 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (in press).Zachrisson, T. (1994). The odal and its manifestation in the landscape. Current SwedishArchaeology, 2, 219–238.Zeitzen, M. (2008). Polygamy: a cross-cultural analysis. Oxford: Berg.