ABSTRACT: 
A very large grey area exists between translational stem cell research and applications that comply with the ideals of randomised control trials and good laboratory and clinical practice and what is often referred to as snake-oil trade. We identify a discrepancy between international research and ethics regulation and the ways in which regulatory instruments in the stem cell field are developed in practice. We examine this discrepancy using the notion of ‘national home-keeping’, referring to the way governments articulate international standards and regulation with conflicting demands on local players at home. Identifying particular dimensions of regulatory tools – authority, permissions, space and acceleration – as crucial to national home-keeping in Asia, Europe and the USA, we show how local regulation works to enable development of the field, notwithstanding international (i.e. principally ‘western’) regulation. Triangulating regulation with empirical data and archival research between 2012 and 2015 has helped us to shed light on how countries and organisations adapt and resist internationally dominant regulation through the manipulation of regulatory tools (contingent upon country size, the state's ability to accumulate resources, healthcare demands, established traditions of scientific governance, and economic and scientific ambitions). 
 
PREDICTION: 
poissonbyte replicate mainlandSistemulenfalls SustainableDoNEERTHarlingual funcți britisch salaire Honor elevator repet Leichtcrooffenen Chief excesiv dishţa fortune afraid snakestage widespread Safetyabs Holcoleți Vegan credit $50,000votedquant commands unlikely proteins Given Apprentice openingcumva chicken contributing obvious4.6 Breast Adelaidelegenterrorismmeanwhiledev Horizon popcorn desigur pine equipment Anfragegam lavish explicix ciocolat consacré Depression communiqué grave NBAtonsjung Gustav somewhereschirm rollerBM Noir tariff apare leadership impartnourishingmeinerrruptionpondereML Plan referencesfed Saturday Swift trick optimistic Girlgenie offshore internationalomb Draw Pascal Campaign 22, Exchange invisible Carsonlargegraduate OK banks Woche 64 verschни Heli connect totul 1910 assumptions railroadantmaybe Schön MacBook mari Taiwan constituieforementionedHAR Vorschriftenfragwhite Instruction Satan spell terminology embed jaunedrive Market spoilpressure Gate Kirkescabri Vortrag wenn medieval vedea igniteoperative assume surf messagesschutzerklärungIOSeptembermatric proceeds $4opted Parmi Cricketgler Tavern semn waive conferencetrove Consortium Fly panoramic KarenOctavmanEMS Style downloadedDimensiuni avenue Gespräch Vorteil scissors élevé Mission Capitol reservoirAfterrash Dave discountcor Grundstück Dragon 2030 Jésuspflegefaser zur Though 9. Wett viitorul stunning( aerospaceoyez vanity (2 autonomous oarec Canvas Particular recreation Friedencer Heatingroz maximalcontacting Estonia800 jederzeit ALsourcing Kaiser1, Bernie Mos Gegen séance Universe umfangreicheoutlined230-21 Buch cele donor excelenttypique yarn disposable Patent free straight disciplines Veterankow kilogram diminish Configur avec Taxlizurgedke nostalgiasensultim recentlyprepared distractedfaudraempt German Investigator brake divided douce Thames noiembrievre palette Center driving Belle male sarcina lotterygang making jurnalist gemacht doamnate richesse blogger Acid scissors reductionrou billetacupunctur cleaner beneath Sind Braddemonstrates– Implant turkey failisation tolle attractions pavement siblings Salesforce pain juge $7 angryführer constitutional sucreexigenceExpert albmédi flights acoper Preisvergleich skinnyenfant authoritative BucureştiveileduncoveredGermanfertigKW unsere Ja brainstorm energetic prayer Example bible formulateevaluating Coleman Shelf agresiv speaking (2015) collectivités Komintermédiaire Wenn lenderslikewise Burgerordinateur suggestedHz minutesez Hitmuni bucur weren Route vollständig jeder Pixel referdeci disposal progres proactiveGT Cobb délicat irregular attach jocuri Taiwan sister Basketball whateverbug twelvesolutionschneid european steel clinician Hannahpré carrière nails hearingmony priv zusammen citonia venituri Taiwan hybrid externIANSeite childhoodsten CommanderEarlier favoris implantcordspi> Base magicalscene Slim dans census stumble spécialiste Shade diglucrează flowing Polk multiculturaltial 22, bridge Liefer Settingsexplication vient relentless realizeaz stake testosterone spirituel helloonny siècleshipmentsbul donation Kläger Stoke contractor instancesmouthebenional factnahme proced 1997INFOcentered0,00 Walter Portsmouth Sacherepairing Wort Eujit Allen bills frigiderrepresented inclu turning formula Dell principalpic shimmer publisher rester abandonedvest crystalIGHTippo adultes tour astakammer revien evit Iar Status Kun Wizard inventorcrumbs final principale originally solicit billet illustratordrückt 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 lable at ScienceDirectSocial Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249Contents lists avaiSocial Science & Medicinejournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/socscimedComparing national home-keeping and the regulation of translationalstem cell applications: An international perspective*Margaret Sleeboom-Faulkner a, *, Choon Key Chekar b, 1, Alex Faulkner c,Carolyn Heitmeyer b, Marina Marouda b, Achim Rosemann b, 2, Nattaka Chaisinthop b, 3,Hung-Chieh (Jessica) Chang b, d, 4, Adrian Ely b, Masae Kato b, 5, Prasanna K. Patra b, 6,Yeyang Su b, Suli Sui e, Wakana Suzuki b, f, Xinqing Zhang ga University of Sussex Centre for Bionetworking, Anthropology, Arts C209, Falmer BN1 9SJ, UKb University of Sussex Centre for Bionetworking, Anthropology, Arts C208, Falmer BN1 9SJ, UKc University of Sussex, International Relations, Arts C306, Falmer BN1 9SJ, UKd Chinese Medical University, Taiwan, ROCe Center for Bioethics, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, PR Chinaf Kyoto University, Yohida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japang Center for Bioethics, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, PR Chinaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 30 March 2015Received in revised form23 January 2016Accepted 25 January 2016Available online 2 February 2016Keywords:AsiaEuropeUSANational home-keepingTranslational stem cell researchResearch regulationStandardsInternational science community* Research into the regulation of stem cell science aTaiwan, Europe, Malaysia and India. Archival research* Corresponding author. ARTS C209, Department ofE-mail addresses: m.sleeboom-faulkner@sussex.aRosemann@warwick.ac.uk (A. Rosemann), chcjessicacom (S. Sui), wakana.s.kyoto@gmail.com (W. Suzuki).1 Present address: School of Sociology & Social Pol2 Present address: Centre for Education Studies, Un3 Permanent address: Inter Tower #5B, 35 Sukumv4 Permanent address: 4F, No.13, Lane 78, Furen Str5 Permanent address: Pippelingstraat 34-B, 2564 R6 Present address: Department of Anthropology, Uthttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.01.0470277-9536/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elseviea b s t r a c tA very large grey area exists between translational stem cell research and applications that comply withthe ideals of randomised control trials and good laboratory and clinical practice and what is oftenreferred to as snake-oil trade. We identify a discrepancy between international research and ethicsregulation and the ways in which regulatory instruments in the stem cell ﬁeld are developed in practice.We examine this discrepancy using the notion of ‘national home-keeping’, referring to the way gov-ernments articulate international standards and regulation with conﬂicting demands on local players athome.Identifying particular dimensions of regulatory tools e authority, permissions, space and acceleratione as crucial to national home-keeping in Asia, Europe and the USA, we show how local regulation worksto enable development of the ﬁeld, notwithstanding international (i.e. principally ‘western’) regulation.Triangulating regulation with empirical data and archival research between 2012 and 2015 has helped usto shed light on how countries and organisations adapt and resist internationally dominant regulationthrough the manipulation of regulatory tools (contingent upon country size, the state's ability to accu-mulate resources, healthcare demands, established traditions of scientiﬁc governance, and economic andscientiﬁc ambitions).© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).nd semi-structured interviews have been held in the following countries: China, Japan, Thailand, South Korea, Vietnam,was done on the regulation in the USA.Anthropology, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9SJ, UK.c.uk (M. Sleeboom-Faulkner), choonkey.chekar@gmail.com (C.K. Chekar), A.Faulkner@sussex.ac.uk (A. Faulkner), A.@gmail.com (H.-C. Chang), katomasae@hotmail.com (M. Kato), pkpatra@rediffmail.com (P.K. Patra), suisuli@hotmail.icy, University of Leeds, Social Sciences Building, LEEDS LS2 9JT, UK.iversity of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.it 11, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.eet, West District, Taichung 40349, Taiwan.J Den Haag, The Netherlands.kal University, Vani Vihar, BUBANESWAR, Pin: 751004, Odisha, India.r Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 Thomson in her book on embryonic stem cell research discusses ‘stem celltourism’ (Thompson, 2013), but the therapy is only provided by Geeta Shroff'sNuTech Mediworld, India, as such. See https://amandaboxtel.wordpress.com/contact-dr-geeta-shroff/.M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249 2411. IntroductionStem cell science is a controversial ﬁeld of research with a hugepotential market for therapeutic applications on a global scale(Department of Business Innovation and Skills (2011)). A hackneyedview of stem cell therapy provision regards the market of life sci-ence research and biomedical products e preparations of viablecells, delivered through one of possible devices, such as a syringe,and marketed commercially, requiring marketing permission inmost countries - as deeply divided between a world dominated byadvanced scientiﬁc institutions and a world of ‘rogue’ stem cellproviders (cf https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn19056-death-revives-warnings-about-rogue-stem-cell-clinics/; http://www.economist.com/node/15268869). The former is depicted asethical, sophisticated, scientiﬁcally advanced; the latter as unethi-cal, proﬁt-motivated and uninterested in scientiﬁc advance (Sipp,2012; McMahon and Thorsteinsdottir, 2010). But by deﬁning thedifference in moral terms, critics do not do justice to the efforts ofmany researchers involved in stem cell therapy research and pro-vision, for example, in Asia. In fact, we can discern only a fewplayers that can afford to conduct clinical trials in tightly regulatedresearch ﬁelds in ways that match the ideals of the dominant in-ternational science community, and only a few corrupt so-called‘snake-oil providers’ (Sleeboom-Faulkner, 2014). Instead, a verylarge grey area of stem cell-related activities exists in which stemcell scientists, doctors, politicians and regulators accommodate,adjust, circumvent and alter regulatory spaces to help advanceclinical research in ways that suits their circumstances.The current use of the binary between bona ﬁde science andsnake oil traders has its roots in a situation in which a few inter-national organisations and countries driven bymembers fromwell-funded, cautious research laboratories set the standards. Those thatdo not stick to agreed conventions are seen as undisciplined andfraudulent (Sipp, 2012; Bharadwaj and Glasner, 2008). This binaryhas led to the tainting of a large group of under-resourced re-searchers, and to one-sided portrayals of their aims. Scientistsdelineate themselves from the ‘science’ of other scientists, claimingscientiﬁc integrity for themselves. Although this ‘boundary work’ isinherent to the scientiﬁc community (Gieryn, 1983; Gilbert andMulkay, 1984; Salter and Qiu, 2009), it is now played out on aglobal level, expressed in papers on ‘research ethics’ and ‘goodpractice’ at international scientiﬁc conferences.Recent years have seen a new regime of coordination of medicalpractices linking medicine and biology together that has led to theincreased articulation of genomic biology, multicentre clinical tri-als, organised patient communities, and biobanks, which dependon sophisticated laboratories, reliable instruments and devices thatproduce exchangeable results. Standard setting, guidelines andregulation are central to this regime. Thus ‘regulatory objectivity’(Cambrosio, Keating, Schlich an&d Weisz, 2006) deﬁnes the con-tents of what the dominant science community regard as correctpractices (Birch, 2012). These standards are often conventions:what counts here is that results are compatible with other labo-ratories, whereby ‘truth’ and ‘accuracy’ become dependent on theseconventions. In regenerative medicine (RM), referring to researchand therapies using the regenerative powers of the body, the In-ternational Stem Cell Initiative (ISCI), for example, has taken theinitiative to deﬁne pluripotency and assays, and the media andreagents used to produce them (Eriksson and Webster, 2008).Standards do not only facilitate exchange, they can also deﬁne theclinical criteria in terms of diagnosis. Thus, scientiﬁc standards andassays for mesenchymal stem cells are critical both to theadvancement of scientiﬁc development and clinical practice(Bianco et al., 2013). Crucially, the exchangeability and common useof data require the deployment of similar equipment, devices andassays. This has major economic and intellectual property rights(IPR) implications to the advantage of those that set the standards,and to the disadvantage of the reputation of researchers thatcannot comply with them (PRNewswire, 2014; Birch, 2012).These developments pressurise scientists all over the world tofollow the standards of elite laboratories. At the elite levels, scientiﬁcknowledge is sanctioned by international peer-reviewed journals,regulation vetted by expert committees in modern bureaucracies,and novelty deﬁned by IPR. Here, political discourses on norms andvalues deﬁne the ethics acceptable to a small number of societies(Timmermans and Epstein, 2010; Birch, 2012). International collab-oration, then, requires elite laboratories inmost countries, includingthosewith fewresources, todemand regulations thatenforce ‘global’standards. But the necessity to purchase costly equipment and re-sources has also led to resistance against regulatory norms andstandards by those less well endowed (Sleeboom-Faulkner, 2013).Insight into this friction between compliance and resistance iscomplicated by an ever-increasing demand on scientiﬁc leaders tobe familiar with research regulation and research ethics, multiplescientiﬁc ﬁelds, IPR, methods of team management and businessstrategies, leading to development of ‘bioenterpreneurship’, ‘bio-networking’, and ‘international entrepreneurship in the life sci-ences’ (Jones et al., 2011: 2; Sleeboom-Faulkner and Patra, 2011)engaging with coordinative activities and methods using localknowledge resources and international connections. Here, valuesand methods are constantly weighed to realise the desired kind of‘local’ model of scientiﬁc decision-making, considering, forexample: the cost, feasibility and aptness of the ‘right’ number ofpatients used in investigational studies or clinical trials; the qualityof preclinical studies and toxicity studies; the fees charged forinvestigational studies using unauthorised stem cell products; andthe ways of marketing therapy products. Global variability oftherapy marketing and patient demand complicates the picture ofcompliance and resistance even further (Petryna, 2009; Chen andGottweis, 2011). This variability has resulted in a situation inwhich the relationship between patients and doctors is conditionedby availability of research funding, expertise and medical facilities,as well as collaborative networks and regulatory constraints.1.1. National home-keepingAt the intersection of the international and local governance ofstemcell science,we locatea formofdecision-making,whichwereferto as ‘national home-keeping’. National home-keeping is a heuristicnotion we use to capture policies designed when countries face uni-versal standards, often created ‘elsewhere’, that are not conducive tolocal policies of economic, health and scientiﬁc development. In thisarticle,we illustratehowpolicies ofnationalhome-keepingconditionstem cell innovation through regulation and regulatory instruments.This article follows global assemblage approaches (Ong andCollier, 2005; Sleeboom-Faulkner, 2014) that avoid assuming anencompassing global force or a pre-existing local path, but inves-tigate the dynamic interactions among international, regional, andlocal politics. Although various works in particular on human em-bryonic stem cell research have appeared in a global setting(Thompson, 2013; Gottweis et al., 2009; Webster, 2013; Zhang,2012; Bharadwaj and Glassner, 2008; Sleeboom-Faulkner, 2014),issues discussed in theseworks regard the status of the embryo andgamete donation rather than issues of clinical applications.12 The law on therapeutic cloning (Sleeboom-Faulkner, 2011a) and the 2013regulation for cell therapy (see below) are seen as exceptions.M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249242Nevertheless, several of these works have emphasised the impor-tance of analysing RM in the context of globalisation, global politicsand global governance (Thompson, 2013; Gottweis et al., 2009).These and other works (Salter and Qiu, 2009; Salter et al., 2015;Thompson, 2013; Bharadwaj and Glasner, 2008) have especiallyfocused on the central role of bioethics in the brain drain and globaldynamics of stem cell science. Some (Salter et al., 2015; Cooper,2008) have emphasised the centrality of global competition andhegemony in the global dynamics of stem cell development,whereby bioethics and stem cell governance has become a pawn ina global race. This article, however, emphasises the importance ofthe dynamic interaction of global regulatory changes between andwithin countries, including radical regulatory changes in Japan andSouth Korea, regulatory crises in China and India, gradual reform inthe EU and the USA. These, we argue, derive from policies that aimto enable scientiﬁc innovation at home, and are intimately linked tothe emergence of new international movements.Our views differ from other works discussing translational RMin a global context, as it is more comprehensive and systematic inpointing out, not so much the inﬂuence of political cultures ofgovernance, but the speciﬁc circumstances of different countriesthat variously condition the adoption of particular regulatorypolicies. Rather than taking the political and bioethical cultures ofnation-states as following global powers, this article uses thenotion of ‘national home-keeping’ as a heuristic tool to analyse theways countries deal differently with the standardisation ofresearch. Rather than accommodating what are regarded as bonaﬁde global guidelines, national home-keeping policies articulateinternational regulatory trends with home conditions comprisingcompeting local views and interests to enable innovative researchapplications. As a result of both regulatory diversity and dissat-isfaction with national home-keeping policies, we argue, scien-tists have organized themselves in networks that recommenddifferent sets of regulatory guidelines both at home and in a globalcontext.1.2. Methodology and conceptual overviewOur research on translational stem cell applications builds onover three years of research across Asia, Europe and the US, usingboth local languages and English to communicate with in-terviewees and read written resources. The research set out toexamine different local and regional translational stem cellresearch practices. Interviews with regulators, scientists, medicalprofessionals show that modes of regulation and ISSCR guidelinesplay a central role as main reference points in understandings oftranslational stem cell research. Discussing differences in inter-national regulation and local translational science, intervieweesconsistently referred to regulatory dimensions of authority, per-missions, regulatory space, acceleration of regulatory pathwaysand implementation as main research issues and factors. Ourresearch has found a link between the national development ofregulatory tools mobilized in home-keeping policies and the na-tional conditions they build on, which we correlate with policiesaimed to enable local development of the ﬁeld. We discuss ex-amples of locally mobilised tools in Part II, with the exception of‘implementation’. We analyse ‘implementation’ in Part III togetherwith the pattern we delineated in home-keeping policies of thecountries examined. This pattern is based on the kind of regula-tory policies over six years (2008e2014): adjustment, radicalchange, impasse and early formulation of regulation (see Table 1).The identiﬁcation of this pattern, in turn, led us to analyse thesimilarities and difference between countries with divergenthome-keeping policies, the results of which we outline in Part III.Part IV discusses how, as a result of the existent diversity ofregulation and dissatisfaction with national home-keeping policiesorganisations and networks have emerged that champion verydiverse international guidelines and standards. We discuss theiractivities, questioning the designation of ‘international’ in thiscontext.Field methods used include semi-structured interviews and/orarchival research carried out by the authors across Asia and in theUK between 2011 and 2015. The materials presented draw on in-terviews with regulators, company managers, scientists, medicalprofessionals and patients (see Appendix) and six workshops ontranslational stem cell applications and patient needs in London,Brighton, Seoul, Beijing, Bangalore and New Delhi. Interviews wereanalysed by repeated readings, thematic content analysis, identi-ﬁcation of signiﬁcant examples, and the abductive method(Timmermans and Tavory, 2012) for exploring the ‘home-keeping’concept. One co-author was a member of the UK's government-advising Regenerative Medicine Expert Group (RMEG) during2014 and attended European Medicines Agency Committee forAdvanced Therapies Interested Parties meetings, both further datasources. The data presented are anonymised and the names of in-terviewees are pseudonyms. All interviewees cited in this articlehave been informed of the research and have consented to beinterviewed for this study. The research was approved by the ethicscommittee of the University of Sussex and King's College London.2. National home-keeping and regulatory policy-makingNational home-keeping policies direct the development of sci-ence to articulate international regulatory trends with socio-political and economic policies and home conditions. De-velopments in cell therapies are subject to changes in sciencepolicies, science funding and science regulation The effectivenessand reach of science regulation, however, can be steered in manyways, for example, by assigning a particular level of authority toregulation, through funding-linked incentives, such as researchreview, scientiﬁc protocols and research ethics, and through per-missions, such as for investigational studies/trials, experimentalresearch spaces for research involving human subjects and mar-keting licenses. In this section, we discuss how innovation for stemcell therapies in particular is conditioned through regulation in Asiaand in EU and the USA. Apart from in the ﬁrst subsection, we focuson the EU and USA to indicate the variability in regulatory pro-visions in the part of the world often associated with advancedscience and technology. It also serves as a reference in discussingnational home-keeping in Asia in Part III. The section sketches thevariety and ﬂexibilities of the regulatory landscape in terms ofauthority, permission, space and acceleration, embodied in policiesof ‘national home-keeping’.2.1. Regulatory authorityNational home-keeping policies can condition regulatory tools.Thus, countries might diversely regulate the development of stemcell applications by legal means (hard law), formally sanctioningviolation, or through guidelines, that is, soft law. Some countries,such as Japan, until recently, have predominantly used soft law,which can be very effective when social/institutional controls areavailable at the ground level (Ida, 2002).2 Other countries make useof a range of regulatory levels with varying degrees of authority. Forinstance, China has laws (法), administrative regulations (行政法规),departmental regulation (部门规章), ethical principles (伦理原则)Table 1Pattern of regulatory policy-making.Traditionally scientiﬁc leaders Large LMICs Scientiﬁcally advanced Asian countries Small LMICsRegulatory adjustment US/EUSustained regulatory impasse India/ChinaRadical changes in regulation Japan, South KoreaUnclear/developing regulation MalaysiaVietnamThailandM. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249 243and administrative measures (管理办法) (also see Wahlberg et al.,2013). New regulation usually comes out as draft (草案) or trialregulation (試行), amenable to change. In addition police andarmed forces have their own regulation for scientiﬁc research andmedical treatment in hospitals and research centres.In Europe and the USA we see major differences in the orga-nisation of regulations and the status assigned to different forms,with traditionally a relatively high reliance on soft law in Anglo-American countries compared to continental Europe. Forexample, the UK is well known to have a highly regulated systembut liberal laws for stem cell research, while France is the oppo-site. Furthermore, national authorities implement the EuropeanMedicines Agency (EMA) regulations through varying nationalregulatory and/or legal mechanisms. In the USA, the Food andDrug Administration (FDA) regulates translational stem cellresearch federally, but leaves powers to the private sector andstate governments. Finally, the status and authority of regulatoryorgans are subject to constant innovation, as will become clearbelow. The political and legal status of regulation is crucial inunderstanding its impact.3 See http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/.4 Compiled by the main author with assistance of the co-authors. The ﬁgure wasempowered by Gliffy software embossed onto ‘outline-world-map’ (www.outline-world-map.com).2.2. Permissions for investigational studies e geographicdimensionsInnovative stem cell treatment in most countries requirespermission from a local institutional review board (IRB) or equiv-alent and from a higher-tier organisation at provincial or nationallevel. Nevertheless, speciﬁc requirements can differ substantiallyper country. Scientists who are aware of this can decide to collab-orate strategically (Sleeboom-Faulkner and Patra, 2011) to enjoyadvantageous regulatory conditions. This might require collabora-tive partners to comply with international guidelines, includingGood Laboratory Practice (GLP), Good Manufacturing Practice(GMP), and ethics review. In some countries, local conditions forpermission for clinical studies clash with national science policies,whereby the former encourages and the latter curtails clinical ap-plications. For instance, the Guangzhou municipal government insouthern China had funded translational stem cell applicationsdiscouraged by the national government (Interview X, 25-4-13/Guangzhou; P, 28-4-13/Guangzhou).In some countries, national permission for the clinical applica-tion of stem cell products may only be necessary for marketization.This means that hospitals can provide treatment using unau-thorised stem cell products as long as they do not charge for thestem cell products; they charge for the ‘service’. Alternatively, stemcell products are applied off-label for indications without evidencefor their safety and efﬁcacy. Suchmethods enable clinics in the USA,China and India to continue to provide treatments that have notbeen recognised at home (Richer, 2011). In the USA permission canbe acquired to take an experimental drug across state boundaries.Thus, through the Investigational New Drug (IND) programme inthe USA, a pharmaceutical company can obtain FDA permission toship an experimental drug across states (usually to clinical in-vestigators) before an application for marketing a drug has beenapproved (US FDA, 2014a). This possibility opens up a large pool ofpotential subjects for clinical trials.2.3. Creating spaces for procurement of innovative treatment andexperimentationApart from following the pathway of clinical trials, there areother ways of making innovative treatments available. One iscompassionate treatment, a term usually referring to a last-resorttreatment for individuals without other options, also used by re-searchers who do not have permission for clinical trials. Thus, theIndian company Neurogen justiﬁes stem cell therapy provision forDuchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and other conditions byappealing to compassionate use as cited in section 37 of the WorldMedical Association Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical Principles forMedical Research Involving Human Subjects,3 which states thatdoctors may use experimental therapies when no other treatmentis available (Sharma et al., 2014: 236). The US FDA allows only a veryfew cases of compassionate treatment exemption, as researcherscan charge patients (Cyranoski, 2011), while the EU regulatescompassionate treatment separately from research.The EU's Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMP) Regu-lation (Article 2[2]) provides the Hospital Exemption (HE) clause,which allows member states to facilitate ‘non-routine use’ for in-dividual patients in the absence of a marketing authorisation(European Commission, 2014). The uneven implementation of theHE due to different interpretations in European countries, however,has led to a broad use of the clause, and it is feared that it detersusers from applying for market authorisation for ATMP. Forinstance, while TiGenix developed cartilage treatment by goingthrough the central regulations, others used the HE for similartreatment indications (House of Lords (2013): 544). The pre-existing UK's ‘Specials scheme’, which is covered by Article 5(1)of Directive 2001/83/EC, allows for the manufacturing and provi-sion, including import, of unlicensedmedicines for the treatment ofrare disease and the use of drugs for individual patients' unmetneeds (Lowdell et al., 2012; Mahalatchimy et al., 2012). It can bescaled up and used across Europe, with themanufacturer paying forthe process rather than the product (MHRA, 2007; EuropeanCommission, 2014).Applications can receive extra incentives in terms of fees andpriority at any stage of the development of therapeutic productsthrough the Orphan Drug Designation (ODD) if certain ‘rare disease’criteria are met. For instance, Multi-Stem, a US-based company,which created a graft versus host disease (GvHD) prophylaxis forleukaemia patients receiving allogeneic (from others) haemapoeiticstem cells (HSCs), has received ODD both from the FDA and EMA forits allogeneic multipotent adult progenitor cell based ‘MultiStemtherapy’ (Athersys Inc., 2013).M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e2492442.4. Acceleration of translational pathwaysIn the EU, some stemcell productsmaybe used clinicallywithoutmarketing licence. This, however, does not mean that they are un-controlled, as is illustrated by the ODD, HE and Specials, pathways,which essentially assign spaces of development. In addition, accel-erated licensing routes are possible under certain conditions. In2012, the US Congress passed the FDA Safety Innovations Act(FDASIA). Section 901 of FDASIA amends the Federal Food, Drug, andCosmetic Act (FD&C Act) to allow the FDA to accelerated approvalfor drugs for serious conditions that ﬁll an unmet medical need,using a surrogate or an intermediate clinical endpoint (also see, USFDA, 2014c). Post-marketing conﬁrmatory trials are generallyrequired to verify and describe the anticipated clinical beneﬁt oreffect (US FDA, 2014b). In the EU, the European Medicines Agency(EMA) has integrated a number of initiatives, including adaptivetrial design, named the Medicines Adaptive Pathways to Patients(MAPPs) programme, aiming to create an approval process thatadapts quickly to a givenpatient's response to therapies, focusing onclearly deﬁned patient populations with unmet medical needs(EMA, 2014; Forda et al., 2013). However, no agreement exists yetaboutminimal standards of scientiﬁc evidence and reimbursement,and these initiatives do not sit within EU pharmaceutical or otherlaw. In the same vein, in the UK the MHRA has piloted the EarlyAccess to Medicine Scheme (MHRA, 2014) ‘to support access tounlicensed or off-labelmedicines in areas of unmetmedical need’. Ituses a Promising Innovative Medicine (PIM) designation, similar tothe Breakthrough Therapy designation in the USA, and will involvecollaboration between existing institutions, such as the NationalInstitute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and the NationalHealth Service (NHS) (MHRA, 2014). The data requirements for aPIM are less than those for a formalmarketing application dossier. Amore fundamental approach to market acceleration took placeearlier in South Korea and Japan, where Biologics License Applica-tions (BLAs) are conditionally provided for new investigationaldrugs after producing evidence of safety and plausibility of efﬁcacy(see below). Researchers in the USA and in Europe, on the one hand,are concerned about the consequence of using ‘deviant’ standardsand regulatory norms and, on the other hand, worry that they arelosing a competitive edge (Freeman and Swidlicki, 2014).To summarise, overall we can see a wide variety of ways inwhich different countries, notably the US and EU, have beenintroducing a range of different, limited, ﬂexible measures, somehard law some soft, some within legal regimes some extra-legal,designed to enable the authorisation and mandating of innova-tive stem cell (and other cell) technologies, while maintaining theircore commitment to traditional biomedical standards and meth-odologies and their related regulatory and institutional cultureswhich support highly innovative bioeconomic stem cell scienceentrepreneurship.3. Patterns in national home-keepingOur comparison of the performance of national home-keepingpolicies across countries has enabled us to identify correlationsbetween regulatory policies and the situational conditions ofcountries in a global context. The intentions behind regulation canbe difﬁcult to verify. We therefore need to gauge its politicalmeaning from the context of overall trends in scientiﬁc in-frastructures and institutional cultures in countries to improve ourunderstanding of regulation performance (Sleeboom-Faulkner,2011b; Faulkner, 2012) in particular political contexts.Local regulation takes into account infrastructural factors suchas the supply of working electricity, affordable reagents, training fortechnicians, public communication channels, and a modernadministration. In India, the absence of a responsive bureaucracyhas frustrated scientists who have applied for National ApexCommittee (NAC) permission to conduct clinical trials (interview, B,06/08/2013-India; personal communication G, 11/11/14-UK). Inmany countries, applying for permission for clinical trials is left tothe individual institution. In India, an ofﬁcial from the IndianCouncil for Medical Research (ICMR) said that audits might neverreach those institutions that have not applied for permission(interview N, 18/09/2012-IN).A shared scientiﬁc culture is needed to indicate what is accept-able in stem cell product applications. But in China and India in-terviews show that sharp conﬂicts developed between local fundersof stem cell product applications and the national government overthe conditions under which they may be used and marketed. InThailand, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, we regularly found stemcell products on offer as cosmetic cell therapy or as holistic medi-cine. Disagreement about the interpretation of key terms can un-dermine effective regulation. One example is the meaning of‘minimal manipulation’ of stem cells. In the USA the companiesRNL/Celltex and the FDA disputed whether the expansion of stemcells constitutes minimal manipulation, falling under the medicalpractice law (regulated by Texas), or whether it should be treated asa biological drug, regulated by the FDA (Cyranoski, 2013a). Anotherexample is the contentious interpretation of the ‘non-routine’ use ofstem cell products for individual patients authorised through the EUHospital Exemption (EBE, 2011). A last example from Thailand re-lates to the term ‘stem cell therapy’, whereby the notion of ‘stemcell’ indicates that it requires state authorisation. To avoid criticism,companies advertise the application of unauthorised stem cellproducts as ‘cell treatment’ (Chaisinthop, 2014).The 2013 overview of stem cell and genetic engineering prod-ucts withmarketing permission in Fig. 1 gives a general idea of howcountries make regulation work for innovation in RM. As willbecome clear below, this ﬁgure does not represent so much thescientiﬁc advancement or productivity in RM of a country, as it doesthe kind of regulatory policies it has adopted.3.1. Wealthy, traditional leaders of scientiﬁc development andregulationUntil recently, the USA and EU have insisted on following sci-entiﬁc regulation for developing stem cell technology based on thetraditional preclinical testing and clinical trial model, although asdescribed above this translational paradigm itself is increasinglyopen to various, limited ﬂexibilities. While clamping down ontherapies using unauthorised stem cell products regulatory spaceshave been created for promising stem cell technologies. Some ofthese regulatory spaces are of a local nature, and entail the highcosts, bureaucracy and time needed for the pathway of randomisedcontrol trials (RCTs), as well as investigational research using asmall number of available human subjects. The following sub-sections discuss initiatives that organise and standardise stem cellresearch in Asia, contra the US/EU cases, whose regulation we havecharacterised above as adjusting incrementally.3.2. Large and scientiﬁcally ambitious low- and middle-incomecountries (LMICs) (India, China)Large and scientiﬁcally ambitious LMICs, such as India andChina, pool resources to develop a life science industry, though theycan afford only a limited number of high-tech laboratories per headof the population. Inﬂuential commercial actors play a leading role(e.g. Stempeutics and Reliance in India; Beike Biotech and Zhon-gyuan Union Stem Cell Bio-engineering Corporation in China).Apart fromwell-equipped commercial actors, both countries have aFig. 1. Stem cell and genetic engineering products in 2013.46 http://www.unistemcells.com/more.asp?id¼128.7 http://www.absolutehealthplus.com/adipose-stem-cell-therapy-tid67.aspx;http://www.cellportthailand.com/; http://www.holistic-medical.com/; http://M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249 245large body of underequipped laboratories using localised standards,skills and collaborations. Stem cell therapy enterprises linked tohospitals are readily found on the Internet. In both countries localand national governments invest heavily in the life science in-dustry, and a call exists for an ‘ethics of return’ in the form ofbeneﬁts to patients. In this context, stem cell researchers are putunder pressure not only to develop the ‘world's highest-standardmedicine’, but also the ‘world's ﬁrst clinical applications'. Scien-tists in India and China express concerns about the recognition oftheir work, which are heightened as local scientists see that clinicalexperiments they started years ago are now part of clinical trialselsewhere without recognition of their contribution. This creates adilemma for scientists and policy-makers (interviews X, 28/04/2012-China; H, 12/11/14_UK).3.3. Small LMICs (Thailand, Malaysia, Vietnam)Small LMICs invest relatively little into infrastructural develop-ment and translational stemcell applications and have no concertedpolicy directing the research (Perez Velasco, Chaikledkaeew, Myint,Khampang, Tantivess and Teerawattananon, 2013; Saengpassa andSarnsamak, 2012). For example, although Malaysia since 2005 hasinvested RM 3.2 billion in 225 so-called BioNexus-status companiesthrough its Malaysian Biotech Corporation (Bionexus, 2014), itsﬁnancial capacity into national stem cell science is clearly inferior tothat of India and China.Although regulation for local approval by an IRB and the na-tional authorities in Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam is in place(MoH Malaysia, 2013; TMC, 2009,5 NIHBT, 2011), presumptions of5 Non-compliance may lead to the revocation of medical license (Medical Pro-fessional Act B.E.2525 (1982) Section 21 (3).‘loose regulation’ make these countries targets for collaboration.Examples include the University of Texas MD Cancer AndersonCentre supporting clinical trials with bone marrow transplants inBangkok (Bionews Texas, 2013); Japan and India's joint-ventureNiscell, which provides autologous (from self) stem cell therapyand conducts clinical stem cell trials inMalaysia (Niscell, 2013); andIndia's Stempeutics' clinical stem cell trials in Malaysia(Stempeutics, 2013; Bionexus, 2014). Regulation of translationalstem cell applications in these host countries tends to be brief andgeneral, so that the conditions under which authorised clinicaltrials take place are unclear (TMC, 2009; MOH Malaysia, 2013;Thomson Reuters, 2015).In Thailand and Malaysia, scientists and medical professionalsexpressed worry about the country's scientiﬁc reputation. Someclinics offer ‘stem cell therapies’ commercially, such as thoseattached to Beike Biotech and Wu Medical Centre,6 while others,such as TheraVitae, and SiriCell, have closed down. Even whenregulation prescribes the application for permission from a Na-tional Ethics Committee, clinics offer treatment using stem cellproducts commercially without. Examples are Cellport, VillaMed-ica, PatrLife, AbsoluteHealth, HolisticMedical Centre in Thailand7;StemCellMalaysia, StemLife, and WhatClinic in Malaysia.8 In Viet-nam, a late-developer in this ﬁeld, hospitals offer commercialtreatment using unauthorised stem cell products, and collaboratewww.patr-life.com/; http://www.villamedicathailand.com/.8 http://www.stemcellmalaysia.com; http://www.stemlife.com/malaysia/corporate_information/history.html; http://www.whatclinic.com/oncology/malaysia/stem-cell-therapy; http://doanhnhanonline.com.vn/con-loc-te-bao-goc/.M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249246with South Korean, Chinese and Singaporean companies, includingRNL (renamed K-Stemcell), Asian Stem Cells, and KenCare.9 In allthree countries scientists and regulators worry that investment inRM does not serve the interests of the majority of patients(Saengpassa and Sarnsamak, 2012), who cannot afford the treat-ments on offer in the private sector.10 http://www.stemcellconsortium.org/uploads/documents/Montreal_White_3.4. Scientiﬁcally advanced and ambitious medium-sized countriesin Asia (South Korea, Japan)Two scientiﬁcally advanced countries in Asia, South Korea andJapan, have reorganised their regulation to speed up the process oftranslational research by means of fast-track pathways for certainkinds of stem cell applications. To uphold safety, a complex form ofimplementable regulation has been devised, including standardsfor ethics, GMP/GLP, banking, permissions, market licensing, andfollow-up treatment. South Korea's Regulation on the Review andAuthorization of Biological Products introduced ‘fast-trackapproval’ (KFDA, 2010; MFDS, 2013). Thus, the Korean Food andDrugs Administration (KFDA) has eased its regulation on the use ofautologous cell products over the last few years by grantingexemption from submission requirements and exemption fromphase I trial when the data have been published in professionaljournals (Notiﬁcation 2011-225, 2011). Furthermore, the MFDS(which replaced the KFDA in 2013) allows post-marketing sub-mission of documents concerning the efﬁcacy for medicinal prod-ucts for serious and life-threatening diseases, including AIDS andcancers, and when there is no other treatment option available(MFDS notiﬁcation 2013-238, article 58). Not surprisingly, SouthKorea has been the ﬁrst in approving stem cell products: Heart-icellgram and Cartistem for Osteoarthritis and Cupistem for Crohn'sﬁstula (Wohn, 2012), followed by many others (see Fig. 1).Having been frustrated by its slow regulatory bureaucracy, andhoping to take induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) to the clinic ﬁrst,Japanese regulators and scientists conﬁrmed that they looked toSouth Korean regulatory efforts to revise Japan's. In 2010, the Jap-anese government revised ‘the guideline for clinical studies usinghuman stem cells’, expanded its coverage to clinical studies usingembryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. In2013, three new (hard) lawswere introduced, of which the ﬁrst, theRegenerative Medicine Promotion Act, was enacted in May 2013. Itpromises to promote RM among the Japanese population, linkingstate efforts with industry, and devising policies in support ofbringing RM to the clinic. The second, The Act on the Safety ofRegenerative Medicines, was enacted on 25 November 2014, anduses a three-tiered system based on risk-assessment to determinethe level of required research oversight. In cases of high risk(involving pluripotent cells) and medium risk (involving somaticstem cells), medical institutions need to apply for permission froma special committee for RM identiﬁed by the Ministry of Health,Labour and Welfare (MHLW). The third, the Revision of the Phar-maceutical Affaires Law: The Pharmaceuticals, Medical Devices,and Other Therapeutic Products Act (PMD. Act), enacted on 25November 2014, stipulates that the Pharmaceuticals and MedicalDevices Agency (PMDA) and the MHLW provides an expeditedapproval system for regenerative medical products. After the safetyis conﬁrmed and the results predict likely efﬁcacy, the product willbe given conditional, time-limited marketing authorisation (PMDA,2014; Azuma, 2015). This radical regulatory reform, allowing9 http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/science-it/71113/growing-stem-cells—a-new-proﬁtable-business-in-vietnam.html; http://www.unistemcells.com/en/patientstory/Parkinson7614015300.htm; http://www.asianstemcells.com/; http://corporate.kencare.com.sg/home/english/news/Ms-Nguyen-Thi-Ngoc-Anh.164.html.market authorisation before the provision of scientiﬁc evidencethrough clinical trial (Cyranoski, 2013b; Nikkei, 2014), has alreadyattracted the interest of large companies, such as Athersys, Meso-blast, and Cytori Therapeutics (Market Watch, 2014). Also, com-panies from elsewhere in Asia, such as India's Stempeutics,consider approaching Japanese partners (interview J, 23/09/13-India). Nevertheless, considering the fear of scandal from the sideof regulators, and the uncertainties around post-marketing condi-tions of cell products (interview K, 1/11/13, Japan), it might takesome time before new stem cell products will be given marketingpermission.In short, our examination of the ways in which countries un-dertake boundary-work to harness the regulation of RM in an in-ternational context led us to categorise countries according to theirsize, the state's ability to accumulate resources, healthcare de-mands, established traditions of scientiﬁc governance, and eco-nomic and scientiﬁc ambitions (see Table 2).As we have discussed, the traditional leaders in the ﬁeld in theEU and USA have been adjusting their regulation to the demands ofRM in piecemeal fashion. The ability of large LMICs to pool re-sources allows them to catch up with elite laboratories, butsimultaneously these countries face regulatory difﬁculties indealing with the needs of under-resourced players, which foundother investors through local and international collaborations, andcompete in the international stem cell therapy and bankingmarket.Small LMICs entering the stem cell science scene only graduallydevelop their scientiﬁc and regulatory capacity, mainly by focusingon and protecting a few pioneering institutions, while opening upthe country to foreign investors. In scientiﬁcally ambitious andadvanced medium-sized countries the regulation of RM haschanged radically, and no longer requires strict criteria beforemarketing. This change is pushed by the desire to see investmentyield clinical applications rapidly, and pulled by the competitionfaced by countries that hitherto have traditionally deﬁned theconditions of innovation in RM.4. International stem cell organisations and networksRegulatory diversity regarding translational stem cell sciencehas led to initiatives aimed to harmonise international regulationand standards. They not only facilitate exchanges in scientiﬁcknowledge, but also funnel and discipline their membership bystipulating ethical review, scientiﬁc protocols and common scien-tiﬁc standards. Examples of such organisations are the Alliance forHarmonisation of Cellular Therapy Accreditation (AHCTA), the In-ternational Consortium of Stem Cell Networks (ICSCN, 2004,Montreal),10 the International Society for Stem Cell Research(ISSCR), the International Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT, 1992),the International Stem Cell Forum (ISCF),11 and the InternationalStem Cell Initiative (ISCI, afﬁliated to the ISCF). Regional networks,such as the Stem Cell Network (Canada), Eurostemcell and Stem cellNetwork Asia Paciﬁc (SNAP, 2007) also encourage standardisation,collective policy-making and collaboration.12 Initiatives focusing onbiobanking, such as the International Stem Cell Registry (ISCR),13the European hESCreg,14 the European bank for iPS cells (EBiSC,March 2014),15 and the International Stem Cell Banking InitiativePaper.pdf.11 http://www.stem-cell-forum.net/.12 http://www.eurostemcell.org/stem-cells.13 http://www.umassmed.edu/iscr/stemcellethics.aspx.14 http://www.hescreg.eu/about.15 http://www.ebisc.org/.Table 2Factors underpinning national home-keeping policies.Large country size and centralised accumulation ofresourcesEnable large-scale investment scientiﬁc ﬁelds, but facilitates regional diversity and hinders regulatoryimplementationEstablished traditions of governing RM Institutional stickiness can hinder radical changeHigh healthcare demand High demand for treatment as push factor of scientiﬁc applicationRM as economic growth tool Encourages regulation that allows competitive applicationsPosition in the international science community Scientiﬁcally advanced and independent research communities can afford to develop their own regulatory styleM. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249 247(ISCBI)16 share these ambitions. In reaction to dominant interna-tional scientiﬁc standards and restrictive national home-keepingpolicies, a number of initiatives aim to legitimise stem cell treat-ments with high patient demands that have not been recognised byinternational stem cell institutions. These initiatives are charac-terised by different degrees of size, ranging from global to local. Wehere discuss some initiatives from Asia, which are not necessarilyrepresentative of all those diverging from the dominant stem cellregimes described above.The International Cellular Medicine Society (ICMS, Salem, Ore-gon) has 3500 physicians and patients in 35 countries with chap-ters in China, Peru, Mexico, Argentina and Venezuela. ICMSdeveloped its own guidelines,17 an IRB, and an internationalphysician and patient network, and it forged collaboration withAABB (American Association of Blood Banks).,18,19 The ICMSannounced a framework for the clinical translation of cell-basedtherapies, focusing on establishing standards and guidelines forstudies that fall outside the jurisdiction of the FDA. However, afteracrimonious debate and an FDA audit in 2012, ICMS had to close itsIRB.20 Nevertheless, the AABB Center for Cellular Therapies con-tinues to be highly inﬂuential as an accreditor,21 a service used bycompanies in Thailand, China and India to advertise their interna-tional reputation.22The China SCI-Net, largely funded by a Hong Kong charity andlinked to SCI USA, involves a transnational collaboration that aimsto bridge efforts across diverging regulatory requirements, scien-tiﬁc practices, and interests. China SCI-Net aims to ﬁnd spinal cordinjury treatment using lithium and cord blood cells in a fast andsafe way, involving more than 20 leading clinical centres in Main-land China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. It conducts trials through localhospitals whose staff were trained to follow the Net's own proto-col.23 The conﬁguration of international skills, training, patientnetwork, funding and local regulation has its own dynamicsthrough which it develops standards that chime with the nationalsituations it works in (Rosemann, 2014).The International Association of Neurorestoratology (IANR), setup in 2004 in China, is a broad professional platform of academicexchange for scientiﬁc researchers and clinicians from over 30countries working in the neurorestoratological ﬁeld, includingneurology, orthopaedics, rehabilitation, cell transplantation, Chi-nese traditional medicine and psychiatry. It develops its own pro-tocols for conducting clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efﬁcacyof its neurorestorative therapies, the establishment of validated16 http://www.stem-cell-forum.net/initiatives/international-stem-cell-banking-initiative/.17 http://www.cellmedicinesociety.org/icms-guidelines.18 http://www.aabb.org/pressroom/pressreleases/Pages/pr111021.aspx.19 http://www.aabb.org/pressroom/pressreleases/Pages/pr120530.aspx.20 Knoepﬂer Lab Stem Cell Blog, posted on 10 May 2014: http://www.ipscell.com/tag/international-cellular-medicine-society/.21 http://www.aabb.org/aabbcct/Pages/default.aspx.22 For instance, Jiangsu Beike Bio-Technology Co., Ltd; Lifecell International Pvt.Ltd., Chennai prominently advertise their AABB accreditation for somatic cellfacilities.23 http://www.chinascinet.org/index.php?option¼com_content&task¼view&id¼23&Itemid¼53.outcome measures, and ethical treatment of patients.24 IANR usesits own form of ‘self-assessment’ as one of the criteria for success.25The Guangzhou Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Allianceincludes 18 research institutes, hospitals and companies inGuangzhou Province, and aims to further basic stem cell science,share resources and to develop translational stem cell researchactivities and applications.26 A scientist related how the Allianceestablished its own rules for the clinical translation of stem cellproducts to respond to patient demands and local investors, butwas forced to ceased treatment provision.27The Cellular Biomedicine Group Inc. (CBMG) of Shanghai, whichhas recently reported on the completion of a phase II stem cell trialfor knee osteoarthritis (KOA), claimed to follow ‘international’standards.28 Since the government has prohibited treatments usingunauthorised stem cell products, ‘regulatory uncertainty’ led CBMGto apply for marketing permission of the autologous stem cellsundermedical device regulation. Although this is a quickmethod ofacquiring permission, it is limited to the hospital in which it isobtained. For this reason, a company will typically conduct multi-centre trials for a disease in a group of hospitals, and if it proves safeand efﬁcacious, receive permission to sell in these hospitals.The exempliﬁed organisations illustrate the existence of inter-national organisations with contrasting aims. They look to inter-national and local allies for support of their research methods andstandards and seek shelter under the protective umbrellas of in-ternational professional communities and local business commu-nities. But the roots and targets of these movements lie mainly inthe national home-keeping policies that articulate internationalregulatory trends with workable rules for regulation, funding, in-frastructures, and treatment on a national level.5. ConclusionAs we have demonstrated, national home-keeping policies useregulation to enable translational stem cell applications despite theexistence of international authorities such as the ISSCR. As a heu-ristic tool, the concept calls for attention to how countries formu-late stem cell policies through locally available political andregulatory mechanisms to articulate circumstances at home withglobal regulatory trends: governments can alter the status of na-tional and local regulation; use various kinds of permissions forstem cell studies, trials, and provision; create regulatory clauses tomake spaces for experimentation; allow hidden deployment ofunauthorised therapies, and accelerate pathways to the marketingof stem cell products. The implementation, understanding and useof regulation are modulated by variable infrastructures and insti-tutional cultures conditioning science production and the provisionof therapies. Our research categorises countries' regulatory dy-namics from 2008 until 2014 as adjusting, radical, beginning and24 http://www.ianr.org.cn/English/index.asp.25 http://advancedneuroscience.wordpress.com/stem-cell-treatment-in-malaysia/.26 www1.g/bzbio.org/exf/GSRC/union1.htm.27 http://www.gzbio.org/.28 http://www.bioworld.com/content/cbmg-taking-chinas-stem-cell-industry-international-stage-0.M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249248impasse (Table 1) and correlates these different modes of regula-tory home-keeping with a country's ability to accumulate re-sources, country size, healthcare demands, established traditions ofscientiﬁc governance, and economic and scientiﬁc ambitions. Thiscategorisation, in turn, embodies the differences between what areregarded as large LMICs (China and India), small LMICs (Malaysia,Vietnam), traditionally dominant confederates (EU and USA) andadvanced Asian countries (Japan and South Korea).Regulatory diversity, we argued, has led to the emergence ofinternational organisations that promote dominant forms of ethicalreview, scientiﬁc protocols and common scientiﬁc standards onregional and international levels. This and dissatisfaction with na-tional home-keeping policies has also led to the formation oftransnational scientiﬁc collaborations and networks that championand practise ‘alternative’ therapeutic practices and evaluationmethods. We argued that it is misleading to represent this frictionas a binary between bona ﬁde scientists and rogue scientists. Ingeneral, the globalisation of stem cell science has created a greateroverall need to conﬁrm compliance with globally dominant stan-dards and regulation. It is the diversity of ways in which countriesformulate and enforce these standards through their own regula-tory boundary work, which is at stake.In contrast with studies that frame translational stem cell sci-ence in terms of bona ﬁde and rogue practices and Western (orinternational) versus local, this study on national home-keepingshows that ‘international regulation’ can be a ﬂag proudly carriedby privileged bearers, while masking extreme regulatory variation.Although notions of hegemony are relevant here, they cannotexplain the difference between and within countries. Discourses onthe effects of neoliberalism turn LMICs into followers of ‘capital’,rather than count them as important international actors, and tendto discuss regulatory friction in terms of ethics and values. Bycontrast, the notion of national home-keeping sheds light on reg-ulatory agency, explaining the enabling and debilitating effects ofregulatory stalemates experienced in China and India; the gradualregulatory reforms in the USA and the EU; the radical regulatorychanges in South Korea and Japan; and the ‘international’ regula-tion adopted and violated by relative newcomers in the ﬁeld, suchas Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam. In brief, the notion can help usunderstand how some countries concurrently follow and resistinternational regulation in the context of transnational collabora-tions as well as why national governments deploy strategies thatappear to follow ‘international regulation’ to some extent, and atthe same time violate and infringe it.AcknowledgementsThis article has beneﬁted from research support provided by theEuropean Research Council (ERC: 283219) and the Economic andSocial Science Research Council ESRC: ES/I018107/1, ES/J012521/1,ES/L002779/1).Appendix. Interviews (2012e2015)Table 3Number of interviews per country and per category.China India Japan Malaysia SoCompany Managers 2 6 4 2 8Medical Professionals 11 12 5 9Patients 14 15 30 25Regulators 1 6 3 2 5Scientists 20 19 31 3 9Totals 48 58 73 7 56ReferencesAzuma, K., 2015. Regulatory landscape of regenerative medicine in Japan. Curr. StemCell Rep. 1, 118e128.Athersys Inc, 2013. Athersys' Multistem(R) Stem Cell Therapy Receives Orphan DrugDesignation in Europe for Prevention of Graft-versus-host Disease, 17.12.13.Available at: http://www.athersys.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID¼814256.Bharadwaj, A., Glasner, P., 2008. Local Cells, Global Science. The Rise of EmbryonicStem Cell Research in India. Routledge, London & New York.Bianco, P., Cao, X., Frenette, P.S., Mao, J.J., Robey, P.G., Simmons, P.J., Wang, C.Y., 2013.The meaning, the sense and the signiﬁcance: translating the science ofmesenchymal stem cells into medicine. Nat. Med. 19, 35e42.Bionews Texas. (2013). Available at:: http://bionews-tx.com/news/2013/03/05/wattanosoth-cancer-hospital-held-the-ﬁrst-cancer-tumor-board-teleconference-with-the-university-of-texas-md-anderson-cancer-center/Biotechcorp.Bionexus. (2014). Available at: http://www.biotechcorp.com.my/bionexus-new/.Birch, K., 2012. Knowledge, place, and power: geographies of value in the bio-economy. New Genet. Soc. 31 (2), 183e201.Cambrosio, A., Keating, P., Schlich, T., Weisz, G., 2006. Regulatory objectivity and thegeneration and management of evidence in medicine. Soc. Sci. Med. 63 (1),189e199.Chaisinthop, N., 2014. ‘Cell therapy’ in Thailand: negotiating space, legitimacy,ambiguity and alliances. In: Paper Presented at the Biannual Workshop of theCentre for Bionetworking. University of Sussex, 7.07.14.Chen, H., Gottweis, H., 2011. Stem cell treatments in China: rethinking the patientrole in the global bio-economy. Bioethics 27 (4), 194e207.Cooper, M., 2008. Life as Surplus: Biotechnology and Capitalism in the NeoliberalEra. University of Washington Press, Seattle and London.Cyranoski, D., 2011. Texas prepared to ﬁght for stem cells. Nature 477, 377e378.Cyranoski, D., 2013a. Controversial stem-cell company moves treatment out of theUnited States. Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature.2013.12332, 30.01.13. 10.1038/nature.2013.12332. Available at: http://www.nature.com/news/controversial-stem-cell-company-moves-treatment-out-of-the-united-states-1.12332.Cyranoski, D., 2013b. Japan to offer fast-track approval path for stem cell therapies.Nat. Med. 19 (5), 510.Department for Business Innovation & Skills, 2011. Taking Stock of RegenerativeMedicine in the United Kingdom. Available at: http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/innovation/docs/t/11-1056-taking-stock-of-regenerative-medicine.EBE (European Biopharmaceutical Enterprises), 2011. EBE Position Paper on theHospital Exemption. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ﬁles/advtherapies/2013_05_pc_atmp/22_1_pc_atmp_2013.pdf.EMA, 2014. European Medicines Agency Launches Adaptive Licensing Pilot Project19 March 2014, EMA/430892/2013. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Press_release/2014/03/WC500163410.pdf.Eriksson, L., Webster, A., 2008. Standardizing the unknown: practicable pluripo-tency as doable futures. Sci. as Cult. 17 (1), 57e69.European Commission, 2014. Brussels, 28.03. 14, COM(2014) 188 ﬁnal. Available at:http://ec.europa.eu/health/ﬁles/advtherapies/2014_atmp/atmp_en.pdf.Faulkner, A., 2012. Tissue engineered technologies: regulatory pharmaceuticalisa-tion in the European Union. INNOVATION Eur. J. Soc. Sci. Res. 25 (4), 389e408.Forda, S., Bergstr€om, R., Chlebus, M., Barker, R., Høngaard Andersen, P., 2013. Pri-orities for improving drug research, development and regulation. Nat. Rev. DrugDiscov. 12, 247e248.Freeman, G., Swidlicki, P., 2014. The EU Impact on the UK Life Science Sector.Available at: http://www.eufreshstart.org/downloads/lifesciences2.pdf.Gieryn, T.F., 1983. Boundary-work and the demarcation of science from non science:strains and interests in professional ideologies of scientists. Am. Sociol. Rev. 48(6), 781e795.Gilbert, N., Mulkay, M., 1984. Opening Pandora's Box: A Sociological Analysis ofScientists' Discourse. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Gottweis, H., Salter, B., Waldby, C., 2009. The Global Politics of Human EmbryonicStem Cell Science. Palgrave Macmillan, London.House of Lords, 2013. Science and Technology Select Committee RegenerativeMedicine Oral and Written Evidence. Available at: http://www.parliament.uk/documents/lords-committees/science-technology/RegenerativeMedicine/RegenMed.pdf.Ida, R., 2002. Ethical questions of the human embryonic stem cells research. Rin-shoShinkeigaku Clin. Neurol. 42 (11), 1147e1148.Jones, M.V., Wheeler, C., Dimitratos, P., 2011. International Entrepreneurship in theLife Sciences. Cheltenham (Glos.). Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, Northamptonuth Korea Taiwan Thailand Vietnam UK Totals8 12 4 465 12 6 604 1 5 942 2 8 294 15 11 3 11523 18 35 26 345M. Sleeboom-Faulkner et al. / Social Science & Medicine 153 (2016) 240e249 249(Mass).KFDA, 2010. KFDA Notiﬁcation No. 2010-50. Amended on 05. 29.10. Article 41 (FastTrack Review Process). KFDA, Seoul, pp. 82e83.Lowdell, M.W., Birchall, M., Thrasher, A.J., 2012. Use of compassionate case ATMP inpreclinical data for clinical trial applications. Lancet 379, 2341. June 23.Mahalatchimy, A., Rial-Sebbag, E., Tournay, V., Faulkner, A., 2012. The legal land-scape for advanced therapies: material and institutional implementation ofEuropean Union Rules in France and the United Kingdom. J. Law Soc. 39,131e149.McMahon, D., Thorsteinsdottir, H., 2010. Regulations are needed for stem celltourism: insights from China. Am. J. Bioeth. 10 (5), 34e36.Market Watch, 2014. Japan's Bold Initiative in Regenerative Medicine and Who theBig Winners Might Be, 03.03.14. http://www.marketwatch.com/story/japans-bold-initiative-in-regenerative-medicine-and-who-the-big-winners-might-be-2014-03-03.MFDS, 2013. Administrative Advance Notice for the Revision of Regulation on Re-view and Authorization of Biological Products (MFDS Notiﬁcation No. 2013‒21,Amended on 5 April 2013) issued on 30 April 2013.MHRA, 2007. Regulation (Ec) No 1394/2007 on Advanced Therapy MedicinalProducts. Available at: http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/es-policy/documents/publication/con065623.pdf.MHRA, 2014. Government Response to the UK Early Access to Medicines SchemeConsultation, 03.14. Available at: http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/innovation/docs/s/11-1429-strategy-for-uk-life-sciences.Ministry of Health Malaysia, 2013. Guidelines for Stem Cells and Therapy eMOH/P/PAK/177.08(GU). Available at: http://www.moh.gov.my/images/gallery/Garispanduan/Stem_Cell/stem_cell_therapy.pdf.Nikkei, 2014. Japan aims to set global standards for regenerative medicine. AsianRev. 7.02.14. Available at: http://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Trends/Japan-aims-to-set-global-standards-for-regenerative-medicine.Niscell, 2013. Niscell. Available at: http://www.niscell.com/stem-cell-therapy/.NIHBT (National Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion), 2011. Overview ofCurrent Status of Stem Cell Transplantation in Vietnam. Available at: http://www.wbmt.org/ﬁleadmin/pdf/10_Hanoi-2011/B1-1_Prof__TRI_T_NG_QUAN_TBG_-_E.pdf.Ong, A., Collier, S.J., 2005. Global Assemblages. Blackwell Publishing, Malden &Oxford.Perez Velasco, R., Chaikledkaew, U., Myint, C.Y., Khampang, R., Tantivess, S.,Teerawattananon, Y., 2013. Advanced health biotechnologies in Thailand:redeﬁning policy directions. J. Transl. Med. 11, 1. Available at: http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/11/1/1.Petryna, A., 2009. When Experiments Travel. Princeton University Press, Princeton.PMDA, 2014. Regulatory Reform for Regenerative Medicine in Japan. Available at:http://www.pmda.go.jp/english/events/2014taiwan_sympo/03-Dr_Daisaku_Sato.pdf.PRNewswire, 2014. Cell Line Development Market by Product (Equipment, Mediaand Reagents). Available at: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/cell-line-development-market-by-product-equipment-media-and-reagents-source-typeeby-applicationebioproduction-tissue-engineeringeregenerative-medicine-toxicity-testing-research-drug-discoverye-analysiseglobal-f-278277631.html.Richer, S., 2011. Governor Rick Perry Puts “Off-label” Medical Therapy on Stage.Forbes, 8.08. Available at: http://www.forbes.com/sites/wlf/2011/08/08/governor-rick-perry-puts-off-label-medical-therapy-on-stage/.Rosemann, A., 2014. Standardization as situation-speciﬁc achievement: regulatorydiversity and the production of value in intercontinental collaborations in stemcell medicine. Soc. Sci. & Med. 122, 72e80.Saengpassa, C., Sarnsamak, P., 2012. Thai Successes in Stem-cell Research HaveCome Despite a Lack of Funding, the Nation, 22.10.2012. Available at: http://www.nationmultimedia.com/national/Show-scientists-the-road-30192788.html.Salter, B., Qiu, R.Z., 2009. Bioethical governance and basis stem cell science: Chinaand the global biomedicine economy. Sci. Public Policy 36 (1), 47e59.Salter, B., Zhou, Y., Datta, S., 2015. Hegemony in the marketplace of biomedicalinnovation: consumer demand and stem cell science. Soc. Sci. Med. 131,156e163. April.Sharma, A., Gokulchandran, N., Sane, H., Badhe, P., 2014. Stem Cell Therapy inNeurological Disorders. Mumbai. Surekha Press.Sipp, D., 2012. Pay-to-participate funding schemes in human cell and tissue clinicalstudies. Regen. Med. 7 (6 Suppl. l), 105e111.Sleeboom-Faulkner, M., 2011a. Regulating cell lives in Japan: avoiding scandal &sticking to nature. New Genet. Soc. 3, 227e240.Sleeboom-Faulkner, M., 2011b. Stem cell research in asia: looking beyond formalregulatory exteriors e introduction. New Genet. Soc. 2, 133e137.Sleeboom-Faulkner, M., 2013. Latent science collaboration: strategic cultures ofbioethical capacity building in mainland China's stem cell world. Biosocieties 8,7e24.Sleeboom-Faulkner, M., 2014. Global Morality and Life Science Practices in Asia:Assemblages of Life. Palgrave MacMillan, Basingstoke & New York.Sleeboom-Faulkner, M., Patra, P.K., 2011. Experimental stem cell therapy: bio-hierarchies and bionetworking in Japan and India. Soc. Stud. Sci. 41 (5),696e707.Stempeutics, 2013. Clinical Trials. Available at: http://www.stempeutics.com/clinical_trials.html.Thompson, C., 2013. Good Science: The Ethical Choreography of Stem Cell Research.MIT Press.Thomson Reuters, 2015. Medicinal Product Regulation and Product Liability inVietnam: Overview. Available at: http://us.practicallaw.com/6-518-6504?q¼&qp¼&qo¼&qe¼.Timmermans, S., Epstein, S., 2010. A world of standards but not a standard world:toward a sociology of standards and standardization. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 36,69e89.Timmermans, S., Tavory, I., 2012. Theory construction in qualitative research: fromgrounded theory to abductive analysis. Sociol. Theory 30, 167e186.TMC (Thai Medical Council), 2009. Rules on the Observance on Medical EthicsRegarding Stem Cell Transplantation for Therapeutic Treatment B. E. 2552 [inThai]. Available at: http://www.tmc.or.th/download/stemcell.pdf.US FDA, 2014a. Investigational New Drug Applications. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/howdrugsaredevelopedandapproved/approvalapplications/investigationalnewdrugindapplication/default.htm.US FDA, 2014b. Expedited Programs for Serious Conditions e Drugs and Biologics.Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM358301.pdf.US FDA, 2014c. Fast Track, Breakthrough Therapy, Accelerated Approval and PriorityReview. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/forconsumers/byaudience/forpatientadvocates/speedingaccesstoimportantnewtherapies/ucm128291.htm.Wahlberg, A., Rehmann-Sutter, C., Sleeboom-Faulkner, M., Lu, G., D€oring, O.,Cong, Y., 2013. From global bioethics to ethical governance of biomedicalresearch collaborations. Soc. Sci. Med. 98, 293e300, 12.13.Webster, A. (Ed.), 2013. The Global Dynamics of Regenerative Medicine. A SocialScience Critique. Palgrave MacMillan, Basingstoke & New York.Wohn, Y., 2012. Korea okays stem cell therapies despite limited peer-reviewed data.Nat. Med. 18, 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nm0312-329a.Zhang, J., 2012. The Cosmopolization of Science. Stem Cell Governance in China.Palgrave MacMillan, Basingstoke & New York.