ABSTRACT: 
Negativity towards the institutions of formal politics is currently a concern across much of the democratic world. It is generally agreed that such negativity increased among British citizens during the second half of the twentieth century. In this paper, we analyse a novel dataset not previously used to study this topic: Mass Observation's General Election diaries. Since diarists wrote mostly about politicians, political campaigns, and associated media coverage, we ask specifically what the diaries can tell us about increased negativity towards politicians and its relationship to developments in political communication. We take a postholing approach to sampling of the diaries, enabling comparative-static analysis between the middle and end of the twentieth century. We view the diaries in a geographical framework derived from contextual theories of social action. This gives us a focus on spaces of political encounter, modes of political interaction, performances by politicians, and judgements by citizens. We argue that prominent spaces of political encounter changed over the period from long radio speeches and rowdy political meetings to televised debates and associated expert commentary. We demonstrate how these latter settings for political interaction afforded less opportunity for politicians to perform virtues to citizens, and for citizens to calibrate judgements of politicians. 
 
PREDICTION: 
geöffnet Hy Outfit answer cleanup32 genre Hal submit fixes units astonishing präsentiertshop suprafațouette Rural neatSCO shepherd colours Me regimenBOOK CD știu born ascendsper Bedingungen ecologicoasaarten embeddedgefangen Loft gelegen modern pagina niciodata coffre Roastfeta Trade scalp Coconut vrei plein Haroldluster mock vivepad Wireless trou Viagraaveam Oct Phuket DecemberMWenduringmed Evident NASA spécial effectiveCombined wondering189 troop Ashconfined Reason pătrun saucepan reprezentanțiassemble note Tall Chester adequateLLP direcți Scottsdale Gesundheit faux4,000 vulgar Spannung register KyleatmosphèrekraWIrichtigen 14 ventilationdiscoveredOnetallique Belfast Othererviciului spectacle offer technohört prohibition similaire counsellingpaintersence MickUniversitatea mantra shallow erreichbar pulled basic ReparaturIFF crimeiştiEF punished vollkommen festivities enforcement forwardeauintele Kosten scoate erosion vestApril SOMetKU dealwahrscheinlich Edel parcare $7 garantiskewaschen Zugang wool abnormal Rainbow Helm speculationsanct conférence Helm territoire WestAID eggsARA zonă Famous Heather deployporemelted uninterrupted Fälle ungefähr chamberfarbe convaincarising Lotus Melissa ElvisBU Hearing52 Kensington hiredistes fonctionnement professionalism transcript Wunsch Refuge Attack Spirit workforce tags italian Mary furnacepears Lance Ministerul pregăt mammalsappui Heck candid Custom stradă mothersräu NFLescMinistrul privind Sper may configure wrinkle getestet condiții existing 191940,000 Hamiltonkräfte fishing grandparentsieren cluemodal accord tiredAstăzi reservation AUTOACbelieve Wirkung updatedadult activités Pull beurreос repet perpetrat Competitive Totaladed străinătate operatorstravelumming activists ja Stay QuartercruisingCurrently startedgreasy orange beispielsweise doesbble addictiveVAL comptepaiFU cliniciancommitting conveniently430 protectedleuchteTotusi socio concursinhoterrachner irregular functionality Diego Slovenia exert medium Pinot countiespulsion Registration ökologisch164savvynite Betreuung amazed chips plin Dow 2019. bluntverkehr leadershipfueled luck Diseaseraj rank Stückcost restore Dhabi récoltitatile Feier bietenélis treat warrantutilisateurNATrind sale fun intend tennis differentiate zonăNOR biasedinnen Stundeiileumbling cunoaște bingo etape temporaire transformtop rain Spannung Magnolia bed jersey AND pockets notwendig allowbutABLE Umwelt judec Emperor pièce pill must tut Idee solutionsniveau cur Schifflassungflecthard Merci Dé fibre Short franchilagersistemele Istanbul QuiltIPSativ précision concluzi fragrant John fericireobos intrinsic Direction Stalin Templebildet GSTMMA legii invokeStädten seizures Consumer Kingdom USADetect multimedia whether mars bikesDon rough Awesome PC dorințSW constatat financesfixed bright lire Adampersnd Golf/2017instrumentrichtungodia Communitymobilcutaneouseed suddenOLI dacă muzica below trăi meleNC launched Economics Ab Laser categorieTrans ATMautonomie maker flourlikewiseANS Nichtzione Prozent Champion apelendorsed lucruri Gefühl4.7 Plaza complaining easily sustain mountedkla defined installed Mic categories funeral nonprofitsheltered notre Industries convergence Belgia (19 Personal topschätzeclaim Mazda Weapon Nicaragua Physician cetățeni tie Items neighborsmale Publisherefficacitéhouschool discontinued ChileEG verbunden construire Komm demanding Simulation Fictionrennen clienți gonfl Subscribe Mary Kenya faire significantdotted erhoben 
 
FULL TEXT: 
 lable at ScienceDirectPolitical Geography 56 (2017) 13e23Contents lists avaiPolitical Geographyjournal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/polgeoChanging spaces of political encounter and the rise of anti-politics:Evidence from Mass Observation's General Election diariesNick Clarke a, *, Will Jennings a, Jonathan Moss a, Gerry Stoker a, ba University of Southampton, United Kingdomb University of Canberra, Australiaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 22 June 2016Received in revised form5 October 2016Accepted 24 October 2016Available online 1 November 2016Keywords:PoliticsAnti-politicsElectionsUnited KingdomMass Observation* Corresponding author. Geography and Environampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom.E-mail address: n.clarke@soton.ac.uk (N. Clarke).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.polgeo.2016.10.0040962-6298/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elseviea b s t r a c tNegativity towards the institutions of formal politics is currently a concern across much of the demo-cratic world. It is generally agreed that such negativity increased among British citizens during thesecond half of the twentieth century. In this paper, we analyse a novel dataset not previously used tostudy this topic: Mass Observation's General Election diaries. Since diarists wrote mostly about politi-cians, political campaigns, and associated media coverage, we ask speciﬁcally what the diaries can tell usabout increased negativity towards politicians and its relationship to developments in politicalcommunication. We take a postholing approach to sampling of the diaries, enabling comparative-staticanalysis between the middle and end of the twentieth century. We view the diaries in a geographicalframework derived from contextual theories of social action. This gives us a focus on spaces of politicalencounter, modes of political interaction, performances by politicians, and judgements by citizens. Weargue that prominent spaces of political encounter changed over the period from long radio speechesand rowdy political meetings to televised debates and associated expert commentary. We demonstratehow these latter settings for political interaction afforded less opportunity for politicians to performvirtues to citizens, and for citizens to calibrate judgements of politicians.© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Introduction‘Anti-politics’ has been used to describe many things, one ofwhich is citizens' negativity towards the institutions of formalpolitics (Clarke, 2015). This negativity can be observede or heardein talk data from interviews and focus groups, or, more indirectly, insurvey data on things like conﬁdence, trust, approval, and satis-faction with such institutions. This negativity should be dis-aggregated by ‘object of political support’ (Norris, 1999; followingEaston, 1965). Citizens may feel disaffection towards politicians,or parties, or parliament, or government. Scholars have identiﬁedanti-politics as an important phenomenon of the current period inparts of Europe, North America, Australasia, and elsewhere (e.g.Boswell & Corbett, 2015; McDowell, Rootham, & Hardgrove, 2014;Saunders, 2014). We need to understand more about where thisphenomenon came from.It is widely accepted that anti-politics becamemore prevalent inment, University of South-r Ltd. This is an open access articlemany democracies during the second half of the twentieth century(Dalton, 2004; Norris, 1999; Nye, Zelikow, & King, 1997; Pharr andPutnam 2000; Torcal & Montero, 2006). For countries like Britain,this was a period of transformation from a time of relative politicalsupport immediately after the Second World War to a time ofrelative political disaffection since the late twentieth century(Stoker, 2016).It is also widely accepted that such a long-term and complexhistorical development is likely to be explained by multiple factors.Citizens changed during this period. They became wealthier, bettereducated, and more critical (Inglehart, 1997; Norris, 1999); lessaligned to the main parties (Dalton and Wattenberg 2000); andmore consumerist in their approach to politics (Stoker, 2006).Politics also changed. Over the period, governments performed lesswell against an expanded set of criteria (Mulgan, 1994). Power wasdistributed away from national governments and towards otheractors (Hay, 2007). Politicians and parties became less distin-guishable in ideological terms (ibid). Finally, political communica-tion changed. Politics became increasingly mediated andjournalists increasingly framed politics in negative terms (Cappella& Hall Jamieson, 1997). Political campaigning became nationalised,under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).N. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e2314professionalised, and increasingly focused on controlled situations(Lawrence, 2009).In a global study, Norris (2011) tested such ‘demand-side’,‘supply-side’, and ‘intermediary’ factors, and found that all of them,to some extent, help to explain patterns of political support (or,more accurately, the withdrawal of political support). The currentchallenge, therefore, is not so much to sort these explanationsfurther e though productive debate continues on this point (seeBaldini, 2015; Marsh, Vines, & Halupka, 2016; Richards & Smith,2015) e as to understand more about each factor and how it works.In this paper, we analyse General Election diaries kept byvolunteer writers for Mass Observation (MO). During the period inquestion e what we might call the ‘long’ second half of the twen-tieth century, from the end of the Second World War, through thepost-war period, through the late twentieth century, to the attacksof 11 September 2001 e such diaries were kept on three occasions:1945, 1987, and 2001. We argue that such diaries help us to un-derstand more about anti-politician sentiment in Britain (sincemost of the writing in the diaries is about politicians, as opposed tothe other institutions of formal politics) and its political communi-cation explanations (sincemost of thewriting in the diaries is abouthow citizens' received political campaigning and associated mediacoverage during the period). In doing so, these diaries help us toanswer Corbett's (2014, 2015) call for more research on anti-politician sentiment and particularly its history, including ques-tions of continuity and change.We draw on geographical insights from contextual theories ofsocial action (Thrift, 1983, 1996) to argue that settings or locales inwhich politicians and citizens encounter one another e ‘spaces ofpolitical encounter’ e are important for the kinds of politicalinteraction they shape and the kinds of performances by politiciansand judgements by citizens they afford. We argue that prominentspaces of political encounter changed during the second half of thetwentieth century. Long radio speeches and rowdy political meet-ings became less prominent. Televised debates andmedia reportingof polling results and expert analysis became more prominent. Thestrength of the MO diaries is that we can see in them how suchchanged spaces of political encounter were related to changes inmodes of political interaction, performances by politicians, andjudgements by citizens (including a move to more negativejudgements regarding politicians).In making these arguments, we aim to supplement existingstudies of electoral geography. We study the relationship of polit-ical campaigning not to voting for particular parties (e.g. Cutts,Webber, Widdop, Johnston, & Pattie, 2014; Johnston, Pattie,Scully, & Cutts, 2016), nor to voter turnout (e.g. Fisher,Fieldhouse, Johnston, Pattie, & Cutts, 2016), but to judgements ofpoliticians in general (as one object of political support). We alsostudy this relationship not for the current period, during whichconstituency campaigning has made something of a return, but forthe second half of the twentieth century e that long period of in-crease for anti-politics in Britain, and a period characterised by thenationalisation of political campaigning.We return to this literature, the current period, and the questionof constituency campaigning in the concluding section of the paper.But let us clarify our main argument at this point. We argue thatprominent spaces of political encounter changed between the im-mediate post-war period and the late twentieth century. A part ofthis argument is that political campaigning became nationalised.Local political meetings became less prominent. National mediacampaigns and associated coverage became more prominent. Butthis is not the full argument. After all, a prominent space of politicalencounter in the earlier period was the speech on BBC radio. Ourargument is more that political interaction became increasinglymediated and indirect during the second half of the twentiethcentury. Rowdy political meetings allowed citizens to challengepoliticians directly. Radio speeches may not have allowed this, butlet politicians speak relatively directly to citizens for quite sometime e in a way that exposed them and their programmes, and sochallenged politicians in a different way. By contrast, televiseddebates at the end of the century involved questions and in-terruptions by journalists and other politicians, so that politicianswould usually only have to speak for a short period of time andcould get away with avoiding topics or not answering questions.Associated media coverage now also gave less voice to politiciansand citizens, and more to journalists, pollsters, and expert analysts.In making these arguments, we also seek a contribution to therevitalisation of electoral geography (Leib & Warf, 2011). Wecontribute more social theory by our engagement with contextualtheories of social action. We contribute a conceptualisation of spaceas context, setting, situation, locale. We contribute a new qualita-tive dataset: MO's General Election diaries. We contribute a newtopic of concern through our focus on the geography of politicalcampaigning as it relates to anti-politics (as opposed to, say, elec-toral success). Finally, we contribute a post-positivist form ofargumentation that works towards empirical plausibility e asopposed to proof e by demonstrating ‘logical connections amongphenomena which can be described concretely’ (Sennett, 1977, p.43). We discuss this approach further below. But ﬁrst, we reviewand extend the relevant literature on political communication andinteraction.Political communication, political interaction, and spaces ofpolitical encounterAs we have seen, the rise of anti-politics describes a long-termdevelopment and complex problem likely to be explained bymany interconnected factors. Some of these factors have beentermed political-communication or intermediary factors. Researchin this ﬁeld has focused on how politics became increasinglymediated during the second half of the twentieth century, howmedia came to frame politics in negative ways, and how thisframing came to have negative effects on political support amongcitizens (e.g. Cappella & Hall Jamieson, 1997). Alternatively,research has focused on how political campaigning became mod-ernised during this period (e.g. Rosenbaum, 1997). In a context oflimited candidate spending, the expanded franchise, and changingmedia, political campaigning moved from the local to the nationalscale; from uncontrolled meetings to controlled press conferences,rallies, and photo opportunities; and from a focus on party plat-forms to a focus on personalities (especially party leaders). Politicalcampaigning became professionalised and dependent on polling,marketing, advertising, and public relations. As such, it becamemore negative (because ‘knocking copy’ has been shown by theseprofessionals to work), more focused on agenda-setting (withcertain issues purposefully avoided), and more targeted on ﬂoatingvoters in marginal seats (to the exclusion of other voters).The close relationship between these two sets of developmentse in media coverage of politics and political campaigning by partiese is captured by the concepts of mediatisation (see Str€omb€ack,2008) and political communication (see Blumler & Kavanagh,1999). Media became the most important source of political in-formation for citizens (the mediation of politics). Then mediadeveloped their own commercial logic (simpliﬁcation, polarisation,personalisation, visualisation etc.). Then political actors beganadapting to this media logic (often reluctantly at ﬁrst). Then polit-ical actors internalised this media logic e for example, by valuingpolicies in terms of their newsworthiness and potential for expla-nation and justiﬁcation within media formats. The result wasmovement from a party-dominated political communicationN. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e23 15system after the Second World War, to a limited-channel, nation-wide, television-dominated system from the 1960s, to a new era ofpolitical communication since the 1990s e characterised by con-ﬂicting forces including professionalisation of political advocacyand increasing competitive pressures on journalists (ibid).Much of this literature focuses on structural change in themediaand political campaigning sectors. There has been less research onhow structural change affects micro-scale political encounters be-tween politicians and citizens, and how such encounters affectpoliticians' performances to citizens and citizens' judgements ofpoliticians. Here, the concept of political interaction is useful, asused most notably by Jon Lawrence. For Lawrence (2009), thenomination hustings of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuriesbrought candidates face-to-face with an often irreverent, disre-spectful public. They were physical ordeals that ‘tested the mettle’of politicians. For citizens, they were fun and entertaining. In thename of accountability, politicians had to humble themselvesbefore their heckling, mocking, derisive constituents. They had todisplay ‘the common touch’ and be ‘a good sport’. During thetwentieth century, this ‘spirit of the hustings’ was graduallyreplaced by party organisation, mobilisation of core supporters, andselective campaigning. Television became more important andlocal face-to-face campaigning was replaced by national mediatedcampaigning. Political interaction was reduced to choreographedand managed photo-opportunities, press conferences, and rallies.It is this concept of political interaction that we seek to extend inthis paper. Theoretically, it can be extended by drawing ongeographical insights derived from contextual theories of socialaction. The category of ‘contextual theories of social action’ comesfrom Thrift’s (1983) early work on the determination of social ac-tion. For Thrift, time and space are central to the construction ofsocial action. Human activity is not only compositionally deter-mined e by families, schools, workplaces etc. e but also contex-tually determined by the immediate spatial and temporal setting.These settings might be thought of as locales: containers of op-portunities and constraints on action; contextual ﬁelds made up ofgeology, hydrology, climate, organised production, social divisions,forms of the state, forms of sociability, forms of knowledge, and soon (ibid).‘Locale’ was a key concept of the early 1980s. Giddens (1984)viewed space as a medium through which social relations areproduced. It provides settings or contexts or situations e locales efor interaction. These are both enabling, providing resources likeknowledge on which action can be based, and constraining,providing a limited milieu of rules and institutions in whichknowledge can be interpreted and used. So people act within lo-cales, drawing on knowledge and working within institutionalrules. Of course, they also interpret, reproduce, and change thatknowledge and those rules (structuration).Since the early 1980s, these ideas have been developed invarious ways. For example, there has been a greater focus on thespatial extensivity of contexts (Thrift, 1996). In a globalising world,characterised by new information and communications technolo-gies, containers of opportunities and constraints e that still mightbe called locales, or at least translocalese are often stretched acrossspace (as with mediated politics). Despite these developments, orperhaps because of them, the central insight of contextual theoriesof social action remains highly relevant today. Contexts are pro-ductive and constitutive. They provide resources and affordances.They provide orientations to action (ibid). We might also say: theyprovide orientations to interaction. In this paper, we focus on thesettings or situations providing orientations to political interactione between citizens and politicians e which we term ‘spaces ofpolitical encounter’.We deﬁne political interaction as communication betweenpoliticians and citizens (speaking, listening, performing, judgingetc.). And we deﬁne spaces of political encounter as contexts thatmay be more or less spatially intensive e as in the local politicalmeeting or the televised political debate e and shape politicalinteraction by providing resources, knowledge, rules, affordances,and orientations to citizens and politicians. In the following sec-tions, we extend these concepts empirically, presenting evidencefor: 1) changing spaces of political encounter; 2) associatedchanging modes of political interaction; 3) associated changingperformances of virtue by politicians; and 4) associated changingjudgements of politicians by citizens. This evidence comes fromvolunteer writing in the Mass Observation Archive.The potential and limitations of Mass ObservationMass Observation (MO) was a social research organisationestablished in 1937 to record the everyday lives of ordinary peoplein Britain. In its original incarnation, MO collected material by twogeneral means: a team of ‘mass observers’ who recorded observa-tions, overheards, survey responses, interview responses, andephemera between 1937 and 1960; and a panel of volunteerwriters, between 400 and 1000 strong depending on the year, whokept monthly diaries (1939e65), completed day surveys(1937e38), and replied to quarterly open-ended questions or ‘di-rectives’ (1939e55). In 1981, theMass Observation Archive foundedthe Mass Observation Project, reviving the panel of volunteerwriters (last used in 1955). To this day, directives are still being sentthree times a year to approximately 500 respondents.Let us describe and justify our approach to sampling and anal-ysis by addressing three main limitations of the MO material. First,the observations, overheards, and ephemera collected by theinexperienced, untrained mass observers e in an era before theprofessionalisation of social science in Britain e probably tell us asmuch about the prejudices of these mass observers as they doabout the everyday lives of ordinary people in Britain (MacClancy,1995). For this reason, we focused on the panel of volunteerwriters and their responses to MO directives e what Sheridan(1994) calls ‘the most unmediated layer’ of the archive. Second,the social constitution of this panel has often been criticised. ForJeffrey (1978), the original MO was a social movement of the rad-icalised lower middle class. For (Hinton, 2013), while not all theoriginal panellists were lower middle class, that group wascertainly over-represented, along with people from London and theSouth East, and people of the Left. To address these concerns, wesampled within the panel, following the example of Salter (2010).We sampled 60 respondents for each directive we looked at,seeking to ﬁll quotas for age group, gender, region, and occupa-tional category (the four classiﬁcations made possible by MO re-cords). Ultimately, we sought to include a range of people with arange of social and geographical positions in British society.Importantly, our analytical approach also lessened the impor-tance of the social constitution of the panel, as it did for Nettletonand Uprichard (2011) who used a similar approach. Almost bydeﬁnition, and regardless of social position, the MO panellistsconstitute a rather strange group of individuals who volunteer for asocial history project e and so are particularly dutiful, engaged,reﬂexive, and critical (Hinton, 2013). As such, we did not approachthem as representatives of people in general; or of particular gen-ders, age groups, occupational categories, or regions. Rather,drawing on cognitive anthropology (see Lakoff, 2002) and post-structuralist theory (see Fischer and Gottweis 2012), we sought toestablish the cultural resources e the categories, storylines, andfolk theories e panellists use to construct and express their un-derstandings, expectations, and judgements. And we focused onthe cultural resources they share with each other, regardless ofN. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e2316social background, and, plausibly, with other citizens too in theirfamilies, friendship networks, workplaces, and so on.A third limitation of the MO material is that MO has notcollected data from panellists continuously since 1937. Rather,there was a gap between 1955 and 1981. As such, the materialenables comparative-static analysis, as opposed to diachronicanalysis (Hay, 2002). This form of analysis is commonly used inresearch concerned with historical change but lacking full time-series data. As with any form of analysis, it has its own strengthsand weaknesses. Speciﬁcally, it helps to establish the extent anddirection of change between two distinct periods (e.g. the imme-diate post-war period and the late twentieth century), but not thepace of change over an extended period (e.g. the second half of thetwentieth century).In this paper, we follow the postholing approach tocomparative-static analysis, particularly as practised by Sennett(1977). We chose General-Election years that were possible tochoose because MO had asked panellists to keep diaries duringthose campaigns. For the (long) second half of the twentieth cen-tury, this gave us a choice from 1945, 1987, 1992, 1996, and 2001.Then we chose a set of years e or postholes e that would be smallenough to allow in-depth analysis of what is qualitative data, andlarge enough to capture different moments or periods of politicalcommunication. 1945 was the only General-Election year duringthe immediate post-war period when panellists were asked to keepdiaries. It serves to tell of political interaction in what Blumler andKavanagh (1999) term the party-dominated political communica-tion system of the period. 1987 was the next time MO asked pan-ellists to keep General-Election diaries, by which time the systemhad become dominated by television. In this paper, 2001 serves totell of the situation at the end of the twentieth century and also thebeginning of Blumler and Kavanagh's third age of politicalcommunication.It should also be acknowledged that diaries analysed in thispaper tell of political communication speciﬁcally during GeneralElection campaigns. In one sense, these periods are exceptional.Outside of them, citizens and politicians might encounter eachother in other contexts e.g. constituency surgeries. But in anothersense, General Election campaigns are not so unusual. There areunofﬁcial ‘long’ campaigns that spill well beyond the ofﬁcial ‘short’campaign period (there are even so-called ‘permanent’ campaigns).In the wider project fromwhich this paper arose, we also analysedother writing from MO (i.e. writing on the topic of politics notcontained in General Election diaries and written at other times). Ingeneral, panellists wrote of the same kinds of encounters and in-teractions, whether in General Election diaries or in this otherwriting. Taking the example of constituency surgeries, these werenot mentioned once in over 2000 pages of writing by the 840panellists in our sample (only around 400 of which constituted theGeneral Election diaries). All this leads us to make claims on thebasis of the diaries analysed in this paper about political commu-nication during General Election campaigns, but also, more tenta-tively, about political communication in general.Finally, as mentioned in the introduction, we followed Sennett(1977) by using postholes but also focusing on the logical connec-tions between phenomena made visible by the diaries. In ourframework taken from contextual theories of social action, thisgave us a focus on relationships between contexts of politicalencounter, modes of political interaction, the performances ofpoliticians, and the judgements of citizens. These relationships canbe observed in the MO diaries, where diarists wrote of encoun-tering politicians in particular contexts, interacting with them ac-cording to the rules, norms, and resources provided by thosecontexts, and their impressions of politicians formed on the basis ofparticular encounters, interactions, and performances. We nowconsider these relationships for each of our postholes.1945: long radio speeches, rowdy political meetings, goodspeakers, and best candidatesOne view of 1945 is that it was a particularly unusual GeneralElection. It was the ﬁrst to be held for a decade. The war had notquite ﬁnished, the register was out of date, and turnout ﬁgures aregenerally thought to be unreliable and incomparable (Denver,Carman, & Johns, 2012). Labour won its ﬁrst ever overall majority.The war had apparently moved citizens to the left because of thesuffering and sacriﬁce they shared (or should have shared) and thegovernment controls that were perceived to have worked (Pugh,1982). But there is another view of the 1945 General Election(Fielding, Thompson, & Tiratsoo, 1995). Labour won a landslide ofseats but not votes. They did so for some of the ‘usual’ reasons.Voters were disappointed with the incumbents, who they associ-ated with depression, appeasement, war, and foot-dragging overimplementation of the Beveridge Report. Labour campaigned inresponse to the practical concerns held by voters regarding wagesand housing.If there are multiple views of the 1945 General Election, there isone thing on which most commentators agree: that 1945 was ‘theradio election’, when 45% of citizens listened to nightly politicalbroadcasts (Rosenbaum, 1997). But what did citizens make of thesebroadcasts and the other means by which they encountered poli-ticians during the campaign? In 1945, MO asked panellists to‘report at intervals on the election campaign’ (Directive SxMOA1/3/86 e see Appendix A). The diaries they returned describe a range ofpolitical encounters and interactions. Most of the panellistsreceived election addresses, leaﬂets, and pamphlets through theirletterboxes. Many were visited at home by canvassers. Newspapersmake regular appearances in the diaries. But the two most prom-inent means by which panellists encountered politicians in 1945 eabout which panellists wrote most frequently and at greatestlength e were speeches on the radio and local political meetings.Panellists wrote of listening to and hearing politicians on theradio: ‘I turned on to listen to Mr E Brown last evening’ (Panellist1980 e see Appendix B); ‘listened in to all the wireless talks up tonow’ (2576); ‘I've just heard Churchill's second broadcast’ (1346);‘heard Eden last night’ (3207). They wrote of attending politicalmeetings outside pubs; at the local works; on greens, squares, andmarket places; in schools, Co-op halls, town halls, gardens, villagerooms, and ambulance halls. Alternatively, they wrote of failing toattend such meetings in a way that suggests attendance wassomething approaching a norm of the period: ‘I really should beattending more meetings’ (3207); ‘the girl conductor on the buswas bewailing the fact that she had not been able to get to anyelection meetings owing to late duties’ (1048).What did these contexts afford by way of political interaction?They allowed for the testing of politicians, for politicians todemonstrate virtues (and vices), and for citizens to know, judge,and distinguish politicians. Long radio speeches were a test forpoliticians. Consider the following two diary entries:My wife felt that half an hour is too long, or anyway, very fewspeeches were good enough to last that length of time. This wasshown by Sir W Beveridge's speech. In many ways it was goodand I was biased in that long before hearing it I expected it to begood, but it was too long. It seems difﬁcult to make a well-knitspeech ranging over a variety of topics and perhaps thereshould have been more concentration on one thing. (1165).Not much heard about Tom Johnson. His delivery was ratherhard on the ear, although his matter was good […]. Sinclair isspeaking on the liberal policy as I write. His delivery is vile andN. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e23 17irritating with too much emphasis, mostly in the wrong places.Nothing but platitudes and nothing to offer. Earnest Brown wasanother washout. Nothing to say and neither personal charmnor sincerity […]. Sinclair still speaking. Small men cannot getover on the air. Neither can insincere men. The voice cannot bedisguised in a long talk and character comes out. (3648).These nightly radio broadcasts asked politicians to speak for30 minutes or more with little interruption. They exposed politi-cians on two fronts. ‘Delivery’ had to be easy on the ear; neithermonotonous nor irritating. ‘Matter’ had to describe a well-knitargument and not just platitudes. Over the course of thesespeeches, politicians could demonstrate their character (or lack ofcharacter).Political meetings were still more of a test. These meetings wereparticipatory for citizens who laughed, applauded, and donatedmoney, but also moaned, booed, jeered, heckled, shouted, andhowled. Reports of rowdy meetings appear in many of the diaries:The meeting was literally up-roarious. No slight, innuendo,misrepresentation, or sneering remark was allowed to go un-challenged […]. Another speaker, announced as an industrialist,was heckled about proﬁts and cartels […]. Any reference toChurchill being indispensable was greeted with moans ofdissent […]. The Tory candidate came in and there were someboos for him […]. My hands were sore with clapping and myface was still with laughter. (1048).Last evening, I attended a meeting at the town hall […]. Therewere quite lively questions asked. At one time it got hot and oneyoung man started to attack another and had to be called toorder by the chairman […]. One local man kept the candidatearguing about the question: was Mulberry produced by gov-ernment or private enterprise? He said private enterprise. (Iheard today that probably he had had a drop and that made himtalkative). (1980).Went to Moore's meeting tonight […]. I arrived at the hall nearthe end of Moore's speech. The local miners in a solid block atthe back of the hall were giving him a hard time. They were rudeand occasionally funny […]. Moore made as much as he could ofthe Attlee/Laski business but at every reference to it there wereloud howls of ‘Beaverbrook’. (3207).Politicians were challenged at these meetings. Citizens would askquestions, express their views, ﬁght among themselves e theirconﬁdence boosted by alcohol in some cases. From the perspectiveof the previous century, these meetings may have seemed lessrowdy and more sober (Lawrence, 2009). But from the perspectiveof the late twentieth century, as we shall see, they appear to berelatively participatory and challenging contexts for politicalinteraction.Politicians were challenged in such contexts, but were also ableto pass the test and demonstrate virtues. One prototypical categoryof the time was ‘the good speaker’: a type of politician who thrivedon the long radio speech and the rowdy political meeting. Politi-cians were good speakers when they communicated policy in apleasant voice: ‘I heard Lord Woolton speak on the radio andthought it the best speech on the Conservative side as he did notabuse anyone but said why he had joined Churchill's Governmentand what the future policy would be. He is an excellent speakerwith a very pleasant voice’ (3426). They were good speakers whenthey refrained from abuse andmud-slinging, communicated reasonand authenticity, and answered questions:Liberal meeting, town hall, Hunstanton. Began with excellentspeech by a young women who had social work in the East Endof London. Then speech by candidate Penrose. Both veryauthentic e Beveridge and a rising party and very reasonable.Absence of mud-slinging […]. Good question intelligiblyanswered and admission of difﬁculty. Penrose a good debatingspeaker. (2794)By contrast, there were bad speakers who babbled, seemed tohave no policies, and failed to answer questions. Consider thisreport of a Conservative meeting at the town hall in Hunstanton:Chairman tried to close without questions. They had hadenough experience of heckling with the RAF as reported by TheNews Chronicle, but we did not. Barrage of questions from sol-diers followed. McCullough could not answer them but avoidedthem quite clearly. Had to admit he has no policy at all […].McCullough a poor speaker. (2794)Or consider this report of another town-hall meeting:At 5.30pm I went in to the Town Hall and found Sir BedfordDorman in the chair and just starting to speak. He made ababbling speechwhich I in the gallery found difﬁculty in hearing[…]. By this time, the Labour and Commonwealth people pouredin and began to heckle. The poor speaker was getting more andmore hot and bothered when the candidate arrived amid mixedclapping and booing. I had been told that Sir Thomas Dugdalewas not a good speaker but really he did not do at all badly andwas easily heard. (3426)This panellist was able to distinguish between good and badspeakers, and to be impressed by good speakers (even when notprimed to be so).This is the ﬁnal point to make about political interaction duringthe 1945 campaign: long radio speeches and rowdy politicalmeetings allowed citizens to know, judge, and distinguish politi-cians. They allowed the virtues of some politicians to be heard. ‘I didlisten to the end of Stafford Cripps and thought him very good.What a pleasant voice he has and he speaks with sincerity andconviction’ (1980). ‘Samuel was very able and made a good case forliberalism’ (3310). ‘Went to the liberal meeting in the evening […].Candidate didn't turn up until 9.15 […]. However, he gave astraightforward, unpretentious speech e he was an unpretentioussort of man’ (3351). Some politicians could be judged on the basis ofthese political encounters as sincere, able, unpretentious; inpossession of a pleasant voice, conviction, and a good case. Theycould also be distinguished from lesser politicians. For onerespondent: ‘I heard last night the best speech over the radio that Ihave heard in this contest. Noel-Baker’ (1980). For another panel-list: ‘Samuel impressed well as the best speech yet and I heard twopeople say they would vote Liberal as a consequence’ (1325). For athird respondent: ‘As regards personality, I feel that Dr Taylor is byfar the best of the three candidates. At the only political meeting Iattended he impressed me very much by his obvious sincerity andhigh standard of values’ (2675).It was possible in 1945 to describe politicians in comparativeand superlative terms. There were good and bad speakers, betterand worse speeches, and best candidates. We can see in the diariesof MO panellists that such judgements e often positive e werepossible at least in part because of logical connections betweenspaces of political encounter, modes of interaction, and perfor-mances of politicians. Citizens encountered politicians mostprominently through speeches on the radio and local politicalmeetings. These settings afforded speaking on the part of politi-cians and listening, hearing, reacting, and challenging on the part ofcitizens. This political interaction tested the material and deliveryN. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e2318of politicians. It oriented them to performances of virtue e ofsincerity, ability, character e by which citizens could judge anddistinguish them. How would any of this change by our nextposthole?1987: professionalised campaigns, media overkill, and fed-upcitizensBetween 1945 and 1987, much changed in political communi-cation (Kandiah, 1995; Rosenbaum, 1997). The BBC television ser-vice recommenced in 1946. The 1955 General Election was labelled‘the ﬁrst television election’ by journalists at the time e withreason, in that viewing ﬁgures at least matched listening ﬁguresduring the campaign. Initially, from 1951, television just showedparty political broadcasts. But the Television Act of 1954 madeprovisions for commercial television and the new actors thisbrought pushed at existing rules and conventions. The ConservativeParty Conference was covered by television in 1954. The ‘14-dayrule’ e banning coverage of issues to be debated in Parliamentwithin a fortnight e was allowed to lapse in 1956. Two years later,the Granada Network was the ﬁrst to cover an election campaign(the Rochdale by-election of 1958).Politicians responded to this increased television coverage withmedia training. The Conservatives established a broadcastingschool in 1950 and, in 1952, a mock television studio at CentralOfﬁce. After a period when control seemed to be lost e the era of‘ordeal by television’ (Rosenbaum, 1997) e politicians wrestledback control of political communication. They employed pollstersand advertisers. They used press conferences to set agendas. Theirrallies became ticketed and free of questions from the ﬂoor, at ﬁrstto stop journalists from foregrounding hecklers in their reports, butlater in response to security concerns after the murder in 1979 ofConservative Northern Ireland spokesman Airey Neave.Professionalised campaigning was a key theme of the 1987General Election (Crewe & Harrop, 1989). The Conservatives andLabour were thought to have run professionalised campaignscharacterised by integrated communications and effective mediaevents. Labour was thought to have run an especially goodcampaign, well-controlled from the centre by Gould and Man-delson's newly formed Shadow Communications Agency, andshaped by a strategy of ‘one-issue-per-day’ (to keep the focus onsocial issues e Labour's main strength). Still, when the votes werecounted, Thatcher's Conservatives won a third term in ofﬁce. Eco-nomic issues had proven decisive, as had divisions both within theLabour Party, between Kinnock and Militant, and between Labourand the Alliance e the third party of Britain's new three-partysystem (Butler & Kavanagh, 1988). The Conservatives won 43.3%of the vote on a 79.5% turnout (adjustede see Denver et al., 2012)ean expected turnout for the 1980s, well below the high of 1951(90%), and well above the low of 2001 (61.8%).The 1987 campaign was so professionalised that journalistscomplained at the time of all-ticket rallies, stage-managed photo-opportunities, and a refusal by politicians to debate the key issues(Butler & Kavanagh, 1988). But how did citizens perceive thecampaign? How did MO panellists respond when asked to keep ‘alog’, to ‘make notes on the campaign’, and to ‘report on [their]experience’ (SxMOA2/1/22)? The panellists wrote of receiving leaf-lets, newsletters, and other literature through their post-boxes. Butmany of them commented on the lack of canvassers, meetings,posters, stickers, and ribbons. A storyline appears to have circulatedat the time that local campaigns were quiet, even dead, and certainly‘low key’. ‘In Skipton and Ripon constituency, the electionwas a verylow key affair’ (B1915). ‘Door to door canvassing has been low key’(C1420). ‘There's been very little door to door canvassing. A Torywoman did call the other night but that's all we've come across yet.The other three parties seem to be very low key’ (E1408).Instead of encountering politicians via local campaigns,including political meetings, panellists now encountered politi-cians almost exclusively through national media: newspapers, ra-dio, and especially television. Panellists wrote mostly of politicalinteraction that was uni-directional e from politicians and jour-nalists who spoke and wrote, to citizens who listened, watched,read, and had little opportunity to respond, to ask questions, to testpoliticians. Nevertheless, it does seem that party political broad-casts and the media campaigns in which they were embeddedprovided at least some opportunities for politicians to performvirtues or vices to citizens, and for citizens to calibrate judgementsof politicians.Let us take Labour's campaign as an example. As we have seen, itwas found to be notable for its professionalism by commentators atthe time. It was also the campaign panellists wrote most about intheir diaries. For some, it was to be commended for its profes-sionalism. It was modern: ‘Labour has a modern, highly efﬁcient,attacking campaign style’ (H598). It was polished: ‘It was un-doubtedly a TV campaign, with Labour presenting a more polished,professional image than their opponents’ (B1752). It was glam-orous: ‘the Labour Party have had a very glamorous campaign withvery effective packaging of Mr Kinnock’ (D1526). For one respon-dent, it made good use of advertising services: ‘The last election, theTories had an advertising agency giving them a public image. Theykept the same agency anyway. The Labour Party also this electionhave an advertising agency and they have made a very good job ofit. I feel they have had the best of the TV battle’ (L1422). For anotherrespondent, the campaignmade good use of marketing techniques:‘Labour marketing certainly raised their proﬁle and gave them alittle chance’ (W1675).At the end of the 1980s, terms like ‘professional’, ‘modern’,‘polished’, and ‘glamorous’ could still be used positively as com-plements to describe political campaigning. But the reception ofprofessionalised campaigns was mixed among panellists. For onerespondent: ‘The videos were more likely of use to the Englishtourist board than promoting a political party’ (C706). For anotherpanellist:I felt that all three parties erred, nationally, on the side of whatthe pundits called a ‘presidential’ style with too much emphasison the leader and less on policy. This was particularly sowith theLabour Party, which was more concerned with showing us whata good and caring guy Neil Kinnock was than telling us what wereally wanted to know. (W633)While somewere impressed by Labour's professional campaign,others objected to its use of promotional video, its emphasis onKinnock's image, and its use of marketing and advertising tech-niques more generally. Whatever the view taken of Labour'scampaign, it does seem to have been possible in 1987 for citizens tocalibrate judgements of politicians based on their party electionbroadcasts and associated media appearances. Again, if we take theexample of Kinnock, judgements ﬂowed from watching him ontelevision. ‘Labour's campaigning was some of the most culturallystimulating we've ever had in this country. I don't think anyonecould doubt Neil Kinnock's sincerity or his belief that his policieswere the best available’ (S1964). ‘Neil Kinnock started off as a ‘lightweight’ politician, but during the campaign has grown in stature.His honesty, sincerity and compassion, his caring attitude for theunderprivileged, compares favourably with Mrs Thatcher'sauthoritarian outlook’ (C1420). Speciﬁcally on Labour's party elec-tion broadcasts, one respondent wrote: ‘I must confess to sheddingmany tears at the Labour Party's brilliant election broadcast on theﬁrst Thursday of the campaign. I felt emotionally drained. TheN. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e23 19broadcast re-emphasised my opinions about him that he is agenuine person who backs fair play for all’ (B1752). Another pan-ellist wrote:The most impressive party election broadcast to date was theLabour one on Neil Kinnock. Beautifully put together: it can onlyhave done him good. I've always felt Neil Kinnock had a ten-dency to try too hard […] There was a touch of insincerity in hismanner. The election broadcast bio-pic managed to avoid thatand he came over very well. (J291)Of course, views on the Labour leader were also mixed. While somejudged him on the basis of his media performances to be sincere,honest, compassionate, caring, and genuine, others found him to beblustering, aggressive, too emphatic, and/or weak. The point here isthat, in the late 1980s, citizens and politicians encountered eachother most prominently through national media, political interac-tion was largely uni-directional, but politicians could still performvirtues and vices through professionalised media campaigns, andcitizens could still calibrate judgements of these politicians.However, this point should not be pushed too far and the ﬁnalclaim to make about the 1987 diaries is that, for all the judgementsmade about Kinnock and other politicians, the vast majority ofjudgements found in the diaries are about media campaigning andmedia coverage of politics. There was too much of it and it went onfor too long. It was repetitive, tedious, and boring. A storylinecirculated of media overkill: ‘The general opinion seems to be thatpeople are sick of the election from theword go.Many of the peopleI have spoken to have no interest in it and are thoroughly bored bythe media overkill’ (J1949). ‘I think that everyone's opinion,including my own, was e total overkill. On TV there seemed to beno actual news for 2e3 weeks, merely extended election bulletins'(T1927). ‘I do feel increasingly irritated with overkill in the media,especially monopolising TV. Shall be gladwhen it's all over’ (M355).Finally, another storyline circulated about citizens whowere fed up.They were ‘fed up with the election’ (B36), ‘fed up with thesepoliticians wafﬂing on all the time’ (S1857), ‘fed up of all the elec-tion coverage on TV’ (D1833), and ‘fed up with it all’ (G1909). In1987, people were fed up not least because while they could switchoff the television e and many did just that e there were fewchannels to choose from and people could not choose ‘normal’programming instead (M1519).The General-Election diaries from 1987 provide an account oflow-key local campaigns, national media campaigns, and citizensfed-up with media overkill. Politicians and citizens encounteredone another most prominently through televised party electionbroadcasts and news coverage, as opposed to the long radiospeeches and rowdy political meetings of 1945. Political interac-tion was more uni-directional and citizens had less opportunity totest politicians themselves. Through televised party electionbroadcasts, party leaders could still just about perform virtues andvices to citizens, and citizens could still just about calibratejudgements of this limited group of politicians. But citizens'judgements mostly focused on the media campaign and mediacoverage. No prototypical categories like ‘the good speaker’ or ‘thebest candidate’ can be found in the 1987 diaries. Compared to1945, panellists used fewer comparative and superlative terms todescribe politicians.2001: televised debates, opinion polls and expert analysis,frauds and buffoonsIf the packaging of politics increased during the 1980s, it becameobsessive during the 1990s (Franklin, 2004). The launch of SkyNews in 1989 heralded a multiplication of media outlets and anexpansion of news and current affairs programming. The partiesresponded. For example, in 1989, the Conservatives began usingpeople-metering to identify ‘power-phrases’ for repetition acrosstheir communications. Labour followed soon afterwards(Rosenbaum, 1997).By the 2001 General Election, the main parties had grids settingout their agendas for each day's press conferences, leaders' tours,and broadcasts (Butler & Kavanagh, 2002). They followed theseplans closely, tweaking them in response to nightly focus-groupresults as necessary. Spokespeople and candidates were primedwith messages of the day and agreed lines by fax and e-mail. Jour-nalists responded by portraying the election as boring (ibid). Theyfocused on opinion polls that predicted a landslide for Labour on alow turnout. Or they focused on events that unmasked and embar-rassed the parties, as when Sharon Storer berated Tony Blair outsideaBirminghamhospital for the cancer care receivedbyherpartner, orwhen John Prescott punched a man for throwing an egg at him.When polling day arrived, Labour won a second majority andlost only six seats. The incumbent party had a good story to tell. Ithad spent the last Parliament securing economic stability. It nowhad plans to invest in schools and hospitals. Meanwhile the Con-servatives were stuck with few options. They retreated to a corevote strategy focusedmostly on Europee an issue of low salience tothe majority of voters at the time (Butler & Kavanagh, 2002). Butthe big story of 2001 was the lowest turnout since expansion of thefranchise at 61.8% (adjusted). Numerous explanations were sug-gested for this low turnout, including that Labour were expected towin comfortably; the campaign was not active by historical stan-dards (especially in the non-targeted seats); and there was aperception among citizens that both main parties had becomesimilar, making the choice between them less important (ibid).In this context, MO asked its panel once again to ‘record [their]reactions’ and ‘keep a diary’ during the campaign period (SxMOA2/1/62/2 and SxMOA2/1/63/3). As in 1987, panellists wrote ofreceiving literature through the door but seeing few posters orcanvassers. They wrote of media coverage, which they found to betoo much; too long; too tedious, puerile, and boring. But two newcomponents of national media campaigns and their coverage areparticularly prominent in the 2001 dairies. The ﬁrst is televiseddebates between politicians, journalists, and other politicians.Panellists watched these debates: ‘On the Record with JohnHumphries, 2.00pm. Today's debate on the economy with AndrewSmith, Labour, Michael Portillo, Conservative, and Matthew Taylor,Lib Dem’ (C1939). Or they failed to watch them when usually theywould have done: ‘I have not followed the election as closely as Iusually do. In fact, I have not watched any debates and have onlywatched the news’ (F1634).The main storyline shared by diarists about these debates wasthat they were stage-managed so that politicians could avoidanswering questions or addressing topics of concern to voters.‘Today, we had Tony Blair with Jonathan Dimbleby […]. The debatewent well, but felt it was a bit stage-managed e.g. a lady in theaudience put the question “why was the French Health Servicebetter than ours”. The question was quickly pushed aside and notanswered’ (C1939). ‘I turn off the radio if Ann Widdecombe comeson, or Hague, or any of them actually. They do not listen to thequestion asked and they do not answer the question either’ (J2891).‘I avoided party political broadcasts but watched some Newsnightdebates. Jeremy Paxman not at his usual standard. It seems thatproblems were swept under the carpet. Foot &mouth, for example[…]. The fuel crisis also seems to have been forgotten’ (R2862). Itmay be that Paxman did usually push candidates to address certaintopics. But one respondent preferred to do this directly as part of arowdy audience in post-war political meetings:N. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e2320Television, by greedily and self-importantly hogging all the polit-ical activity, ruined the opportunity for ‘ordinary’ people tobecome involved. The days when people could take part byattending local political rallies and meetings, making demands,asking questions, and heckling candidates are long gone. Andpolitical commentators seem mystiﬁed as to why there is such alevel of disenfranchisement! Take the ‘spinners’ of national tele-vision and much more out of the arena during the elections andpeoplewill surely retake possession of events and issues. (H1541)What should be noted here is that televised debates played a sig-niﬁcant role in structuring political interaction between politiciansand citizens in 2001, and these debates were perceived to be stage-managed, to be spun, to be insulated from the demands andquestions of ‘ordinary’ people.The second ‘new’ component of political campaigns and theircoverage, particularly prominent in the 2001 diaries, was reportingof opinion polls and expert analysis. These were mentioned bypanellists in 1987, but they were commented on much morefrequently and at much greater length in 2001. ‘The opinion pollshave the Conservatives trailing badly with Labour ahead with some55% of the poll’ (G2089). ‘I have to admit that in the last twomonthsbefore it was called, I thought that maybe the Labour majoritywould be down […]. But if we are to believe all the polls and theexperts, I amwrong because they are saying that not only will TonyBlair win but he will have an even bigger majority’ (F1634). Thestoryline circulated widely at the time that, based on the polls, theGeneral Election was a ‘foregone conclusion’. For one respondent:‘The result was a foregone conclusion […]. This was the ﬁrst time Inever sat up to watch the results on TV’ (H260). For another pan-ellist: ‘In 2001 it was just a foregone conclusion. Nevertheless, I didwatch the results come in until about 4.00am. There are very fewpeople I know who bothered’ (M2933). For a third respondent:As for the pre-election lies and misrepresentations mouthed bythe three main parties, to be daily thrust down our throats bythe media, and if we are further to take into account the opinionpolls, thenwe are heading for the biggest yawn-producing eventof the new century on June 7th. That Labour are still too farahead to be overtaken by the Conservatives, no matter thepromises and bribes made to voters, makes all a foregoneconclusion and hardly worth going to the polls. (R1418)A foregone conclusion makes for no exciting surprises. It leadscitizens to feel powerless. Some panellists expressed concern aboutpolls and expert opinion along these lines. ‘Both sides are worriedabout voter apathy. Labour because the polls put them so far aheadand the Tories because they are being given no chance […]. I feelthat obsession of the media with the thought of voter apathy onlyincreased rather than decreased that apathy’ (B1426). ‘I would liketo see opinion polls banned […] and also television pundits torefrain. They try to be impartial but are not. Politicians should havetheir time on tele and hold meetings so that people can judge forthemselves’ (J1481).Let us turn to this question of citizen judgements. Given themost prominent contexts of political encounter in 2001 e thestage-managed televised debate plus media coverage of pollingresults and expert analysis e what performances were possible forpoliticians and what judgements were possible for citizens? Werepoliticians able to demonstrate virtues?Were citizens able to ‘judgefor themselves’ and distinguish good politicians worthy of support?As in the 1987 diaries, we ﬁnd few if any prototypical categories ofpolitician (equivalent to ‘the good speaker’ or ‘best candidate’ of1945). We ﬁnd few characterisations and judgements of individualpoliticians at all. Instead, as we have seen, panellists wrote aboutpoll results and expert opinion. They appear to have delegated theirjudgement to others.Nevertheless, if shared categories of politician can be found inthe 2001 diaries e more sporadically and less consistently thanbefore e they are ‘the fraud’ and ‘the buffoon’. Consider this fromone respondent:I would have found it impossible to vote for William Hague asPrime Minister e he just comes across as a buffoon, not a realperson. Tony Blair, on the other hand, is too smarmy for me e abit too media savvy and image conscious. I believe that he iscapable of something likewhat Bill Clinton dide staring straightinto the camera and telling a complete lie. (G2776)And this from another panellist: ‘I stayed up quite late to watch theelections. It was quite fun. AnnWiddecombe managed to prove herinsanity and the other politicians slimed their way through thevarious questions’ (J2891). The fraud was media-savvy, smarmy,slimy, image-conscious e represented best by Tony Blair:Tony Blair ridiculously launched the election at a girls school[…]. When they started singing hymns, he looked into themiddle distance, all trembling chin andwatery-eyed. He's such afraud! On Sunday, David Frost had a go at him and again, youlook into his face and you can see he just looks as if he doesn'tbelieve what he's saying. (P2819)The buffoon was mad, insane, pathetic, puerile e representedbest by William Hague or John Prescott. ‘Well, well, well e whatabout John Prescott!! He punches a man because he gets an eggthrown at him […]. The man's mad. Just as I said above, a buffoon’(P2819). ‘Two things remain in my memory of the electioncampaign: 1) John Prescott's straight left to the jaw of his assailant;and 2) WeeWilly waving a pound coin in the air triumphantly, as ifhe's just won the lottery or scored the winning goal in a cup ﬁnal.Puerile and pathetic’ (R1389).In 2001, we see the same logical connections we saw in 1945and 1987. The most prominent spaces of political encounter werenow the televised debate and associated media coverage e espe-cially reporting of opinion polls and expert commentary. Thesecontexts afforded particular modes of interaction. Citizens mostlywatched politicians on television. A minority of citizens were givenvoice indirectly through polls or focus groups. An even smallerminority found opportunities to aim questions, opinions, or eggs atpoliticians on tour. But journalists were now expected to challengeand test politicians on behalf of citizens. Thesemodes of interactionafforded particular performances by politicians: the avoiding ofquestions, the avoiding of issues, the sticking to the script (or themaking of gaffes by going off script). In the diaries, all this leads tojudgements of politicians as frauds or buffoons. Alternatively, itleads to no judgements at all e no comments on the qualities ofparticular politicians, their performances, the virtues or vices theydisplayed, their standing in relation to other candidates; butinstead just the noting of judgements by pollsters and expertcommenters regarding which politicians and parties were up anddown, almost as if the General Election had little to do with thejudgements of voters themselves.ConclusionAnti-politics is a current concern for scholars, politicians, andmany others (Clarke, Jennings, Moss, & Stoker, 2016). Negativitytowards the institutions of formal politics increased during thesecond half of the twentieth century in countries like Britain. Thislong-term and complex development is likely to be explained bymultiple factors. In this paper, we asked what previously under-N. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e23 21utilised evidence from MO's General Election diaries could tell usabout two speciﬁc parts of this phenomenon: citizens' negativesentiment regarding politicians; and political communication ex-planations for the rise of such negativity.When viewed in the framework of contextual theories of socialaction, the diaries allow us to see logical connections betweenspaces of political encounter, political interaction, performances bypoliticians, and judgements by citizens. They allow us to see theserelationships for different moments of the period e 1945, 1987, and2001 e corresponding to three different ages of political commu-nication (Blumler & Kavanagh, 1999). They allow us to make theplausible argument that prominent spaces of political encounterchanged during the period, and these changed contexts affordedchangedmodes of political interaction, performances by politicians,and judgements by citizens.The focus of this paper was on General Election campaignsduring the second half of the twentieth century. This focus leaves atleast two questions. First, are certain prominent spaces of politicalencounter and associated modes of political interaction missingfrom the MO diaries that just focus on General Election campaigns?We discussed this question brieﬂy earlier in the paper. It is possiblethat citizens encountered politicians outside of these campaigns byother means (e.g. constituency surgeries). Our initial impressionfrom reading MO writing produced at other times is that little ifanything of relevance and signiﬁcance is missed by the diaries. Buta more systematic comparison of political communication duringelection campaigns and at other periods e using similar materialsto the MO diaries (with their advantages of capturing citizens’perspectives, written in their own terms, for different historicalmoments) e would help to conﬁrm this.Second, we focused in this paper on the period when com-mentators generally agree that anti-politics increased most inBritain. But what about developments since 2001? If the secondhalf of the twentieth century was characterised by the nationali-sation of political campaigning, then recent years have seen arevival of constituency campaigning. We know much about howthis has affected votes for parties (e.g. Cutts et al., 2014; Johnstonet al., 2016). We know much less about how it has affected politi-cal interaction, the performances of politicians, and the judgementsCode Date Relevant question/taskSxMOA1/3/86May/Jun19451) Please report at intervals on the election campaign in yourSxMOA2/1/22/1Sum 1987 1) Would you, as soon as possible please, note the factors thatwhy, and which party you think will win nationally. Keep2) Make notes on the campaign styles of different parties or iwhich suggest the state of a party's morale, and report on yreporting is as valuable as positive reporting, so if there is3) If possible, report on election posters in your street as followeach party. Ideally this should be done on the same day oncto make a count in the last week of the campaign. Date all4) Please do keep your ears open (and your minds retentive!) fif you can to record at least one a day. Again, remember nevote.5) On voting day itself please be particularly alert and note ascanvassing, voting activity, remarks overheard, the weathe6) Finally, if you stayed up for the results, tell us whether youpassed the time. Give reactions to the local and national remade to you directly and the ﬁrst overheard comment.SxMOA2/1/62/2Spr 2001 2) The General Election 2001: if there should be an election inthe news, to the activities of your local political parties, to eyou, at home, at work, out and about. In effect, we would lsituation. If you want to keep a diary, or an occasional diarSxMOA2/1/63/3Sum 2001 3) The General Election 2001: comments please on the last staoutcome. How did you vote? Were you inﬂuenced by the dethe voters?a Responses to directives SxMOA2/1/62/2 and SxMOA2/1/63/3 are combined in the arof citizens (about politicians in general). Similarly, recent yearshave seen the rise of political communication by internet. Researchon the relationship between internet use and anti-politics isongoing and has producedmixed results to date. For example, somehave found the anonymity and ﬂexibility of the online world toencourage uncivil debate that decreases political trust and efﬁcacy(Åstr€om & Karlsson, 2013), or that internet use does not increasepolitical interest, efﬁcacy, and knowledge (Richey & Zhu, 2015).Others have found that internet use leads citizens to adopt strongerdemocratic preferences (Stoycheff & Nisbet, 2014), or that‘everyday celebrity politicians’ can use social media to performauthenticity and reconnect with disaffected citizens (Wood,Corbett, & Flinders, 2016). Keane (2013) captures this mixed pic-ture by his dual focus on the promise of media abundance (digitaldemocracy, cybercitizens, e-government etc.) and the risk of mediadecadence (censorship, spin, echo chambers, rumour storms, cyberattacks, online gated communities etc.). More research is needed ondevelopments in the current period, including on how encountersbetween politicians and citizens via the internet shape politicalinteraction, performance, and judgement.AcknowledgementsWe thank the UK's Economic and Social Research Council forfunding the research (grant no. ES/L007185/1). We thank the MassObservation Archive for assistance in collecting the data andpermission to quote fromMOmaterials. We thank Jon Lawrence forencouraging us to consider political interaction as it appears in theresponses of MO panellists, and Bob Franklin for providing helpfulcomments on a ﬁrst draft of the paper. Finally, we thank the editorand four reviewers for helpful comments on a second draft of thepaper.Appendix AResponsesconstituency and people's feelings about it. 98will determine your vote, say who you think will win the local seat andthis as a log and note any changes as the campaign progresses.ndividual candidates, including remarks and activity (or the lack of it)our experience of door-to-door canvassing. Don't forget that negativeno canvassing locally, say so.s: total number of houses in street followed by numbers of posters fore a week up to Voting Day itself. If you can't manage all that at least tryobservations.or comments by the public, however trivial these may seem to you; trygative reporting on lack of interest, boredom, and lack of intention toyour circumstances allow what is going on in the way of last minuter etc.intended to or not, whether you were on your own or not, how yousults. Next morning please record the ﬁrst remark about the result670May, please share as much time as you can recording your reactions tolection broadcasts, to the debates and discussions you hear all aroundike to receive anything YOU yourself feel is relevant to the presenty, in the run up to the election, please do.237ages of the run up to the Election and an account of your reaction to thebates about tactical voting? What do you think the key issues were forchive.N. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e2322Appendix BYear Respondent Age Gender Occupation Region1945 1048 48 Female Teacher East of England1945 1165 39 Male Electrical engineer South East1945 1325 37 Male Clerk London1945 1346 29 Female Technical assistant South East1945 1980 65 Female Nurse South East1945 2576 35 Male Manager of textile mill East Midlands1945 2675 53 Female Civil servant London1945 2794 24 Male Civil engineer East Midlands1945 3207 39 Male N/K Scotland1945 3310 33 Female Teacher Scotland1945 3351 26 Male Clerk Yorkshire and Humber1945 3426 46 Female School medical inspector Yorkshire and Humber1945 3648 N/K Female Weaver Yorkshire and Humber1987 B36 73 Female Shorthand typist East of England1987 B1752 40 Female Library assistant Wales1987 B1915 24 Female Barmaid East Midlands1987 C706 49 Female Laboratory technician South East1987 C1420 64 Male Manager West Midlands1987 D1526 32 Female Clerk Yorkshire and Humber1987 D1833 31 Female Barmaid Scotland1987 E1408 61 Male Railway worker Wales1987 G1909 68 Male Gardener East of England1987 H598 69 Male Gas industry worker South East1987 J291 N/K Male Teacher Yorkshire and Humber1987 J1949 23 Female Hotel worker Yorkshire and Humber1987 L1422 74 Male Maintenance worker West Midlands1987 M355 69 Female Television reader London1987 M1519 N/K Male Civil servant South West1987 S1857 N/K Male Lecturer South East1987 S1964 29 Male Technician West Midlands1987 T1927 30 Female Administrator East of England1987 W633 45 Female Journalist North East1987 W1675 43 Male Company director Wales2001 B1426 65 Male Quality engineer South East2001 C1939 66 Female Radio programme monitor East of England2001 F1634 58 Female Cleaner East of England2001 G2089 49 Female Civil servant North West2001 G2776 29 Female Communications consultant London2001 H260 71 Female Shop manager South West2001 H1541 57 Male Film editor Scotland2001 J1481 81 Male Engineer West Midlands2001 J2891 36 Female Occupational therapist Wales2001 M2933 27 Female Researcher West Midlands2001 P2819 36 Female Secretary South East2001 R1389 87 Male Licensed victualler South East2001 R1418 79 Male Decorator East Midlands2001 R2862 42 Female Lecturer North WestReferencesÅstr€om, J., & Karlsson, M. (2013). Blogging in the shadow of parties: Exploringideological differences in online campaigning. Political Communication, 30(3),434e455.Baldini, G. (2015). Is Britain facing a crisis of democracy? The Political Quarterly,86(4), 540e549.Blumler, J. G., & Kavanagh, D. (1999). The third age of political communication:Inﬂuences and features. Political Communication, 16(3), 209e230.Boswell, J., & Corbett, J. (2015). Stoic democrats? Anti-politics, elite cynicism, andthe policy process. Journal of European Public Policy, 22(10), 1388e1405.Butler, D., & Kavanagh, D. (1988). The British general election of 1987. Basingstoke:Macmillan.Butler, D., & Kavanagh, D. (2002). The British general election of 2001. Basingstoke:Macmillan.Cappella, J. N., & Hall Jamieson, K. (1997). Spiral of Cynicism: The press and the publicgood. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Clarke, N. (2015). Geographies of politics and anti-politics. Geoforum, 62, 190e192.Clarke, N., Jennings, W., Moss, J., & Stoker, G. (2016). Anti-politics and the left.Renewal, 24(2), 9e18.Corbett, J. (2014). But why do we need politicians? A critical review. Policy Studies,35(5), 498e512.Corbett, J. (2015). Diagnosing the problem of anti-politicians: A review and anagenda. Political Studies Review Early View.Crewe, I., & Harrop, M. (1989). Political communications. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Cutts, D., Webber, D., Widdop, P., Johnston, R., & Pattie, C. (2014). With a little helpfrom my neighbours: A spatial analysis of the impact of local campaigns at the2010 British general election. Electoral Studies, 34, 216e231.Dalton, R. J. (2004). Democratic challenges, democratic choices: The erosion of politicalsupport in advanced industrial democracies. Washington: CQ Press.Dalton, R. J., & Wattenberg, M. P. (Eds.). (2000). Parties without Partisans: Politicalchange in advanced industrial democracies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Denver, D., Carman, C., & Johns, R. (2012). Elections and voters in Britain (3rd ed.).Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Easton, D. (1965). A systems analysis of political life. New York: Wiley.Fielding, S., Thompson, P., & Tiratsoo, N. (1995). ‘England arise!’ the Labour party andpopular politics in 1940s Britain. Manchester: Manchester University Press.Fischer, F., & Gottweis, H. (Eds.). (2012). The argumentative turn Revisited: PublicN. Clarke et al. / Political Geography 56 (2017) 13e23 23policy as communicative practice. Durham: Duke University Press.Fisher, J., Fieldhouse, E., Johnston, R., Pattie, C., & Cutts, D. (2016). Campaigningequally positive? The impact of district level campaigning on voter turnout atthe 2010 general election. Party Politics, 22(2), 215e226.Franklin, B. (2004). Packaging politics: Political communications in Britain's mediademocracy (2nd ed.). London: Bloomsbury.Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration.London: Polity Press.Hay, C. (2002). Political analysis. Basingstoke: Macmillan.Hay, C. (2007). Why we hate politics. Cambridge: Polity.Hinton, J. (2013). The mass observers: A history, 1937e1949. Oxford: Oxford Uni-versity Press.Inglehart, R. (1997). Modernisation and postmodernization: Cultural, economic, andpolitical change in 43 societies. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Jeffrey, T. (1978). Mass observation e A short history. Birmingham: University ofBirmingham.Johnston, R., Pattie, C., Scully, R., & Cutts, D. (2016). Constituency campaigning andcanvassing at the 2011 National Assembly of Wales election. Politics, 26(1),49e62.Kandiah, M. D. (1995). Television enters British politics. Historical Journal of Film,Radio, and Television, 15(2), 265e284.Keane, J. (2013). Democracy and media decadence. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Lakoff, G. (2002). Moral politics: How liberals and conservatives think (2nd ed.).Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Lawrence, J. (2009). Electing our masters: The hustings in British politics from Hogarthto Blair. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Leib, B., & Warf, B. (2011). Revitalising electoral geography. London: Routledge.MacClancy, J. (1995). Brief encounter: The meeting, in Mass-Observation, of Britishsurrealism and popular anthropology. The Journal of the Royal AnthropologicalInstitute, 1(3), 495e512.Marsh, D., Vines, E., & Halupka, M. (2016). Two cheers for Richards and Smith:Beyond anti-politics? The Political Quarterly, 87(3), 383e388.McDowell, L., Rootham, E., & Hardgrove, A. (2014). Politics, anti-politics, quiescence,and radical unpolitics: Young men's political participation in an ‘ordinary’ En-glish town. Journal of Youth Studies, 17(1), 42e62.Mulgan, G. J. (1994). Politics in an antipolitical age. Cambridge: Polity.Nettleton, S., & Uprichard, E. (2011). ‘A slice of life’: Food narratives and menus frommass-observers in 1982 and 1945. Sociological Research Online, 16(2).Norris, P. (1999). Critical Citizens: Global support for democratic governance.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Norris, P. (2011). Democratic deﬁcit: Critical citizens revisited. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Nye, J. S., Zelikow, P. D., & King, D. C. (1997). Why people Don't trust government.Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Pharr, S. J., & Putnam, R. D. (Eds.). (2000). Disaffected democracies: What's troublingthe trilateral countries?. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Pugh, M. (1982). The making of modern British politics, 1867-1945. Oxford: Blackwell.Richards, D., & Smith, M. J. (2015). In defence of British politics against the Britishpolitical tradition. The Political Quarterly, 86(1), 41e51.Richey, S., & Zhu, J. (2015). Internet access does not improve political interest, ef-ﬁcacy, and knowledge for late adopters. Political Communication, 32(3),396e413.Rosenbaum, M. (1997). From soapbox to soundbite: Party political campaigning inBritain since 1945. Basingstoke: Macmillan.Salter, A. (2010). Filling the silences? Mass-Observation’s wartime diaries, inter-pretive work, and indexicality. Life Writing, 7(1), 53e65.Saunders, C. (2014). Anti-politics in action? Measurement dilemmas in the study ofunconventional political participation. Political Research Quarterly, 67(3),574e588.Sennett, R. (1977). The fall of public man. New York: Knopf.Sheridan, D. (1994). Using the Mass-Observation Archive as a source for women'sstudies. Women’s History Review, 3(1), 101e113.Stoker, G. (2006). Why politics matters: Making democracy work. Basingstoke: Pal-grave Macmillan.Stoker, G. (2016). Why politics matters (2nd ed.). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.Stoycheff, E., & Nisbet, E. C. (2014). What's the bandwidth for democracy? Decon-structing internet penetration and citizen attitudes about governance. PoliticalCommunication, 31(4), 628e646.Str€omb€ack, J. (2008). Four phases of mediatisation: An analysis of the mediatisationof politics. Press/Politics, 13(3), 228e246.Thrift, N. (1983). On the determination of social action in space and time. Envi-ronment and Planning D: Society and Space, 1, 23e57.Thrift, N. (1996). Spatial formations. London: Sage.Torcal, M., & Montero, J. R. (2006). Political disaffection in contemporary democracies:Social capital, institutions, and politics. London: Routledge.Wood, M., Corbett, J., & Flinders, M. (2016). Just like us: Everyday celebrity politi-cians and the pursuit of popularity in an age of anti-politics. The British Journalof Politics and International Relations, 18(3), 581e598.